MONTEBELLO MUNICIPAL CODE 1993 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
the City of Montebello, California 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 14, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
  
PREFACE 
The Montebello, California Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1993, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 14, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of Douglas Barnes, city attorney. 
The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 14, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance No. 2414, passed March 27, 2019. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
Beginning with Supplement No. 14, a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
As of Supplement No. 14, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Beginning with Supplement No. 14 this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 14, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement No. 14, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections: 
 
1.01.010 - Adoption. 
There is hereby adopted the "Montebello Municipal Code," as compiled, edited and published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. 
(Ord. 2094 § 1, 1993)  
1.01.020 - Title, citation and reference. 
This code shall be known as the "Montebello Municipal Code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the "Montebello Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the Montebello Municipal Code. Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the Montebello Municipal Code and such references shall apply to the numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. 
(Ord. 2094 § 2, 1993)  
1.01.030 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "Montebello Municipal Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Montebello codified herein, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 2094 § 3, 1993)  
1.01.040 - Title, chapter and section headings. 
Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. 
(Ord. 2094 § 4, 1993)  
1.01.050 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 2094 § 5, 1993)  
1.01.060 - Ordinances passed prior to adoption. 
The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance No. 2070, passed September 22, 1992. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance No. 2070, but prior to adoption of this code, are adopted and made a part of this code: 
Ordinance No. 	Date Adopted 
2071 	October 13, 1992 
2072 	October 27, 1992 
2073 	October 27, 1992 
2074 	November 24, 1992 
2075 	December 22, 1992 
2076 	January 12, 1993 
2077 	January 12, 1993 
2078 	February 23, 1993 
2079 	March 23, 1993 
2080 	April 13, 1993 
2081 	April 27, 1993 
2082 	May 11, 1993 
2083 	June 8, 1993 
2084 	June 8, 1993 
2085 	June 8, 1993 
2086 	June 8, 1993 
2087 	June 22, 1993 
2088 	July 6, 1993 
2089 	July 20, 1993 
2090 	September 21, 1993 
2091 	September 21, 1993 
2092 	October 19, 1993 
 
(Ord. 2094 § 6, 1993)  
1.01.070 - Effect of past actions and obligations. 
The adoption of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of this code, does not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this code, and does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed or deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. 
(Ord. 2094 § 7, 1993)  
1.01.080 - References to prior code. 
References in city forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and sections of the former Municipal Code shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 2094 § 8, 1993)  
1.01.090 - Constitutionality. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 
(Ord. 2094 § 9, 1993)  
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.04.010 - Provision governing construction of code. 
Unless the provisions of the context otherwise require, these general provisions, rules of construction and definitions shall govern the construction of this code. The provisions of this code and all proceedings under it are to be construed with a view to effect its objects and to promote justice. 
(Prior code § 1300)  
1.04.020 - Article and section headings. 
Article and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any article or section thereto. 
(Prior code § 1301)  
1.04.030 - Reference to acts or omissions within this city. 
This code shall refer only to the commission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the city and to that territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the Constitution, or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of property. 
(Prior code § 1302)  
1.04.040 - Prohibited acts include causing, permitting, or suffering. 
Whenever in this code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing such act or omission. 
(Prior code § 1303)  
1.04.050 - Acts by deputy. 
Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon a public officer, or employee, the power may be exercised, or the duty may be performed by a deputy of such office or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance, unless this code expressly provides otherwise. 
(Prior code § 1304)  
1.04.060 - Writing—Form—Language to be used. 
Writing includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise. 
(Prior code § 1305)  
1.04.070 - References apply to amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to any portion of this code, or to any ordinances of this city, the reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made. 
(Prior code § 1306)  
1.04.080 - Notices—Methods of serving. 
Whenever a notice is required to be given under this code, unless different provisions herein are otherwise specifically made, such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail, in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified, at his last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records of the city or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office. 
(Prior code § 1307)  
1.04.090 - Notice—Proof of serving. 
Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the city, or by affidavit of any person over the age of eighteen years, which shows service in conformity with this code, or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. 
(Prior code § 1308)  
1.04.100 - Cash deposits. 
Whenever this code requires a cash deposit for any purpose, a valid and sufficient corporate surety bond may be deposited in lieu thereof. 
(Prior code § 1328)  
1.04.110 - Surety bonds. 
Whenever this code requires a corporate surety bond for any purpose, a cash deposit in lieu thereof may be deposited. 
(Prior code 21 1329)  
1.04.120 - Use of title. 
The use of the title of any officer, employee, office or ordinance means such officer, employee, office or ordinance of the city of Montebello. 
(Prior code § 1318)  
1.04.130 - Tenses. 
The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future, the present. 
(Prior code § 1309)  
1.04.140 - Gender. 
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
(Prior code § 1310)  
1.04.150 - Number. 
The singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular. 
(Prior code § 1311)  
1.04.160 - City. 
"City" means the city of Montebello. 
(Prior code § 1317)  
1.04.170 - City manager, administrator or coordinator. 
Whenever in this code, or in any other rule, regulation, resolution or ordinance of this city, the phrases "city manager," "city manager" or "city coordinator" are used, they shall be deemed amended, and construed to mean "city manager." 
(Prior code § 1327) 
(Ord. No. 2367, § 1, 5-13-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2367, § 1, adopted May 13, 2015, changed the title of § 1.04.170 from "City manager or coordinator" to read as set out herein.  
1.04.180 - Community development or parks and recreations director. 
Whenever in this code, or in any other rule, regulation, resolution or ordinance of this city the phrases "director of community development" or "director of parks and recreation" are used, they shall be deemed amended, and construed, to mean "assistant city manager/community services and development." 
(Prior code § 1331)  
1.04.190 - Council. 
"Council" means the city council of this city. 
(Prior code § 1319)  
1.04.200 - County. 
"County" means the county of Los Angeles. 
(Prior code § 1316)  
1.04.210 - Goods. 
"Goods" includes wares or merchandise. 
(Prior code § 1325)  
1.04.220 - Oath. 
"Oath" includes affirmation. 
(Prior code § 1313)  
1.04.230 - Operate. 
"Operate" includes carry on, keep, conduct or maintain. 
(Prior code § 1326)  
1.04.240 - Building or land—Owner. 
"Owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant in common, joint tenant, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
(Prior code § 1322)  
1.04.250 - Parks or recreation department or director. 
Whenever in this code, or in any other ordinance, resolution, rule or order of this city, reference is made to the phrases "recreation department" or "park department," such phrases shall be deemed amended to read "parks and recreation department." In addition, whenever in this code, ordinance, resolution, rule or order of the city, reference is made to the phrases "park director," "recreation director," and "recreation and park director," the same shall be deemed amended to read "parks and recreation director." 
(Prior code § 1330)  
1.04.260 - Person. 
"Person," as used in this code or in any uniform code adopted hereby, includes any person firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust company or corporation, and any municipal, political or governmental corporation, district, body or agency, other than the city of Montebello. 
(Prior code § 1314)  
1.04.270 - Sale. 
"Sale" includes any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale. 
(Prior code § 1324)  
1.04.280 - Shall and may. 
"Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. 
(Prior code § 1312)  
1.04.290 - State. 
"State" means the state of California. 
(Prior code § 1315)  
1.04.300 - Street. 
"Street" includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, sidewalks, parkways, curbs, or other public ways in this city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to the public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
(Prior code § 1321)  
1.04.310 - Building or land—Tenant or occupant. 
"Tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
(Prior code § 1323)  
Chapter 1.08 - CITATION PROCEDURE 
Sections: 
 
1.08.010 - Issuance. 
A.  Any officer arresting any person for a violation of any provision of this code, who does not immediately take the arrested person before a magistrate, as prescribed in the Penal Code of the state, shall prepare in duplicate a written notice to appear in court. The notice shall contain: 
1.  The name and address of the person arrested; 
2.  The offense charged, the time and place of such alleged violation; and 
3.  Where and when such arrested person shall appear in court. 
B.  The time specified in the notice to appear must be at least ten days after such arrest. The place specified in the notice to appear shall be in conformity with Section 853.6 of the Penal Code of the state. 
C.  The arresting officer shall deliver one copy of the notice to appear to the alleged violator, and the alleged violator, in order to secure his release, must give his written promise to so appear in court at the time and place indicated thereon, by signing the duplicate notice which shall be retained by the officer. Thereafter, the arresting officer shall forthwith release from custody the person so arrested. The duplicate copy of the notice to appear shall be filed in the manner prescribed in Section 853.6 of the Penal Code of the state. 
(Ord. 2070 § 2, 1992: prior code § 1204)  
1.08.020 - Failure to appear—Minimum charge. 
Any person who wilfully violates his written promise to appear in court by failing to so appear at the time and place stated, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested. 
(Prior code § 1205)  
1.08.030 - Failure to appear—Issuance of warrant. 
When a person signs a warrant promise to appear at the time and place specified therein, and has not posted bail as provided in Section 853.6 of the Penal Code of the state, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his arrest within twenty days after such person has failed to appear as promised, or if such person promises to appear before an officer authorized to accept bail, other than a magistrate, and fails to do so on or before the date with which he promised to appear, then within twenty days after the delivery of such written promise to appear by the officer to a magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense, such magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution, a warrant for his arrest. When such person violates his promise to appear before an officer authorized to receive bail other than a magistrate, the officer shall immediately deliver to the magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense charged the written promise to appear and the complaint, if any, filed by the arresting officer. 
(Ord. 2070 § 3, 1992: prior code § 1206)  
Chapter 1.12 - GENERAL PENALTY 
Sections: 
 
1.12.010 - Violations—Misdemeanor and prosecutorial discretion. 
A.  Any violation of any provision of this code and adopted codes constitutes a misdemeanor unless specifically designated as an infraction by this code or prosecuted as an infraction in the discretion of the city attorney or city prosecutor in the interest of justice. Each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provisions of this code is committed, continued, maintained or permitted shall constitute a separate and distinct violation and public nuisance, and shall be punishable accordingly. 
B.  Any conviction of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this code shall, unless otherwise specified, be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
C.  Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this code, unless specified otherwise, shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dolalrs for a first violation, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same provision within one year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same provision within one year. 
(Ord. 2285 § 1, 2005; Ord. 2070 § 1, 1992; prior code § 1200) 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 1, 1-28-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2365, § 1, adopted Jan. 28, 2015, changed the title of § 1.12.010 from "Violations a misdemeanor—Penalty" to read as set out herein.  
1.12.020 - Violations deemed public nuisances. 
In addition to other penalties provided by law, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this code or any code adopted by reference by this code or any ordinance of the city not included within this code, or any such threatened violation, shall be deemed a public nuisance that may be abated by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 2, 1-28-2015)  
1.12.030 - Administrative citations. 
Every violation of this code, the penalty for which is defined as an "infraction" or "misdemeanor," shall be subject to an administrative fine and penalty citation in accordance with Chapter 1.14 of this code. The provisions of Chapter 1.14 relating to administrative fines and penalties are in addition to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, which may be pursued by the city to address any violation of codes, ordinances, mandates, regulations, resolutions, rules or other laws adopted by the city, or other applicable codes adopted by reference. Pursuit of one of the civil or criminal provisions authorized by this code shall be at the sole discretion of the city and nothing in this code shall prevent the city from initiating civil, criminal or other legal or equitable proceedings as an alternative to any other proceeding. 
(Ord. 2284 § 2, 2005)  
1.12.040 - Enforcement. 
Any violation of this code, codes adopted by the city, or provisions of state or federal law that may be enforced by the city, or any rules, regulations, permits or approvals issued by or applicable to the city may be enforced by any means authorized by law, including but not limited to, criminal prosecution, civil action for restraining order and injunctive relief, receivership, administrative or abatement proceeding. The remedies provided in this code are intended to be cumulative and not exclusive, and may be pursued individually, consecutively, or in conjunction with each other. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 3, 1-28-2015)  
1.12.050 - Recovery of attorney's fees. 
A.  The prevailing party in any judicial action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding to abate a nuisance may recover its reasonable attorney's fees, provided that the city elected, at the initiation of such individual action or proceeding, to recover its own attorney's fees. In no judicial action or administrative or special proceeding shall an award of attorney's fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. A "judicial action" includes, but is not limited to, any civil or criminal action, inspection or abatement warrant or appeal. An "administrative proceeding" includes, but is not limited to, any public nuisance hearing, administrative citation or appeal(s) therefrom, revocation of permits by the city, or cost recovery hearing. Any recovery of attorney's fees for abatement of a nuisance shall be in accordance with this section. 
B.  In addition to recovery of any other costs as provided by this code, in any action to abate a nuisance, the city shall be entitled to recover from the property on which the nuisance exists and against the property owner and any other violators jointly and severally, all actual, staff and administrative costs, including but not limited to, those incurred in investigations, inspections, abatement, enforcement and providing any notice required by this code or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 4, 1-28-2015)  
Chapter 1.14 - ADMINISTRATIVE FINES AND PENALTIES 
Sections: 
 
1.14.010 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  This chapter authorizes the imposition of administrative fines on any person who violates any provision of this code in order to encourage and obtain compliance with the provisions of this code for the benefit and protection of the entire city. This chapter governs the imposition, enforcement, collection and administrative review of all administrative fines imposed under the authority of California Government Code Section 53069.4 and the police power of the city. 
B.  The issuance of citations imposing administrative fines may be performed at the discretion of the officials of the city authorized hereunder. The issuance of a citation to any person constitutes but one remedy of the city to address violation of the code by any person and obtain immediate compliance. By adopting this chapter, the city does not intend to limit its authority to employ any other remedy, civil or criminal, to address any violation of this code by any person, which the city may otherwise pursue. 
C.  Every person who applies for and receives a permit, license, land use approval (e.g., subdivision map, conditional use permit, variance) or any other approval required by the city shall comply will all conditions imposed upon the issuance of such permit, license or approval. A violation of any condition of such permit, license or approval shall be subject to an administrative fine under the provisions of this chapter. Likewise, any person who fails to obtain any permit, license, land use approval or any other approval from the city when such a person is so required by this code shall be subject to an administrative fine pursuant to this chapter. 
D.  Because of the serious blighting conditions that result from persistent or prolonged failure to comply with the provisions of this code and the effect of such conditions on the desirability and marketability of surrounding properties and the adverse impacts on the public health, safety and welfare, this chapter imposes strict civil liability upon the owners of real property for all violations of this code existing on their real property. 
(Ord. 2284 § 3 (part), 2005)  
1.14.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to for purposes of administering this chapter: 
"Citee" means any person served with an administrative citation charging him or her as a responsible person for a violation of this code. 
"Citation" means an administrative citation issued pursuant to this chapter to remedy a violation. 
"Code" means the Montebello Municipal Code and any code adopted by reference. 
"Code enforcement officer" mean any employee or agent of the city designated by the city manager to enforce any provisions of this code. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city or his or her designee. 
"Costs" shall have the meaning set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1033.5, including, without limitation, attorney's fees. In addition to such items, all of the following shall be included within the definition of "costs:" 
1.  Personnel costs of the city, as actually incurred by the city (for contractors and consultants) or based on established rates of employee costs as adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. Such personnel costs shall include, but not be limited to, the costs incurred by the city to pay any contractor to abate a public nuisance. 
2.  Costs of administrative hearing, including, hearing officer costs and reporter costs. 
3.  Accrued interest at the maximum rate established by law. 
"Day" means a calendar day. 
"Department" means any department of the city that shall have issued an administrative citation. 
"Issuance," "issued" or "served" means any of the following: 
1.  The preparation and service in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Article 3 (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure; or 
2.  Mailing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address if the owner of the subject property, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current. 
"Hearing officer" means the person, whether a city employee or third party, selected by the city manager to serve as the hearing officer for administrative hearings held pursuant to this chapter. 
"Non-transient violation" means any violation of this code that pertains to zoning, building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar building, structural or zoning issue, that does not create an immediate danger to public health or safety. 
"Person" means a natural person or a legal entity that is also an owner, tenant, lessee or other person with any right to possession or control of the property where a violation of this code exists. 
"Responsible person" means a person who causes a violation of this code to occur, or allows a violation to exist or continue to exist, by his or her action or failure to act, or whose agent, employee, or independent contractor causes a violation to occur, or allows a violation to exist or continue. There is a rebuttable presumption that the record owner of a parcel, as shown on the county's latest equalized property tax assessment rolls, and a lessee of a parcel has notice of any violation existing on said property. For the purposes of this chapter, there may be more than one responsible person for a violation. 
"Transient violation" means any violation of this code other than a non-transient violation. 
"Violation" or "violates" refers to any violation of any provision of this code and also means the failure to comply with any condition or requirement imposed on any permit, license, land use approval, or any other approval issued to a person under or pursuant to this code. 
(Ord. 2284 § 3 (part), 2005)  
1.14.030 - Administrative citations. 
A.  An administrative fine or fines may be issued to any responsible person for a violation of any provision of this code or for a failure to comply with any condition or requirement imposed on any permit, license, land use approval or other approval issued under or pursuant to this code by the issuance of a citation hereunder as a remedy to enforce compliance with the provisions of this code. 
B.  Any violation of this code shall be deemed a public nuisance. 
C.  Any peace officer, code enforcement officer of any other person designated by the city manager and the Montebello Municipal Code may issue an administrative citation to a responsible person pursuant to this chapter. 
D.  A citee shall be liable for and shall pay to the city the fine or fines described in the citation unless: (i) such person corrects the violation or violations described in the citation within the period specified in the citation; or (ii) such person appeals the imposition of such fine or fines as provided herein and is relieved of the obligation to pay such fine or fines. However, the payment of such a fine or fines shall not relieve any person from any further violation of the provisions of the code for which such fine or fines have been imposed and paid. Any such person shall continue to be responsible for complying with the provisions of the code and correcting any and all violations of the code. 
E.  Each administrative citation shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name of the person charged with any violation of the code. 
2.  The date or dates on which the person violated the code. 
3.  The section or sections of the code so violated. 
4.  The location where the violation occurred. 
5.  The amount of the daily fine to be imposed for each violation of the code. 
6.  The date or dates when the fine or fines will be imposed unless the violation or violations of the code are corrected prior to the date or dates specified in the citation. 
7.  A notice that each violation of the code also constitutes a nuisance and that collection of any unpaid fines or nuisance abatement costs may be enforced as an assessment or lien against the real property where the code violation occurred and that unpaid assessments can result in the property being sold after three years by the county assessor. 
8.  A notice of the procedure to request an administrative hearing to contest the citation. 
9.  The amount of the proposed fine for each violation listed in the citation. 
10.  The signature of the person who issued the citation. 
11.  The date the citation is issued. 
12.  Any other information deemed necessary by the city manager for enforcement or collection purposes. 
F.  In the event the city intends to collect the fine as a lien or assessment, the owner of the property, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, shall be issued the citation. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as limiting the authority of the city to issue citations to, or collect, by other means, amounts due from, any responsible person. 
(Ord. 2284 § 3 (part), 2005)  
1.14.040 - Administrative fines. 
A.  Each person who violates any provision of this code or who fails to comply with any condition imposed on any permit, license, land use approval or other approval issued under or pursuant to this code shall be subject to the imposition and payment of an administrative fine or fines as provided herein. Likewise, any person who fails to obtain any permit, license, land use approval or any other approval from the city when such a person is so required by the code shall be subject to an administrative fine under this chapter. 
B.  The amount of the applicable administrative fines for various violations shall be established by separate resolution of the city council. 
C.  In the case of a violation of the code that is a transient violation, a fine shall be imposed without an opportunity to cure or correct such violation, and the citee shall be required to abate the violation, if necessary, immediately. On the second and each subsequent time that a person is used a citation for the same violation in any twelve-month period, the fine shall be doubled, and the citee shall be liable for the amount of the fine until it is paid, in addition to being responsible for abating the violation. However, the code enforcement officer shall have discretion to issue a citation for any violation referred to in this subsection under the procedures set forth in subsection D of this section. 
D.  In the case of a violation of this code that is a nontransient violation, the code enforcement officer may grant a responsible person or citee a reasonable period of time to correct the violation or violations without incurring any liability to the city for the payment of such fine or fines. Such reasonable period of time shall depend on the nature of the violation and the amount of time needed to correct the violation. The reasonable period of time shall be provided to the responsible party or citee in writing. However, the director of the department that issued the citation may, in his or her sole discretion, extend such period for up to thirty additional days; provided that the violation is of such a nature that requires additional time to correct and the responsible party or citee demonstrates that he or she has made substantial progress to correct the violation or violations, that he or she has been diligent in correcting such violation or violations, and that he or she was unable to correct such violation or violations within the initial reasonable correction period. The responsible party or citee must submit a written request, within five business days of the issuance of the citation to such director seeking such an extension. The request shall contain a description of the corrections made, the corrections remaining to be made, the date when the violation or all of them shall be corrected, and the facts indicating why correcting the violation or violations is not possible or practicable within such initial correction period. The director of the department that issued the citation shall respond in writing within three business days of receipt of the request; and the decision of the director shall be final. Unless the responsible party or citee causes the correction of all of the violations described in the citation within the correction period or such other extended period as may have been granted, the fine or fines imposed by the citation shall become effective on the day following the expiration of the correction period or such other extended period as may have been granted and such fine or fines shall continue to accrue on a daily basis until such violation or violations have been corrected in compliance with the applicable city code provision. 
On the second and each subsequent time that a person is issued a citation for the same violation in any twelve-month period, the fine shall be effective immediately, without any waiting or correction period, and the responsible party or citee shall be liable for the amount of the fine until it is paid, in addition to being responsible for abating the violation. 
E.  All administrative fines imposed hereunder shall be made payable to the city. Payment of any fine or fines shall not excuse the citee from complying with the provision of the code so violated. The issuance of a citation or payment of any fine, or both, shall not bar the city from instituting any other enforcement action or remedy to obtain compliance with the provisions of the code so violated including the issuance of additional civil and/or criminal citations. In the event such other enforcement action includes a court action, and the citation has not been both appealed and resolved in the citee's favor, said court may include in any order issued by that court, an order or judgment requiring payment of any fines theretofore issued and unpaid. 
(Ord. 2291 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2284 § 3 (part), 2005)  
1.14.050 - Administrative hearing request. 
A.  Any citee may contest a citation issued to the citee and the proposed fine by filing a written request for an administrative hearing. To request a hearing, the citee shall sign and file the request form provided by the city clerk. The request form shall state the grounds for contesting the citation and/or the proposed fine. A citee may contest the citation and the proposed fine by denying that the citee owns, possesses, or controls the property where the violation exists, denying that the citee is responsible for the violation described in the citation, denying that a violation exists or existed, or proving that the violation was corrected within the period described in the citation or such further period granted by the applicable director. A citee may not raise any issue or defense at the hearing, or in any subsequent court action, that was not included on the request form. 
B.  To be effective, the request for an administrative hearing must be filed with the city clerk within five business days of the date the citation was issued. If the citee mails the request form, the request form shall be deemed filed with the city clerk on the date on which it is received in the office of the city clerk. Any reference in this chapter to the "city clerk" means the city clerk or his or her designee. 
C.  A citee who has requested an administrative hearing must deposit with the city the amount of the proposed fine to ensure his or her appearance at the hearing. A request for a hearing shall not be complete and shall not be accepted unless it is accompanied by the deposit required by this section. 
D.  Notwithstanding subsection C of this section, any citee who intended to request an administrative hearing and is financially unable to make the advance deposit of the fine or penalty as required herein, may file a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver. The citee shall complete an advance deposit hardship waiver form and return it to the city clerk or his or her designee along with the written request for hearing. The citee may request an advance deposit hardship waiver form by telephone, mail or in person, but shall be solely responsible for assuring its receipt, completing and returning it within the required time. The city clerk or his or her designee may waive the requirement of an advance deposit and issue the advance deposit hardship waiver only if the citee submits the required advance deposit hardship waiver form and includes a sworn affidavit and any supporting documents or materials demonstrating to the satisfaction of the city clerk or his or her designee that it would be a significant financial detriment on the citee to the deposit the full amount of the fine or penalty in advance of the hearing. The requirement for depositing the full amount of the fine or penalty shall be sustained unless or until the city clerk or his or her designee makes this determination. The city clerk's office shall serve written notice of the city clerk or his or her designee's determination on the hardship waiver by certified mail, return receipt requested. Service shall be deemed complete at the time the notice is deposited into the mail and addressed to the citee at the address indicated on the administrative hearing request form. The notice shall include a brief description of the reasons for the city clerk or his or her designee's determination to issue or not issue the advance deposit hardship waiver. The written determination of the city clerk or his or her designee shall be final. If the city clerk or his or her designee determines not to issue an advance deposit hardship waiver, the citee shall remit the deposit amount to the city clerk or his or her designee with ten days of service of that decision, or thirty calendar days from the date of the administrative decision. 
E.  In the event that the citee files a timely request a hearing, the city clerk shall immediately forward such request to the city manager who shall advise the citee by letter, no later than five days after receiving the citee's request for a hearing, of the date, time, and place set for the hearing. The hearing shall be set on a date that is no less than ten days and no more than forty-five days after the date of the notice. The city manager shall also advise the citee that the citee may review those writings in the city's files concerning the violation or violations for which the citation was issued and that the city intends to introduce such writing as the administrative hearing. Upon payment of the city's actual reproduction costs, the citee may have copies thereof. The failure of the citee to appear at the administrative hearing shall constitute a waiver of the citee's right to a hearing on the citation and any defense to the citation that the citee may have had, and the citee's deposit shall be forfeited without further action. 
(Ord. 2284 § 3 (part), 2005)  
1.14.060 - Conduct of administrative hearings. 
An administrative hearing conducted pursuant to this chapter shall comply with the following: 
A.  The hearing shall be conducted by an impartial hearing officer on the date, time and place specified in the citation. The hearing shall proceed solely on the issues or defenses raised in the request for a hearing filed by the citee and all matters not contested in said request shall be deemed admitted. 
B.  The city shall have the burden to establish the truth of any matter in the citation that has been contested by the citee by a preponderance of the evidence. The citation shall be admitted into evidence and shall constitute prima facie evidence of all matters contained therein. In addition, the city may present such other evidence and reports as may be necessary or helpful to the hearing officer to resolve the issues raised by the citee. 
C.  The citee shall be given the opportunity to testify and to present written and oral evidence relevant to the matters raised in the request regarding the violation or violations described in the citation. 
D.  The citation, and other reports prepared by the officer issuing the citation, or at his or her request, concerning the violation or violations or their attempted correction shall be accepted by the hearing officer as prima facie evidence of the violation or violations. 
E.  The hearing shall be conducted informally and the rules of evidence need not be followed provided that the decision of the hearing officer on any material issue may not be based upon hearsay evidence alone. 
F.  The unexcused failure of the citee to appear at the hearing shall constitute a waiver of his or her contest to the citation and the proposed fine or fines and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies concerning the violation or violation described in the citation, and the citee's deposit shall be forfeited without further action. Such failure to appear shall constitute an admission of the truth of all matters contained in the citation and a validation of the fine or fines imposed in the citation, which shall be ordered in the decision of the hearing officer. 
(Ord. 2284 § 3 (part), 2005)  
1.14.070 - Administrative hearing officer and decisions. 
A.  The hearing officer shall be selected by the city manager and when the hearing officer selected is not an employee of the city, may be compensated for the time expended in providing such services based upon a written agreement for that purpose. The hearing officer's employment or compensation shall not be based on the number of citations affirmed or denied by the hearing officer. If the citee so elects in writing prior to the hearing, the citee shall be entitled to pay for one-half of the costs of the services of the hearing officer. 
B.  The hearing officer may continue the hearing on a citation upon the request of the citee, or other citee's representative, or the representative of the city, upon a showing of good cause. All continuance requests shall be made in person or in writing at or before the hearing. If the continuance is granted, a new hearing date shall be set within fifteen days. The citee shall deposit the amount of the estimated costs of the continued hearing as a condition of granting a continuance if the hearing is continued beyond the period that the citee is required to comply with the citation. The hearing officer shall have the authority to issue subpoenas. 
C.  After considering all the evidence and testimony submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue his or her written decision on the contested citation within five business days. The decision of the hearing officer shall, either uphold or deny the citation or any portion thereof and state the facts and reasons supporting the decision. If the citation is upheld, the hearing officer shall also order the imposition of a fine in the amount stated in the citation, as well as any costs, and compliance with the code within five days or such time as the hearing officer deems reasonable. If the citation is denied, the hearing officer shall order the return of the deposited fine, which return shall occur within sixty days following the written order of the hearing officer. The written decision shall be filed with the city clerk and a copy thereof shall be mailed to the citee. 
D.  All decisions and orders of a hearing officer shall become final unless appealed by the citee as provided herein. 
(Ord. 2284 § 3 (part), 2005)  
1.14.080 - Judicial review. 
A.  The citee or the city may seek judicial review of the decision of the hearing officer by filing an appeal with the Superior Court within twenty calendar days after the citee or the city receives a copy of the decision in accordance with the provisions of California Government Code Section 53069.4. No appeal shall be permitted from a decision based upon the failure of the citee or the city to appear at the administrative hearing or upon any other waiver of the administrative hearing by the citee or the city. 
B.  If an appeal of any decision or order of a hearing officer that ordered the citee to pay any fine or fines, or costs, to the city is affirmed, in whole or part, the judicial officer hearing the appeal shall enter an order requiring the citee to pay such fine or fines, and any costs, to the city and said order on appeal shall constitute a money judgment in favor of the city against the citee. 
(Ord. 2284 § 3 (part), 2005)  
1.14.090 - Collection of fines. 
A.  Each final order of a hearing officer that establishes the amount if a fine or fines, or costs, payable by a citee to the city shall constitute a money judgment. Each such money judgment shall be enforceable pursuant to the general laws of the state of California. 
B.  Each final order of a hearing officer that establishes the amount of a fine or fines, and any costs, payable by a citee to the city shall also constitute a sister state judgment. To enforce any such sister state judgment, the city may apply for the entry of a judgment pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 1710.10) of Title 11 of Part 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
C.  In addition to any other remedy available to the city, the city may also request that the fine or fines, and any costs, imposed by an order of a hearing officer be collected as a lien or assessment against the property on which the violation or violations occurred by requesting the city council to adopt an appropriate resolution to record such lien or place the amount of said fine or fines, and any costs, on the Los Angeles County tax rolls for collection. For assessments, the resolution of the city council shall conform with the county of Los Angeles auditor/controller-recorder's policies and procedures for applying special assessments to the tax rolls. The following procedures shall apply to such liens or assessments: 
1.  A notice of proposed lien or assessment shall be served on the owner of the property in the same manner as the administrative citation that was served on the owner. The notice shall state the amount of the fine or fines, and any costs, sought to be imposed as a lien or assessment, the legal description of the property on which the lien or assessment is sought to be imposed and the owner's right to appeal said proposed action by filing a written appeal within ten days from the date of service or mailing of said notice. The notice shall warn the owner that a failure to file a written appeal with the city clerk within said ten-day period shall constitute a waiver of the owner's right to appeal the imposition of the proposed lien or assessment on the owner's property. If the city council, by resolution, adopts a fee to defray the expenses to process and conduct a hearing on said appeal, the notice also shall state the amount of the fee and payment of the fee is a condition precedent to the effectiveness of the owner's right to appeal. 
2.  Within ten days from the date of service or mailing of said notice, the property owner may file a written appeal to the proposed lien or assessment and any shall deposit required fee with the city clerk or his or her designee or waive the right to such an appeal. The city council shall hear the appeal at its first regular meeting that is at least fourteen calendar days after the date on which the appeal was filed. Written notice of the hearing date shall be served on the owner, at least, ten days prior to the hearing on the appeal. At the hearing on the appeal, the city council shall consider the order of the hearing officer imposing the fine or fines on the citee, the computation of the amount of the proposed lien or assessment, the evidence that the owner owns the property on which the lien or assessment is sought to be imposed, evidence that the record owner of the property on which the lien or assessment is sought has been served with the citation in accordance with this chapter, and evidence that the violation or violations supporting the order of the hearing officer occurred at or was related to the property on which the assessment lien is sought to be imposed. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council may adopt, or decline to adopt, a resolution to place a lien or assessment on the property of the owner. The city council also may modify the amount of the proposed lien or assessment. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
3.  If no appeal is filed pursuant hereto, the city manager shall also cause the preparation and submittal of a resolution to the city council that imposes a lien or assessment on the property of the owner. The city council shall adopt the proposed resolution unless it determines that such a lien or assessment would not be appropriate. 
4.  The tax collector's power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the property owner to receive notice. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. However, if any real property to which the citation relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the amount shall not result in a lien against the real property but instead shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. 
D.  Notwithstanding any of the remedies for collection of unpaid fines contained in this section, the city manager is authorized to enter into agreements with responsible parties or citees for the payment of fines and penalties over a fixed term upon terms that are acceptable to the city manager. 
(Ord. 2291 § 2, 2006; Ord. 2284 § 3 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 1.16 - CITY SEAL 
Sections: 
 
1.16.010 - Adoption. 
The city shall have, and does adopt, an official seal which is described as follows: 
 A die of two and one-fourth inches (2 ¼?) in diameter, having an outer circle, the inside of which shall be one-fourth inch (¼?) wide, the said circle having an outside rope border one-sixteenth of an inch ( 1/16 ?) in width. On the surface of the die at the top thereof within the outer circle there shall be engraved the words "CITY OF MONTEBELLO," and on the surface of the die at the bottom thereof within said outer circle shall be engraved the words "CALIFORNIA." In the middle of said circle on each side of said word "CALIFORNIA," equidistant from the words "CITY" and "MONTEBELLO" respectively, there shall be engrave a five (5) point star. Across the center of said die there shall be engraved the words "INCORPORATED OCTOBER 16, 1920." The inside of the seal shall have two (2) engraved semicircles with plain borders, the circular sides of which shall be the inner line of said circle and the flat sides of which shall face the center containing the said words "INCORPORATED OCTOBER 16, 1920." On the surface of the upper semicircle of said die there shall be engraved three (3) oil derricks and an oil tank on top of a Cocas Plumosus palm tree with hills in the distance. On the surface of the lower semicircle of said die there shall be engraved a group of five (5) whole and two (2) parts of orange trees and the base of the Cocas Plumosus palm tree, which base shall merge on each side thereof with the lower border of the lower semicircle of said die. The outside rope border of said outer circle shall be the outside border of said seal. Said seal die shall be made of steel and brass counter, the female to be cut in steel and the male to be driven into the female. 
(Prior code § 2803)  
1.16.020 - Use of seal. 
The impression of the seal shall be made and used upon all official documents executed by the city and its duly authorized officials. 
(Prior code § 2804)  
1.16.030 - Custodian. 
The clerk shall be the custodian of the seal. 
(Prior code § 2805)  
Chapter 1.20 - CITY JAIL 
Sections: 
 
1.20.010 - Designated. 
That portion of the Montebello Police Building, located at 1600 Beverly Boulevard in the city, designated as quarters and accommodations for prisoners, is designated as the city jail for the city. 
(Prior code § 1203)  
Chapter 1.24 - PRISON LABOR 
Sections: 
 
1.24.010 - Labor upon public works. 
Persons confined in the city jail under a final judgment of imprisonment for violation of any ordinance may be required by the chief of police to perform labor on the streets or other public property, or works within the city. 
(Prior code § 1201 (part))  
1.24.020 - Streets or other public property or works within the city defined. 
The phrase, "streets or other public property or works within the city," as used in this chapter includes, among other things, clerical and menial labor in the city jail, or in any camp maintained for the labor of such persons on the streets or other public property, or works within the city. 
(Prior code § 1201 (part))  
1.24.030 - Rules and regulations—Clothing. 
The city council may prescribe and enforce the rules and regulations under which such labor is to be performed; and may provide clothing of such distinctive character for such persons as such city council in its discretion, may deem proper. For each month the prisoner appears, by the record, to have given cheerful and willing obedience to the rules and regulations, and that his conduct is reported by the office in charge of the jail to be positively good, five days shall with the consent of the city council, be deducted from his term of sentence. 
(Prior code § 1201 (part))  
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL  
Chapter 2.04 - CITY MANAGER[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2367, § 2, adopted May 13, 2015, changed the title of Ch. 2.04 from "City manager" to read as set out herein. 
 
2.04.010 - Office created—Basis for appointments. 
The office of the city manager of the city is created and established. The holder of this office shall be appointed by the city council solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications, ability and previous governmental experience, and shall hold office at the pleasure of the city council excepting as hereinafter provided in Section 2.04.060. 
(Prior code § 2100) 
(Ord. No. 2367, § 2, 5-13-2015)  
2.04.020 - Residence. 
The appointed city manager, if not a resident of the city at the time of appointment, shall become a resident of the city within ninety days after his appointment. 
(Prior code § 2101) 
(Ord. No. 2367, § 2, 5-13-2015)  
2.04.030 - Eligibility of council members. 
No member of the city council of the city shall be eligible for an appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed after he has ceased to be a member of the council. 
(Prior code § 2102) 
(Ord. No. 2367, § 2, 5-13-2015)  
2.04.040 - Compensation. 
The city manager shall receive such compensation as the city council shall from time to time determine and fix by resolution. 
(Prior code § 2104) 
(Ord. No. 2367, § 2, 5-13-2015)  
2.04.050 - Duties. 
The city manager shall be the administrative head of city government under the direction and control of the city council. He shall: 
A.  Be responsible for the preparation and submission to the city council of the annual city budget and its administration after its adoption; 
B.  Prepare and submit to the city council at the end of each fiscal year a comprehensive report of the financial and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year; 
C.  Advise the city council of the financial condition and future needs of the city; 
D.  Prepare such general rules and regulations as are necessary or proper for the general conduct of the administrative offices and departments of the city under his express jurisdiction and submit the same to the city council for its approval; 
E.  Serve as personnel officer of the city; 
F.  Be responsible for public relations and the dissemination of information to the citizens of the city. 
G.  Attend all meetings of the city council and such other boards and commissions as may be designated by the city council; 
H.  Be responsible to see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully performed and all due conditions met and observed; 
I.  Exercise general supervision over all public property under the control and jurisdiction of the city council and not specifically delegated to a particular board or other department head; 
J.  Devote his entire time to the duties of this office and to the interests of the city; 
K.  Perform such other duties as may be required of him from time to time by the city council. 
(Prior code § 2105) 
(Ord. No. 2367, § 2, 5-13-2015)  
2.04.060 - Removal. 
A.  The city manager shall not be removed from office during or within a period of thirty days next succeeding any municipal election at which time a member of the city council is elected. At any other time the city manager may be removed only at a regular meeting of the city council and upon affirmation votes of at least three members of the city council. At least thirty days prior to the effective date of his removal, the city manager shall be furnished with a written notice stating the council's intention to remove him and reasons therefor. Within seven days after receipt of such notice, the city manager may, by written notification to the city clerk, request a hearing before the city council, in which event the city council shall fix a time for a public hearing which shall be held at its regular meeting place before the expiration of the thirty-day period referred to. The city manager manager shall appear and be heard at such hearing. 
B.  After furnishing the city manager with written notice of his intended removal, the city council may suspend him from duty, but his compensation shall continue until his removal as herein provided. In removing the city manager, the city council shall use its uncontrolled discretion, and its actions shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearing, the purpose of which is to allow the city manager and city council to present to each other and the public all pertinent facts prior to the final action of removal. 
(Prior code § 2106) 
(Ord. No. 2367, § 2, 5-13-2015)  
2.04.070 - Exclusion from civil service and personnel system. 
The office of city manager is specifically excluded from the civil service or personnel system of the city, and the city manager shall not be entitled to the benefits, advantages or protection of the civil service or personnel system of the city; he shall not be subject to the procedures outlined or prevailing in the system. 
(Prior code § 2107) 
(Ord. No. 2367, § 2, 5-13-2015)  
Chapter 2.08 - CITY COUNCIL 
 
2.08.010 - Reorganization. 
A.  The council shall reorganize by selecting one of its number as mayor, and another of its number as mayor pro tempore, on the following occasions: 
1.  At the second meeting of November in nonelection years, beginning November 28, 1988; or 
2.  At the first meeting immediately following the certification of election results in election years. 
B.  Persons shall be appointed to the position of mayor, in accordance with an order of appointment, established hereby. The order of appointment which shall apply is as follows: 
1.  Glasman; 
2.  Nighswonger; 
3.  Pizzorno; 
4.  Payan; 
5.  Salazar; 
C.  Persons shall be appointed to the position of mayor pro tempore in the same order for the period of time immediately preceding their appointment as mayor. 
D.  As members leave the council, the order of appointment shall be deemed modified by adding the names of new council members at the bottom of the order of appointment, and deleting the name of the retiring member or members therefrom. Where the names of two or more new council members are added to the order at the same time, their respective positions on the order of appointment shall be determined based upon which person received the highest number of votes in the municipal election immediately preceding. 
E.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, by the affirmative vote of not less than three members of the council, any or all provisions hereof may be suspended, and any member of the council may be appointed to the position of mayor or mayor pro tempore for a fixed or indeterminate term or terms. 
(Prior code § 2800.1)  
2.08.020 - Council meetings—Dates and times. 
Pursuant to Government Code Section 36805, council meeting dates and times shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2090 § 1, 1993: Ord. 2086 § 1, 1993: Ord. 2009 § 1, 1990: prior code § 2800)  
2.08.030 - Meeting place. 
The council chamber in the city hall, located at 1600 West Beverly Boulevard, within the city, is designated as the meeting place of the city council. 
(Prior code § 2801)  
2.08.040 - Prohibition of convicted felons from holding elective office. 
Any person shall be disqualified from being an elective officer of the City of Montebello if that person has been convicted of a felony. Prior to running for elective office, a candidate is required to execute, under penalty of perjury, a statement indicating the candidate has not been convicted of a felony. 
(Ord. No. 2339, § 1, 10-27-2010)  
2.08.050 - Municipal elections. 
Pursuant to Sections 1301 and 1000 of the California Elections Code, commencing with the statewide election to be held on November 6, 2018, the city of Montebello's general municipal elections shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of even-numbered years to coincide with the statewide election. 
(Ord. No. 2394, § 3, 3-8-2017)  
Chapter 2.12 - CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS 
 
2.12.010 - Authority. 
A.  In accordance with Penal Code § 836.5, the employees of the city designated by the city manager as code enforcement officers of the city, are authorized to arrest without a warrant a person violating any provisions of this code whenever such a code enforcement officers have reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has violated that provision in the officer's presence. The aforementioned power of arrest if further given to a code enforcement officer for all offenses classified as misdemeanors or infractions appearing anywhere in this code. 
B.  In any case in which a person is arrested pursuant to subsection A of this section and the person arrested does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, the public employee making the arrest shall prepare a written notice to appear and release the person on his or her promise to appear. (State law reference: California Penal Code Sections 836.5 and 853.6.) 
(Ord. 2285 § 3, 2005; Ord 2024 § 1, 1990: prior code § 1200.21)  
Chapter 2.16 - DIRECTOR OF FINANCE 
 
2.16.010 - Office established. 
There is created and established the office of director of finance, sometimes referred to in this code as "finance officer." The office of director of finance may be combined with any other office or position not inconsistent therewith. 
(Prior code § 2380)  
2.16.020 - Powers and duties. 
The director of finance shall be the head of the finance department of the city, and shall have the power and shall be required to: 
A.  Have charge of the administration of the financial affairs of the city under the direction of the city manager; 
B.  Compile the budget expense and income estimates for the city manager; 
C.  Maintain a general accounting system for the city government and each of its officers, departments and agencies; 
D.  Supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all moneys and audit of all expenditures to insure that budget appropriations are not exceeded; audit all purchase orders before issuance; to insure that sufficient funds are appropriated and available; audit and approve before payment all bills, invoices, payrolls, demands or charges against the city government and with the advice of the city attorney, when necessary determine the regularity, legality and correctness of such claims, demands or charges; prepare and submit to the city council periodically a register of audited demands with his affidavit attached thereto as provided in Section 37202 of the Government Code; 
E.  Submit to the city council through the city manager a monthly statement of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the city; and, as of the end of each fiscal year, submit a complete financial statement and report; 
F.  Supervise the keeping of current inventories of all property of the city by all city departments, offices and agencies; 
G.  Perform all the financial and accounting duties heretofore imposed upon the city clerk, and the city clerk shall be relieved of such duties including all such duties imposed upon the city clerk by Section 40802 through 40805 of the Government Code of the state. 
H.  Perform such other duties as may be imposed upon him by law or by this code. 
(Prior code 2381)  
Chapter 2.20 - POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS 
 
2.20.010 - Duty to render aid at all times—Compensation for injuries. 
A.  In addition to the performance of their regular and ordinary duties, it shall be the duty of all police officers and firefighters, at all times, and under all circumstances, to go to the aid of all persons or animals in distress or danger and render them such help and assistance as lies within their power. 
B.  In case any police officer or firefighter is injured while rendering such additional services as aforementioned, he or she shall be deemed to be injured in the course of his or her employment and shall be entitled to workmen's compensation therefor, as provided by law. 
(Prior code §§ 2807 and 2808)  
2.20.020 - Mutual aid—Agreements. 
The city council, upon the recommendation of the fire chief or police chief, may adopt mutual aid agreements to provide for fire and police protection for the city and any adjoining municipality, county fire protection district, or any agency rendering fire or police protection. Any member of the police or fire department who renders services outside of the city limits of this city, pursuant to the provisions of any mutual aid agreement, adopted by this city, either pursuant to the provisions of this section or otherwise, shall be deemed to be acting within the scope and course of his employment by this city. 
(Prior code § 2809)  
2.20.030 - Police officers—Recruitment and training. 
The recruitment and training of police officers of the city shall, hereafter, be in accordance with the standards as established from time to time by the Commission on Peace Officers Standards and Training of the Department of Justice, of the state, created pursuant to Section 13500 et seq. of the Penal Code of the state of California. 
(Prior code § 2809.1)  
2.20.040 - Local control over public safety services and voter approval for the transfer of city fire and police services. 
A.  Fire and police services shall be provided by city employees. Prior to the city council transferring or consolidating all or substantially all of the fire and/or police services performed by sworn city personnel to any other public entity other than the city of Montebello, the following findings must be made: 
1.  Existing emergency response times and service levels, including, but not limited to, on-duty staffing levels, facilities and equipment shall be maintained or enhanced. 
2.  There shall not be an increase in cost to either the police or fire department general fund allocation, or if a savings to any fund is projected, it shall not be a result of significant service alterations or reductions. 
3.  Such evidence, including a report by an independent auditor of the financial costs associated with a final proposal, shall be submitted to an ad hoc committee of residents appointed by the city council. The purpose shall be to develop a report that would analyze any proposal in the form of a complete and final proposal and make a recommendation to the city council of such action. 
B.  No less than six months prior to any such transfer or consolidation becoming effective, the proposed transfer or consolidation shall have been approved by a super majority of fifty-five percent of the voters of the city voting thereon at any regular or special municipal election. 
C.  This section shall not apply to any public safety services currently performed under contract at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2325 § 1, 2008)  
Chapter 2.24 - TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT 
 
2.24.010 - Created—Purpose—Control. 
A transportation department of the city is created for the maintenance and operation of motor buses for the transportation of passengers for hire in and about the city and vicinity subject to the control of the city council. 
(Prior code § 2330)  
2.24.020 - Rules and regulations. 
The city council may from time to time adopt such rules and regulations for the management and control of the department, as it shall deem necessary or expedient. 
(Prior code § 2331)  
Chapter 2.28 - HOUSING MEDIATION BOARD 
 
2.28.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Housing mediation board ordinance." 
(Prior code § 2385)  
2.28.020 - Established. 
There is created and established a board of the city to be known as the "Housing mediation board" and hereinafter referred to as "board." 
(Prior code § 2385.1)  
2.28.030 - Members—Appointment—Term. 
A.  The board shall consist of not less than six members and not more than nine appointed by the city council. Insofar as practicable, one-third of the board members shall be tenants residing within the city, one-third owners or managers of rental dwelling units within the city, and one-third neutral parties consisting of residents who are neither tenants nor owners of a rental dwelling unit. Members shall serve at the pleasure of the city council for a three-year term from the time they are appointed and may be appointed for as many consecutive three-year terms as is deemed appropriate by the city council. Appointments shall be made to maintain a balance as to the status as owner, tenant, or neutral party, and expiration date of term, insofar as is practicable. 
B.  A board member who has served for a period of not less than three years of active service, may request to be appointed by the board to serve as a "reserve board member," with all rights, protection, and privileges of a board member, except that a reserve board member: (a) shall not have the right to serve as an officer of the board or to vote at any board meetings; (b) shall have no obligation to attend monthly board meetings; and, (c) shall have no right to receive a stipend for attending monthly board meetings. 
(Ord. 2126 § 1, 1995: Ord. 2106 § 1, 1994: prior code § 2385.2(a))  
2.28.040 - Mediators—Candidate recommendations. 
After completing the mediation training required by Section 2.28.050, the housing mediation board will recommend to the city council the names of candidates who have qualified to be mediators. The housing mediation board shall determine such qualification on the candidate's objectivity, lack of bias, ability to deal tactfully in appropriate circumstances and such other qualities as may be appropriate to the board's duties. 
(Prior code § 2385.2(b))  
2.28.050 - Training required. 
All candidates for board membership shall receive mediation training as established by the housing mediation board in its rules of procedures. 
(Prior code § 2385.3)  
2.28.060 - Vacancies. 
A vacancy in the board shall exist whenever a person appointed thereto fails to qualify within ninety days after notice of appointment, dies or resigns. Any vacancy shall be filled by city council appointment. 
(Prior code § 2385.4)  
2.28.070 - Indemnity. 
The city shall indemnify and defend the board for conduct arising out of their responsibilities as set forth in this chapter, unless such conduct consists of any fraudulent or criminal act as determined by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Prior code § 3285.5)  
2.28.080 - Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the housing mediation board shall be as follows: 
A.  To establish rules of procedure for mediation conducted by the board, notices and services, hearings, meetings of the board and order of business. Such rules and all changes or additions thereto shall be submitted to and subject to approval by the city council and thereafter filed with the city clerk before becoming effective; 
B.  To mediate housing disputes between rental property owners and tenants as provided herein; 
C.  To conduct training sessions or workshops for owners, managers, and tenants of rental property, concerning effective property management and tenant rights and responsibilities. 
(Ord. 2179 § 1, 1998; prior code § 2385.6)  
2.28.090 - Quorum and meetings. 
A quorum shall consist of one-half the board's members, excluding vacant positions. All meetings of the board shall be held in publicly accessible buildings located in the city, and shall be open to the public. The time and place of meetings shall be provided for in the rules of procedure. 
(Prior code § 2385.7)  
2.28.100 - Officers. 
A.  The board shall organize and elect a chairperson, vice chairperson, and any other executive officers as needed from its membership in July of each year. In the absence or disability of the chairperson, vice chairperson and executive officer, the board may designate a temporary chairperson. 
B.  The duties of the chairperson, vice chairperson or other executive officer shall be specified in the board's rules. The assistant city manager/community services and development or his designee shall serve as secretary to the board. 
(Prior code § 2385.8)  
2.28.110 - Mediation process. 
A.  Initiation of Mediation. Upon receipt of a completed petition for mediation by either a rental property owner or tenant, a time and place for hearing the petition shall be set. 
B.  Initial Step Mediation. An initial mediation hearing shall be heard by one or more board members, as designated by the board chairperson. If the parties reach agreement at such initial hearing, the terms of the agreement shall be stated in writing and be signed by the parties as an agreement terminating the dispute, and the mediation process shall terminate. 
C.  Second Step Mediation. In cases where initial mediation does not result in agreement, a second step mediation hearing may be held upon the request of either party, or upon recommendation of the mediator, or where the chairperson, in his or her discretion, determines that it would be in the best interest of the parties. A second step mediation hearing shall be held with a group of at least two board members selected by the chairperson. If the parties reach agreement at such hearing, the mediation shall be terminated and the terms of such agreement shall be stated in writing and be signed by the parties as an agreement terminating dispute. If no agreement is reached in a second step mediation hearing, the mediation process shall terminate and the mediators shall, within seven days after termination of the hearing, file with the board a brief report summarizing the mediation hearing. 
D.  Enforceable Agreements. Agreements reached as a result of mediation and signed by the parties thereto shall be enforceable in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Prior code § 2385.9)  
2.28.120 - Records. 
All records and reports of board meetings shall be public records. All petitions for mediations, agreements reached as a result of a mediation hearing, and all reports and records of mediation hearings shall be confidential unless otherwise agreed by the parties to the mediation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the board is authorized at any time to provide copies of petitions for mediation, agreements reached as a result of the mediation hearing, certificates of nonparticipation, and certificates of participation to any party to the mediation. In no event shall this section be construed as forbidding either party to any litigation from introducing any petition for mediation, agreement reached as a result of mediation, certificate of nonparticipation, or certificate of participation which shall be relevant. 
(Prior code § 2385.10)  
2.28.130 - Retaliatory eviction forbidden. 
It is hereby declared that the right to institute mediation as provided herein is a protected right contemplated by California Civil Code Section 1942(c) and the provisions of the Civil Code Section 1942.5 forbidding the eviction of tenants exercising the rights described therein, and providing remedies for such wrongful evictions, shall apply to the right of a tenant to request mediation. This chapter however, creates no new or different cause of action for retaliatory eviction. 
(Prior code § 2385.11)  
2.28.140 - Report on activities and effectiveness. 
The board shall submit to the city council a report at least annually reviewing the board's activities and evaluating the effectiveness of the mediation process. The report may include recommendations for changes in the mediation process which are necessary or proper to increase the board's effectiveness. 
(Prior code 2385.12)  
2.28.150 - Role of attorneys—Permitted assistance. 
A.  No attorney shall take part in any mediation hearing, unless: 
1.  The attorney is the owner, manager or tenant of the dwelling unit which is involved in the mediation; or 
2.  The owner, manager or tenant for the dwelling unit involved in the mediation is a partnership in which the attorney is a general partner, and in which all partners are attorneys; or 
3.  The owner, manager or tenant of the dwelling unit involved in the mediation is a corporation, and the attorney is an officer or director of the corporation, and all of the officers and directors of the corporation are attorneys. 
B.  Nothing herein shall prevent an attorney from rendering advice to a party participating in a mediation hearing, either before or after commencing the mediation process; nor shall anything herein prevent an attorney from testifying to facts of which he has personal knowledge and about which he is competent to testify. Nothing herein shall prevent the city attorney or any deputy city attorney from advising the board, its members and alternates as to any matter relating to the performance of their duties. 
C.  Any person may be represented by an agent other than an attorney in mediation hearings, provided such agent is granted authority to do so in writing, and the authorization includes authority to enter into a binding settlement of the dispute being mediated. 
D.  Attorneys may be appointed as board members and may participate in hearings as mediators. 
(Prior code 2385.13)  
2.28.160 - Matters not subject to mediation. 
A.  Any breach of a lease or rental agreement for a dwelling unit, or other act, for which a rental property owner could issue a three-day notice as provided in Code of Civil Procedure Section 1161, Subsections (2), (3) and (4), shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter. Such three-day notice shall not be invalid or subject to the terms of Section 2.29.190 for failure to mediate with such tenant receiving the notice; provided, that any failure to pay a rent increase shall be subject to the terms of subsection A of Section 2.28.180. 
B.  The failure of a tenant to quit after giving notice as provided in Code Civil Procedure Section 1161, subsection (5), shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  All claims that the physical condition of the dwelling unit, or the building or premises within which it is located, is unsatisfactory regardless of whether such condition is a violation of law or not shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter. Whenever possible, the assistant city manager/community services and development director or his designee shall assist a tenant complaining about such conditions by referring the tenant to the city department, or an appropriate county or state agency, having responsibility in such matters. 
(Ord. 2179 § 2, 1998; prior code § 2385.14)  
2.28.170 - Matters subject to mediation. 
Any matter relating to the use or occupancy of a rental dwelling unit, other than those set forth in Section 2.28.160, may be mediated at a hearing as provided herein. Such matters include, but are not limited to, all of the following: claims that rent increases are excessive or unjustified; disputes over deposits; clarification of responsibilities for property maintenance; disputes over the rights and responsibilities of rental property owners and tenants; claims that a notice to quit, other than those specified in Section 2.28.160 are retaliatory, wrongful, improper, or should otherwise be subject to discussion and mediation between the rental property owner and tenant; and property related disputes and/or concerns among neighboring residents. 
(Ord. 2179 § 3, 1998: prior code § 2385.15)  
2.28.180 - Mediation of rent increases. 
A.  If within ten working days of the receipt of a notice an increase in rent, a petition for mediation is filed with the city planning department by a tenant of a dwelling unit subject to a rent increase, and served by the city, then a mediation hearing shall be set prior to the effective date of rent increase, if reasonably possible, otherwise a hearing shall be set within a reasonable time after the effective date. The term "effective date" means that date on which tenant would have begun increased rent payment, but for the filing of a mediation petition. The rent increase shall not be effective unless or until the rental property owner or manager of the premises, or the rental property owner's duly authorized agent, meets with the tenant requesting mediation at the hearing. 
B.  The board, in its rules, may require the rental property owner to provide specific documentation and information regarding costs of operating the building in which the dwelling unit is located at the mediation hearing, in order for the rental property owner to be considered as having appeared at the mediation hearing with the tenant. 
C.  No rent increase shall be invalid or otherwise questioned for failure to reach agreement regarding the increase at a mediation hearing. 
D.  Nothing herein shall relieve a tenant of the obligation to pay the rent in effect prior to the receipt of the notice of an increase whether or not the rental property owner meets with the tenant at the mediation hearing. 
E.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any rent increase established by a written lease which takes effect without the service of a notice. 
(Ord. 2059 § 1, 1991: prior code § 2385.16)  
2.28.190 - Failure to participate in mediation. 
A.  Policy. It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide a process in which trained mediators may assist disputants in reaching voluntary agreement. Accordingly, except as provided herein, there shall be no penalty or disability, either civil or criminal, for failure to participate in the mediation process and there shall be no penalty, either civil or criminal for failure to reach agreement with a disputant in the mediation process. However, it is the intent and purpose of this chapter that its provisions shall be enforced by courts of competent jurisdiction and for that purpose, petitions for mediation, agreements reached as a result of mediation, certificates of participation and certificates of nonparticipation shall be admissible evidence in any proceedings in which they are relevant. 
B.  Failure of Rental Property Owner to Participate After Service of Notice to Quit. If, within ten days after the receipt a notice terminating a tenancy, other than a three-day notice as described in Section 2.28.160. the tenant of the dwelling unit subject to the notice files and serves a petition for the mediation upon a rental property owner, the petition shall be set for hearing prior to the date specified in the notice. The notice shall not be effective and the tenancy shall not be terminated, unless and until the rental property owner or the manager or duly authorized agent attends the mediation hearing with the tenant as provided herein. The failure to reach agreement at the hearing, shall not affect the validity of such notice in any way. 
C.  Failure of Rental Property Owner to Participate After Service of Notice of Rent Increase. The failure to mediate rent increases shall be subject to the provisions of Section 2.28.180. 
D.  Tenant's Failure to Appear at Hearing. If a tenant files a petition under this chapter and then fails to appear at a duly scheduled mediation hearing, he or she shall forfeit the right to file a second petition pertaining to the same matter unless he or she proves that the failure to appear was due to an illness for which he or she was hospitalized. 
E.  Certificates of Participation and Nonparticipation. Following a mediation hearing in which both the parties participate as provided herein, the mediator shall provide both parties with a certificate indicting such participation. In the event that a party fails to participate in a mediation hearing as provided herein, the other party shall be provided by the mediator with a certificate indicating such nonparticipation. 
(Prior code § 2385.17)  
2.28.200 - Petitions for mediation. 
A.  A petition for mediation shall be filed with the secretary to the board or with designated city staff assigned to assist the board, or with such person as shall be designated by the board's rules. A petition shall state the name and address of the party seeking mediation, the name, address and telephone number, if known, of all parties with whom mediation is sought, and a brief statement of the facts giving rise to the dispute. Copies of any written notices and other relevant documents shall be submitted with a petition. If mediation is requested because of a dispute resulting from the service of a notice of a rent increase or a thirty-day or longer notice terminating a tenancy, then the request shall include the date the notice was served, and the date the notice will terminate the tenancy or the rent increase will take effect. 
B.  The board, in its rules, may specify such other information as may be appropriate to be included in a petition for mediation. 
C.  The board, in its rules, shall specify that petitions for mediation of rent increases or other monetary issues or disputes shall have priority over nonmonetary issues or disputes in terms of scheduling of mediation hearings. 
(Prior code § 2385.18)  
2.28.210 - Mediation hearings—Notice of time and place—Service. 
A.  A notice by first-class mail setting the time and place of the mediation hearing shall be prepared and served upon all parties named in the petition. Service shall be by mail to the addresses provided in the petition not less than ten days prior to the hearing. Notice may be provided by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the option of the chairperson or mediators to insure that the parties are properly notified. 
B.  Service of the notice upon resident manager on the premises or upon the persons named in notices posted pursuant to Section 1962 of the Civil Code shall be deemed to be service upon the rental property owner. 
(Prior code § 2385.19)  
2.28.220 - Mediation hearings—Consolidated hearings. 
A.  Whenever more than one request for mediation has been filed with respect to rental units which are under common ownership or management and which are operated as a single-housing complex, and which relate to common subject matter, such requests may, on order of the chairperson, be consolidated for hearing. 
B.  Two or more persons may join in a petition for mediation or be named in a petition for mediation, whenever the dispute relates to all parties named. 
C.  All named parties must be present at mediation hearings in order to have their petition considered by the mediator. 
(Prior code § 2385.20)  
2.28.230 - Fees. 
The city council may, by resolution, establish a fee schedule to reimburse the city for its administrative expenses. In establishing a fee schedule, the city council may require fees of both rental property owners and tenants, and shall give due consideration to rates which will encourage participation in the mediation process by persons of all income levels. The failure to pay a required fee shall, in the case of a tenant, be grounds for terminating the mediation process, or, in the case of a rental property owner, be grounds for finding that the rental property owner has failed to participate in the mediation process. 
(Prior code § 2385.21)  
Chapter 2.30 - ADVISORY COMMISSIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ords. 2248 and 2295. 
 
2.30.010 - Advisory commissions established. 
A.  The city council establishes six commissions to serve the city, identified as follows and collectively referred herein as the "commissions": 
1.  Civil service commission; 
2.  Culture and recreation commission; 
3.  Golf course commission; 
4.  Planning commission; 
5.  Traffic and safety commission; 
6.  Youth and education commission. 
B.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as restricting or curtailing any of the powers of the city council, or as a delegation to the commissions, of any authority or discretionary powers vested and imposed by law in the city council. The city council declares that the public interest, convenience, welfare and necessity require the establishment of the commissions to act in a purely advisory capacity, for the purposes set forth herein this chapter. 
(Ord. 2322 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2.30.020 - Members—Composition. 
Each commission shall be composed of five members or "commissioners" as used herein. 
(Ord. 2322 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2.30.030 - Members—Appointment/removal. 
A.  Each city council member has the power to appoint one member to each of the commissions, except for the youth and education commission where each city council member has the power to appoint one commissioner and one alternate. 
B.  Each commissioner, and alternate where applicable, shall serve at the pleasure of that city councilmember and shall be removed in the same manner as he or she is appointed. 
(Ord. 2322 § 1 (part), 2008) 
(Ord. No. 2414, § 2, 3-27-2019)  
2.30.040 - Members—Eligibility. 
A.  Except as set forth herein, an individual shall be eligible for appointment to a commission as long as he or she has been a resident and registered voter of the city for at least one year prior to the time of his or her appointment, and remains a resident and registered voter at all times during his or her term. 
B.  Individuals wishing to be considered for an appointment to a commission must submit a completed application form to the city clerk no later than two weeks prior to council consideration of said appointment. Applications received after that date will be filed for consideration the next time appointments are scheduled for city council action. 
C.  In addition, with respect to the youth and education commission, all members shall be between the ages of fourteen and nineteen at the time of appointment. Each member of the youth and education commission shall be in good academic standing with their respective schools, as defined by each school, and submit two letters of recommendations as a requirement of the application process. 
D.  Employees of the city of Montebello are not eligible to serve on any commission. 
(Ord. 2322 § 1 (part), 2008) 
(Ord. No. 2345, § 1, 8-24-2011)  
2.30.050 - Members—Term of office. 
The term of office of members of a commission shall be for a period of four years. The member shall serve for the duration of his or her term, unless: (1) the appointing councilmember vacates office for any reason prior to the expiration of the appointed commissioner's four-year term, at which point the commissioner's term shall immediately expire; or (2) the commissioner is removed pursuant to Section 2.30.030. No person shall sit on a commission after the expiration of his or her term. 
(Ord. 2322 § 1 (part), 2008) 
(Ord. No. 2345, § 2, 8-24-2011)  
2.30.060 - Members—Vacancies. 
The city council shall fill any vacancy, whether created by death, disability, ineligibility, non-attendance or otherwise, within thirty days of the occurrence of the vacancy. The appointment shall only be for the remainder of the term being vacated. 
(Ord. 2322 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2.30.070 - Members—Compensation. 
Except for members of the golf course commission, members of a commission shall be entitled to such compensation as determined by the city council by resolution. Members of the golf course commission shall be compensated with free play at the Montebello golf course, providing that starting times are available. Commissioners will only be compensated for meetings attended. 
(Ord. 2322 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2.30.080 - Meetings—Frequency and place. 
A.  Except for the golf course commission, each of the commissions shall hold regular meetings, at least once per calendar month, at a day and time approved by resolution of the commission. The golf course commission shall hold regular meetings at least once every two months. 
B.  Meetings shall be held at city hall located at 1600 W. Beverly Boulevard, Montebello, California or at another location allowed by law. 
C.  All meetings, including adjourned meetings and special meetings, shall be held in the manner provided for in the Ralph M. Brown Act, as set forth in California Government Code Section 54950 et seq., and as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 2322 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2.30.090 - Meetings—Absence from. 
A.  If a member of a commission is absent, without cause, from three consecutive regular meetings of the commission, or from a total of six regular meetings of the commission during a calendar year, the position of such member shall be deemed to be vacant. The commission chairperson shall immediately inform, in writing, the city clerk of such a vacancy. 
B.  An absence due to illness, an unavoidable absence from the city, or provided that written notice thereof is given to the commission chairperson in advance of such regular meeting, shall be deemed an excusable absence or absence with cause. 
(Ord. 2322 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2.30.100 - Meetings—Officers. 
Each July, the commission shall select one of its members to serve as chairperson and one of its members to serve as vice-chairperson. The chairperson and the vice-chairperson shall serve in those positions for a period of one year. The chairperson shall preside over commission meetings. If the chairperson is absent, the vice-chairperson shall preside over the meetings. 
(Ord. 2322 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2.30.110 - Meetings—Rules and records. 
The majority of the members of a commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Each commission may adopt rules for the transaction of business but, unless so adopted, the procedures set forth in the current edition of Robert's Rules of Order shall prevail. There shall be an accurate and detailed record of all proceedings, findings, determinations, resolutions and transactions of each commission, which record shall be a public record and filed with the city clerk immediately upon their approval. Minutes from a regular meeting shall be submitted to the respective commission for review and approval at the next regularly scheduled meeting and shall contain sufficient detail to enable the city council to ascertain what transpired at said meeting. Each of the commissions shall be supported by staff designated by the city council or the city manager. 
(Ord. 2322 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2.30.120 - Duties—Culture and recreation commission. 
The culture and recreation commission shall advise the city council on matters relating to parks, recreation, human services and the fostering and stimulation of the general arts and cultural development of the city of Montebello. The culture and recreation commission shall perform the following duties: 
A.  Advising the city council regarding activities oriented toward recreational activities that pertain to the standard leisure needs of people of all ages, and such programs and services that would provide special programs and resources basic to the life needs of residents. 
B.  The commission shall be afforded the opportunity to review all capital improvement projects relating to parks, recreation and human services, so as to provide input to the city council. 
C.  Make recommendations to the city council regarding various arts and cultural programs. Such programs shall include topics relating to fine arts and applied arts; music, drama, dance, city history, civic beautification, cultural heritage and literature. As part of this duty, the commission may: (1) conduct studies and prepare reports for the city council regarding programs designed to further arts and culture for citizens residing within the community; (2) initiate and formulate plans of worthwhile arts and cultural programs or projects; (3) coordinate and partner with various arts and cultural groups to develop programs, projects or activities within the community; and (4) publicize and disseminate information regarding forthcoming arts and cultural programs, projects, activities or events. 
D.  From time to time, other duties may be directed by the city council. 
(Ord. 2322 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2.30.130 - Duties—Civil service commission. 
The powers and duties of the civil service commission shall be: 
A.  Pursuant to the rules set forth in Chapter 2.60 herein, to hear appeals submitted by any person in the classified service relative to any disciplinary action, dismissal, demotion or alleged violation of Chapter 2.60 or the civil service rules, and to certify its finding and recommendations. 
B.  In any investigation or hearing conducted by the commission, it shall have the power to examine witnesses under oath and compel their attendance or production of evidence by subpoenas issued in the name of the city and attested by the city clerk. It shall be the duty of the police chief to cause all such subpoenas to be served, and refusal of a person to attend or to testify in answer to such subpoena shall subject the person to prosecution in the same manner as set forth by law for failure to appear before the city council in response to a subpoena issued by the city council. Each member of the commission shall have the power to administer oaths to witnesses. The commission shall afford every witness the opportunity to be heard. 
C.  To publish or post notices of tests for positions in the classified service; to receive application therefore; to conduct and grade tests (this duty and function may be contracted as provided in Section 2.60.280 of this title); to certify to the appointing authority a list of all persons eligible for appointment in the appropriate position in the classified service. The commission shall cause the duties imposed upon it by this subsection to be performed by the personnel office for the commission. In the performance of such duties so delegated by the provisions of this subsection, the personnel officer shall be subject to the direction and control of the civil service commission. 
D.  When required by the city council, the commission shall hold hearings and make recommendations on any matter of personnel administration, within the limits of such request. 
E.  To advise the city council on all matters and problems concerning personnel administration. 
F.  From time to time other duties may be directed by the city council. 
(Ord. 2322 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2.30.140 - Duties—Golf course commission. 
The duties of the golf course commission shall be as follows: 
A.  To advise the city council and the municipal services department on matters relating to the use, maintenance, improvement, promotion and operations of the municipal golf course, as well as to agreements involving or relating to the municipal golf course. 
B.  To promote the marketing and use of the golf course as a recreation facility and income source for the city of Montebello. 
C.  From time to time other duties may be directed by the city council. 
(Ord. 2322 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2.30.150 - Duties—Planning commission. 
The planning commission shall perform the duties and shall have all the rights, powers and privileges specified and provided for in this code or by state law. In addition, the planning commission shall perform such other duties as may from time to time be directed by the city council. For state law as to planning commissions, refer to California Government Code Section 65100 et seq. and Title 17 of this code. 
(Ord. 2322 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2.30.160 - Duties—Traffic and safety commission. 
The traffic and safety commission shall perform such duties as may be provided for in this code or other applicable law. In addition, the commission shall perform such functions as may be specifically delegated to it or directed from time to time by the city council. 
(Ord. 2322 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2.30.170 - Duties—Youth and education commission. 
The youth and education commission shall advise the city council on matters relating specifically to youth. This includes activities oriented toward educational, recreational and civic programs, and those activities that pertain to life issues, thus addressing the educational and leisure needs, creating awareness and improving quality of life for our youth. The duties of the commission shall also include the identification and publication of educational opportunities for youth and the development of youth leadership. In addition, the commission shall perform such other duties as may from time to time be directed by the city council. 
(Ord. 2322 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2.30.180 - Appeals—Traffic and safety commission. 
A.  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the traffic and safety commission may, not later than fifteen calendar days following the rendering of the decision of the commission, file a written letter of appeal with the city clerk, setting forth the reasons for appealing the decision of the commission to the city council, and paying the requisite fee for the appeal as set forth by the city council by resolution. In addition, the city council, may upon motion, determine to review the decision of the traffic and safety commission in the same manner as if an appeal had been filed by a person aggrieved by such decision. 
B.  Upon notification by the clerk of such appeal, the secretary of the traffic and safety commission (determined as the city engineer or his or her designee) shall transmit to the clerk the respective commission file relating to the matter appealed. The clerk shall place the matter on the council's agenda as soon as possible thereafter, and shall give appellant, and any other interested person requesting such notice, ten days written notice of the time and place of such hearing. The city council shall, at the time of such hearing, review the matter and shall affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the traffic and safety commission. The determination of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
C.  Neither the traffic and safety commission nor the city council shall be required to hold formal noticed public hearings upon matters on appeal. The city council shall hear all relevant evidence offered by any interested person, and shall consider the files and staff report for purposes of the appeal. 
(Ord. 2322 § 1 (part), 2008)  
Chapter 2.32 - HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION 
 
2.32.010 - Created. 
A human services commission for the city is created. 
(Ord. 2051 § 2, 1991: prior code § 2310)  
2.32.020 - Purpose. 
The human services commission shall be, for all purposes, an advisory commission to the city council for matters relating to senior citizens fifty years of age or older. In addition, this commission shall advise on matters relating to human services, which are those special activities basic to the life needs of the people. Examples include tutoring, graffiti abatement, food assistance, court referral programs, at-risk youth and counseling. 
(Ord. 2083 § 1, 1993: Ord. 2051 § 3, 1991: prior code § 2319)  
2.32.030 - Members—Number. 
The commission shall consist of a total of seven voting members. 
(Ord. 2100 § 1, 1994: Prior code § 2311)  
2.32.040 - Members—Appointment—Removal. 
All members of the commission shall be appointed by the city council. An individual shall be eligible for appointment to the commission as long as he or she is a resident within the city at the time of his or her appointment and at all times during his or her term. Each member shall serve until his or her successor is appointed and qualified, or until he or she is removed from office, by not less than a majority vote of the total voting membership of the city council, without or without cause. 
(Ord. 2158 § 1, 1997: Ord. 2106 § 2, 1994: prior code § 2312)  
2.32.050 - Members—Terms. 
Terms of office of each voting member of the commission shall be for a period of four years, except for the initial appointments, which shall be for the term, as follows: 
A.  Commission Office No. 1: two years; 
B.  Commission Office No. 2: two years; 
C.  Commission Office No. 3: four years; 
D.  Commission Office No. 4: four years; 
E.  Commission Office No. 5: four years. 
(Prior code § 2313)  
2.32.060 - Compensation. 
The commission shall receive such compensation, including but not limited to reasonable expenses, as may be approved from time to time by the city council. 
(Prior code § 2318)  
2.32.070 - Duties. 
The commission shall perform the following duties: 
A.  The commission shall, from time to time, make recommendations the city council for the conduct of various city programs in a manner so as to assist senior citizens; and 
B.  The commission shall conduct such studies and prepare reports, as may be requested from time to time of it by the city council, concerning the betterment, and/or implementation, of programs designed to assist the senior citizens residing within this community; and 
C.  Such other duties as may from time to time be directed by the city council. 
(Prior code § 2317)  
2.32.080 - Meetings—Time and dates—Officers. 
At its organizational meeting, the commission shall, by motion, establish its regular meeting times and dates. The commission shall meet not less than once per calendar month. At its organizational meeting, the commission shall elect one of its voting members as chairman and one of its voting members as vice chairman. The terms of office as chairman and vice chairman shall be set by the commission at its organizational meeting. 
(Prior code § 2315)  
2.32.090 - Meetings—Absence from. 
A.  If a member of the commission shall be absent from three consecutive regular meetings of the commission, without cause, the office of such member shall be deemed to be vacant. The secretary of the commission shall immediately inform the city council of such vacancy. 
B.  An absence due to illness, an unavoidable absence from the city, or provided that written notice thereof is given to the secretary of the commission in advance of such regular meeting, shall be deemed absence for cause. 
(Prior code §§ 2314 and 2314.1)  
2.32.100 - Assistance—Recordkeeping. 
The assistant city manager/community services and development shall supply secretarial assistance, and other staff persons, as may be reasonably necessary to assist the commission in the performance of its duties and functions. The commission shall keep such records of its proceedings as it may determine to be required. 
(Prior code § 2316)  
Chapter 2.36 - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION 
 
2.36.010 - Created—Members—Term. 
There is created a parks and recreation commission, of, and for, the city, which shall be composed of seven members. All members of the commission shall be appointed by the city council. An individual shall be eligible for appointment to the commission as long as he or she is a resident within the city at the time of his or her appointment and at all times during his or her term. Each member shall serve until his or her successor is appointed and qualified, or until he or she is removed from office, by not less than a majority vote of the total voting membership of the city council, with or without cause. 
(Ord. 2158 § 2, 1997: Ord. 2106 § 3, 1994: prior code § 2320)  
2.36.020 - Members—Terms. 
The terms of office of members of the commission shall be for a period not to exceed four years; provided, that the city council shall stagger terms of office or portions of terms of office at such times as it shall deem necessary, so as to provide for continuity in the membership of the commission. 
(Prior code § 2321)  
2.36.030 - Powers and duties. 
The parks and recreation commission shall be, for all purposes, an advisory commission to the city council for matters relating to parks and recreation. This includes activities oriented toward standard education, employment, recreation, and those activities that pertain to the standard leisure needs of people under fifty years of age. 
(Ord. 2083 § 2, 1993: prior code § 2328)  
2.36.040 - Meetings—Frequency—Place. 
The commission shall hold regular meetings, at least once per month, at the city hall at 1600 W. Beverly Boulevard, Montebello, California, and may hold such additional meetings at the place as it may deem necessary or expedient. 
(Prior code § 2325)  
2.36.050 - Meetings—Absence from. 
A.  If a member of the commission shall be absent from three consecutive regular meetings of the commission, without cause, the office of such member shall be deemed to be vacant. The secretary of the commission shall immediately inform the city council of such vacancy. 
B.  An absence due to illness, an unavoidable absence from the city, or provided that written notice thereof is given to the secretary of the commission in advance of such regular meeting, shall be deemed an absence for cause. 
(Prior code §§ 2320.1 and 2320.2)  
2.36.060 - Quorum—Officers. 
A majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the purposes of transacting business. The commission shall annually select one of its members to act as chairman and one of its members to act as vice chairman. The terms of office of both the chairman and vice chairman shall be for a period of one year. 
(Prior code § 2326)  
2.36.070 - Records. 
The secretary of the commission shall keep a record of all the proceedings, resolutions, findings, determinations and transactions of the commission, which record shall be a public record, and a copy of which record shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Prior code § 2327)  
2.36.080 - Advisory capacity. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as restricting or curtailing any of the powers of the city council, or as a delegation to the commission, of any of the authority or discretionary powers vested and imposed by law in the city council. The city council declares that the public interest, convenience, welfare and necessity require the appointment of a parks and recreation commission, to act in a purely advisory capacity to the city council, for the purposes herein enumerated. 
(Prior code § 2329)  
Chapter 2.40 - PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
2.40.010 - Created. 
A planning commission for the city is created. 
(Prior code § 2300)  
2.40.020 - Member—Term—Appointment— Removal. 
The planning commission of this city shall consist of seven members. Each commissioner shall be appointed for a term not to exceed four years; provided that the city council shall stagger terms of office; or portions of terms of office at such times as it shall deem necessary, so as to provide for continuity in the membership of the commission. All members of the commission shall be appointed by the city council. An individual shall be eligible for appointment to the commission as long as he or she is a resident within the city at the time of his or her appointment and at all times during his or her term. Each member shall serve until his or her successor is appointed and qualified, or until he or she is removed from office, by not less than a majority vote of the total voting membership of the city council, with or without cause. 
(Ord. 2158 § 3, 1997: Ord. 2106 § 4, 1994: prior code § 2301)  
2.40.030 - Organization—Meetings—Rules for transaction of business—Records. 
The commission shall elect its chairman from among its appointed members for a term of one year and, subject to other provisions of law, may create and fill such other offices as it may determine. The commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month. It shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of the resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(Prior code § 2305)  
2.40.040 - Regular meeting—Defined. 
A regular meeting as provided for by law or by rule of the planning commission or any regularly advertised public hearing shall be deemed a regular meeting. 
(Prior code § 2304)  
2.40.050 - Absence from meetings. 
A.  If a member of the commission shall be absent from three successive regular meetings of the commission, without cause, the office of each member shall be deemed to be vacant. The secretary of the commission shall immediately inform the city council of such vacancy. 
B.  An absence due to illness, an unavoidable absence from the city, or provided that written notice thereof is given to the secretary of the commission in advance of such regular meeting, shall be deemed an absence for cause. 
(Prior code §§ 2302 and 2303)  
2.40.060 - Powers and duties. 
The city planning commission shall perform the duties and shall have all the rights, powers and privileges specified and provided for in this code or by state law. 
(Prior code § 2306)  
Chapter 2.44 - TRAFFIC AND SAFETY COMMISSION* 
 
2.44.010 - Created. 
There is created a traffic and safety commission for the city as follows. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.02 (part))  
2.44.020 - Members—Appointment—Removal. 
The traffic and safety commission of this city shall consist of seven members. Members shall be appointed for terms not to exceed four years each; provided, that the city council shall stagger terms of office or portions of terms of office at such times as it shall be deemed necessary, so as to provide continuity in the membership of the commission. An individual shall be eligible for appointment to the commission as long as he or she is a resident within the city at the time of his or her appointment and at all times during his or her term. Each member shall serve until his or her successor is appointed and qualified, or until he or she is removed from office, by not less than a majority vote of the total voting membership of the city council, with or without cause. 
(Ord. 2158 § 4, 1997: Ord. 2106 § 5, 1994: Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.02 (part))  
2.44.030 - Officers—Meetings. 
The organization of this commission shall be: 
A.  Officers. The commission shall select one of its numbers as chairperson and one of its numbers as vice chairperson of the commission for a term, respectively, of one year. The director of public works or his/her designee shall act as the secretary to the commission. 
B.  Meetings. The commission may normally hold at least one regular meeting each calendar month, at such time and place as the secretary of the commission shall designate for the commission. The commission shall adopt such rules as it deems to be necessary for the transaction of its business, and shall keep appropriate records thereof. 
C.  Absence from Meetings. If any member of the commission shall be absent from three successive regular meetings of the commission, without cause, the office of such member shall be deemed to be vacant. The secretary of the commission shall immediately inform the city council of such. 
D.  Absence for Cause. An absence due to illness, an unavoidable absence from the city, or provided that written notice thereof is given to the secretary of the commission in advance of such regular meeting, shall be deemed an absence for cause. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.02 (part))  
2.44.040 - Duties. 
The traffic and safety commission of the city shall perform such duties as may be provided for in this code or other applicable law. In addition, the commission shall perform such functions as may be specifically delegated to it from time to time by the city council. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.02 (part))  
2.44.050 - Compensation. 
Members of the traffic and safety commission shall be entitled to such compensation as may, by resolution, be determined by the city council. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.02 (part))  
2.44.060 - Appeals from decision of commission. 
A.  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city traffic and safety commission may, not later than fifteen days following the rendering of the decision by the city traffic and safety commission, file a written letter of appeal with the city clerk, appealing the decision of the city traffic and safety commission to the council; or, the council, may upon motion, determine to review the decision of the city traffic and safety commission in the same manner as if an appeal had been filed by a person aggrieved by such a decision. 
B.  Upon notification by the clerk of such appeal, the secretary of the city traffic and safety commission shall transmit to the clerk of the city traffic and safety commission's file with reference to the matter appealed. The clerk shall place the matter on the council's agenda as soon as possible thereafter, and shall give appellant, and any other interested person requesting such notice, ten days' written notice of the time and place of such hearing. The council shall at the time of such hearing, review the matter and, shall affirm, modify or reverse the traffic safety commission's decision. The determination of the council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.02 (part))  
2.44.070 - Hearings—Form. 
Neither the city traffic and safety commission nor the council shall be required to hold formal noticed public hearings upon matters referred to in this chapter or Title 10 of this code. The city traffic and safety commission and the council shall hear any relevant evidence offered by any interested person, and shall consider the files and any staff report therein included. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.02 (part))  
Chapter 2.46 - GOLF COURSE COMMISSION 
 
2.46.010 - Created—Members—Term. 
The golf course commission of this city shall consist of seven members, each of which shall be appointed by the city council. Members shall be appointed for terms not to exceed four years each; provided, that the city council shall stagger terms of office or portions of terms of office at such times as it shall be deemed necessary, so as to provide continuity in the membership of the commission. An individual shall be eligible for appointment to the commission as long as he or she is a resident within the city at the time of his or her appointment and at all times during his or her term. Each member shall serve until his or her successor is appointed and qualified, or until he or she is removed from office, by not less than a majority vote of the total voting membership of the city council, with or without cause. 
(Ord. 2201 § 1, 1999: Ord. 2158 § 5, 1997: Ord. 2130 § 1 (part), 1995)  
2.46.020 - Members—Term. 
Each commissioner shall be appointed for a term not to exceed four years; provided that the city council shall stagger terms of office; or portions of terms of office at such times as it shall deem necessary, so as to provide for continuity in the membership of the commission. 
(Ord. 2158 § 6, 1997: Ord. 2130 § 1 (part), 1995)  
2.46.030 - Powers and duties. 
The golf course commission shall be, for all purposes, an advisory commission to the city council and the department of parks and recreation for matters relating to the use, maintenance, improvement, promotion, operations and agreements involving the municipal golf course, and for agreements relating to the municipal golf course. 
(Ord. 2130 § 1 (part), 1995)  
2.46.040 - Meetings—Frequency—Place. 
The commission shall hold regular meetings at least once every three months at the city hall at 1600 W. Beverly Boulevard, Montebello, California, or at another location designated by resolution of the commission. Special meetings may be called as needed. 
(Ord. 2130 § 1 (part), 1995)  
2.46.050 - Meetings—Absence from. 
A.  If a member of the commission shall be absent from three consecutive regular meetings of the commission, without cause, the office of such member shall be deemed to be vacant. The secretary of the commission shall immediately inform the city council of such vacancy. 
B.  An absence due to illness, an unavoidable absence from the city, or provided that written notice thereof is given to the secretary of the commission in advance of such regular meeting, shall be deemed an absence for cause. 
(Ord. 2130 § 1 (part), 1995)  
2.46.060 - Quorum—Officers. 
A majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the purposes of transacting business. The commission shall annually select one of its members to act as chairperson and one of its members to act as vice-chairperson. The terms of office of both the chairperson and vice-chairperson shall be for a period of one year. 
(Ord. 2130 § 1 (part), 1995)  
2.46.070 - Records. 
The secretary of the commission shall keep a record of all the proceedings, resolutions, findings, determinations and transactions of the commission, which record shall be a public record, and a copy of which record shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. 2130 § 1 (part), 1995)  
2.46.080 - Advisory capacity. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as restricting or curtailing any of the powers of the city council or the department of parks and recreation, or as a delegation to the commission of any of the authority or discretionary powers vested and imposed by law in the city council or the department of parks and recreation. The city council declares that the public interest, convenience, welfare and necessity require the appointment of a golf commission, to act in a purely advisory capacity to the city, for the purposes enumerated in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2130 § 1 (part), 1995)  
Chapter 2.48 - EMERGENCY SERVICES 
 
2.48.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The purposes of this chapter are to provide for: 
1.  The preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency; 
2.  The direction of the emergency organization; and 
3.  The coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. 
B.  Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. 
(Prior code § 2340)  
2.48.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the term: 
A.  "Disaster" means actual or threatened enemy attack, sabotage, extraordinary fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake or other public calamity. 
B.  "Emergency" means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, drought, sudden and severe energy shortage, plant or animal infestation or disease, the Governor's warning of and earthquake or volcanic prediction or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy or conditions, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of this city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. 
(Ord. 2080 § 1, 1993; prior code §§ 2341 and 2342)  
2.48.030 - Disaster council—Created—Membership. 
The Montebello disaster council is created and shall consist of the following: 
A.  The mayor, who shall be chairman; 
B.  The director of emergency services, who shall be vice chairman; 
C.  The assistant director of emergency services; 
D.  Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of this city, adopted pursuant to the ordinance codified herein; 
E.  Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Prior code § 2343)  
2.48.050 - Disaster council—Powers and duties. 
It shall be the duty of the Montebello disaster council, and it is empowered, to develop the city emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency, and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon the adoption by resolution of the city council. It shall review and recommend for adoption by the city council mutual aid plans and agreements, and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairman, or in his absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice chairman. 
(Ord. 2080 § 3, 1993: prior code § 2345)  
2.48.060 - Director of emergency services—Powers. 
A.  Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect; 
B.  Request the Governor to proclaim a state of emergency when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency; 
C.  Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter; 
D.  Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this city; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them; 
E.  Represent this city in all dealing with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein. 
(Ord. 2080 § 4, 1993: prior code § 2345.1)  
2.48.070 - Director of emergency services—Additional powers. 
A.  In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as herein provided, the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a "state of war emergency," the director is empowered: 
1.  To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably necessary for the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency, including orders or regulations imposing a curfew prohibiting all unauthorized individuals from being present on or at any public street, alley, sidewalk, park, playground or other public place or public building within designated hours and within designated boundaries where necessary to preserve public order and safety. Such orders and regulations and any amendments and rescissions thereof shall be in writing and shall be given widespread publicity and notice. Such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council; 
2.  To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use; 
3.  To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a "state of emergency" in the county in which the city is located or existence of a "state of war emergency," to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers; 
4.  To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency; and 
5.  To execute all of his ordinary power as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the city council, all powers conferred upon him by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority. 
B.  The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council. 
C.  The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this city; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. 
(Ord. 2080 §§ 5, 6, 1993; prior code § 2346)  
2.48.080 - Director of emergency services—Delegation of duties. 
In the event that the director of emergency services is unavailable, the assistant director of emergency services shall have all of the duties and powers of the director. 
(Ord. 2080 § 8, 1993: prior code § 2346.2)  
2.48.090 - Review of local emergency by city council. 
In the event of a proclamation of a local emergency, the city council shall review, at least every fourteen days until the local emergency is terminated, the need for continuing the local emergency and shall proclaim the termination of the local emergency at the earliest possible date that conditions warrant. 
(Ord. 2080 § 7, 1993: prior code § 2346.1)  
2.48.120 - Emergency organization. 
All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who, by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Section 2.48.070(E), may be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city. 
(Ord. 2070 § 5, 1992: prior code § 2347)  
2.48.130 - Civil defense and disaster organization—Organization. 
A.  The functions and duties of the Montebello civil defense and disaster organization shall be distributed among such divisions, services and special staff as the city council shall prescribe by resolution. 
B.  The city council shall, by resolution, set forth the form of organization, establishment and designation of divisions and services, the assignment of functions, duties and powers, and the designation of officers and employees. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the federal government and Civil Defense Agency of the state. 
(Prior code § 2348)  
2.48.140 - Obstructing enforcement of rules or performance of duty. 
No person shall wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the civil defense and disaster organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 2349)  
2.48.150 - Violations—Penalties. 
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for not to exceed six months, or both, for any person, during an emergency to: 
A.  Wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter; 
B.  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof; 
C.  Wear, carry or display without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. 
(Ord. 2026 § 3, 1990: prior code § 2352)  
Chapter 2.52 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
 
2.52.010 - Created. 
A community redevelopment agency is created in and for the city. The city council of the city does, pursuant to the Community Redevelopment Law of the state, declare itself to be the community redevelopment agency. The city council when acting as the agency, shall be vested with all of the rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities, incident thereto. 
(Ord. 2147 § 1, 1996: prior code § 2990)  
Chapter 2.56 - JUDICIAL REVIEW OF CITY DECISIONS 
 
2.56.010 - Applicability of California Code of Civil Procedures Section 1094.6. 
Section 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure is applicable to the decisions of the city council, and of any department, board, commission, officer or agent of the city suspending, demoting or dismissing an officer or employee, revoking or denying an application for a permit, license or other entitlement or denying an application for any retirement benefit or allowance which is subject to the judicial review pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. 
(Prior code § 1550)  
2.56.020 - Notice of time limit within which review can be sought—Required. 
The city council, and any department, board, commission, officer or agent of the city which makes such a decision shall give notice to the affected party that the time in which to seek judicial review of such decision is governed by Section 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. In the event that the decision is reviewable by the city council or another department, board, commission, officer or agent of the city, such notice shall in addition specify the time within which the affected party may seek such review. 
(Prior code § 1531)  
2.56.030 - Notice—Form. 
Such notice as is required by this chapter shall be in written form and given in accord with the provisions of Section 1.04.080. Notice shall be deemed, for all purposes, to have been given at the time of personal service or when deposited in the custody of the United States Postal Service. 
(Prior code § 1552)  
Chapter 2.60 - CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM 
 
2.60.010 - Adoption—Purpose. 
In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters; to attract to municipal services the best and most competent persons available; to assure that appointments and promotions of employees will be based on merit and fitness as determined by competitive tests; to provide a reasonable degree of security for qualified employees; and to insure the city a staff of loyal and qualified employees; the following civil service systems is adopted as a continuation of the existing civil service systems established by Ordinance No. 259. 
(Prior code § 2200)  
2.60.020 - Personnel officer—Designated—Powers and duties. 
The city manager shall be personnel officer. With the approval of the council, the personnel officer may delegate any of the powers and duties conferred upon him under this chapter to any officer or employee of the city, or may recommend that such powers and duties be performed under contract as provided in Section 2.60.280 of this chapter. The personnel officer shall: 
A.  Attend all meetings of the commission and serve as secretary; 
B.  Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the civil service rules not specifically reserved to the council, commission or other officers or employees of the city; 
C.  Prepare and recommend to the council revisions and amendments to the civil service rules. The city attorney shall approve the legality of such revisions and amendments prior to their submission to the council; 
D.  Act as custodian of all personnel records and shall be the official upon whom all notices, requests for hearings, complaints and other official documents shall be served; 
E.  Prepare a position classification plan, including class specifications, and from time to time necessary revisions of the plan. The plan, and any revisions thereof, shall become effective upon approval of the council by resolution; 
F.  Maintain in card index form a roster of officials and employees of the classified service; 
G.  Prepare a record of the length of service of each employee and officer of the classified service together with a concise statement of the duties of each officer and employee in the classified service, together with the salary paid and hours rendered by said employee; 
H.  Prepare a plan of compensation, and revisions thereof, covering all classifications in the classified service. The plan, and any provisions thereof, shall become effective upon approval of the council by resolution; 
I.  Become familiar with all matters relating to the retirement system and its administration. 
(Prior code § 2201)  
2.60.030 - Civil service commission. 
A.  There is created a civil service commission of and for the city, which shall consist of seven members, each of who shall be appointed by the city council. 
B.  The membership and size of the civil service commission shall not be increased from its current membership of five, to a greater number not to exceed seven, until such time as the extra members are appointed and duly qualified to serve on the commission. Once such appointments for membership of the commission are made, the total members, for purposes of calculating a quorum and all other purposes then shall be seven. 
(Ord. 2158 §§ 7, 11, 1997: Ord. 2106 § 6, 1994: prior code § 2202)  
2.60.040 - Civil service commission—Members—Qualifications—Eligibility for appointment to classified service. 
An individual shall be eligible for appointment to the commission as long as he or she is a resident within the city at the time of his or her appointment and at all times during his or her term. Each member shall serve until his or her successor is appointed and qualified, or until he or she is removed from office, by not less than a majority vote of the total voting membership of the city council, with or without cause. No person while a member of the commission, nor for a period of one year after termination of such membership shall be eligible for appointment to the classified service of the city. 
(Ord. 2158 § 8, 1997: Ord. 2106 § 7, 1994: prior code § 2205)  
2.60.050 - Term—Chairman. 
Each commissioner shall be appointed for a term not to exceed four years; provided that the city council shall stagger terms of office; or portions of terms of office at such times as it shall deem necessary, so as to provide for continuity in the membership of the commission. Annually, on or before January 15th, the members of the commission shall elect one of their number as chairman of the commission. 
(Ord. 2158 § 9, 1997: prior code § 2203)  
2.60.060 - Civil service commission—Functions and powers. 
The functions and powers of the commission shall be: 
A.  As provided by this chapter and by the rules, to hear appeals submitted by any person in the classified service relative to any disciplinary action, dismissal, demotion or alleged violation of this chapter or the civil service rules, and to certify its findings and recommendations as provided by this chapter; 
B.  In any investigation or hearing conducted by the commission, it shall have the power to examine witnesses under oath and compel their attendance or production of evidence by subpoenas issued in the name of the city and attested by the city clerk. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to cause all such subpoenas to be served, and refusal of a person to attend or to testify in answer to such subpoena shall subject the person to prosecution in the same manner as set forth by law for failure to appear before the city council in response to a subpoena issued by the city council. Each member of the commission shall have the power to administer oaths to witnesses; 
C.  To publish or post notices of tests for positions in the classified service; to receive applications therefor; to conduct and grade tests (this duty and function may be contracted as provided by Section 2.60.280 of this chapter); to certify to the appointing authority a list of all persons eligible for appointment in the appropriate position in the classified service. The commission shall cause the duties imposed upon it by this subsection to be performed by the personnel officer except the duty to conduct and grade tests which may be performed for the commission by the personnel officer. In the performance of such duties so delegated by the provisions of this subsection, the personnel officer shall be subject to the direction and control of the civil service commission; 
D.  When requested by the city council, the commission shall hold hearings and make recommendations on any matter of personnel administration, within the limits of such request; 
E.  To advise the city council on all matters and problems concerning personnel administration. 
(Prior code § 2206 (part))  
2.60.070 - Civil service commission—Meetings—Timing—Place—Order of business—Quorum. 
The commission shall determine the order of business for the conduct of its meetings, and shall meet regularly at least once a month, or more often if on call of the chairman or a majority of the commission. A majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. All meetings of the commission shall be held in the city hall except where facilities of the city hall are not sufficient to accommodate, the commission may adjourn to larger quarters. 
(Ord. 2158 § 10, 1997: prior code § 2206 (part))  
2.60.080 - Absence from meetings. 
A.  If a member of the commission shall be absent from three successive regular meetings of the commission, without cause, the office of such member shall be deemed to be vacant. The secretary of the commission shall immediately inform the city council of such vacancy. 
B.  An absence due to illness, an unavoidable absence from the city, or provided that written notice thereof is given to the secretary of the commission in advance of such regular meeting, shall be deemed an absence for cause. 
(Prior code §§ 2203.1 and 2203.2)  
2.60.090 - Vacancies. 
Vacancies on the commission shall be filled as provided in Section 2.60.030 of this chapter for the balance of the unexpired term. 
(Prior code § 2204)  
2.60.100 - Status of officers and employees. 
All officers and employees of the city shall be included in one of the categories specified in this section: 
A.  Elective Officers of the City. The elective officers of the city shall be the following: 
1.  Each member of the city council; 
2.  City clerk; and 
3.  City treasurer. 
B.  Classified Service Employees. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this section, all full-time officers and employees of the city shall be deemed, for all purposes, to be included within the city civil service system, and such persons shall be referred to as employees in the classified service. All employment rights and duties of employees in the classified service shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and of the civil service rules and regulations of the city. 
C.  Unclassified Service Employees. The persons now, or hereafter, holding any of the following positions shall be deemed to be included within the unclassified service of the city. Unclassified service employees shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter with reference to the city's civil service system; nor shall such unclassified service employees be subject to, or governed by, the provisions of the city's civil service rules and regulations. Appointments to, and dismissals from, positions in the unclassified service shall be governed, exclusively, by the provisions of this section. 
1.  City Council Appointees. 
a.  Persons holding any of the positions enumerated in this subdivision shall be appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of, the city council: 
i.  Any person employed by the city as an independent contractor for the purpose of performing a specific function or service; 
ii.  All persons serving on any city commission, committee or board; 
iii.  The city manager; and 
iv.  The city attorney. 
b.  Any action taken by the city council in the appointment of or dismissal of any person with reference to a position referred to in this subdivision, shall not be effective unless such action is concurred in by not less than three members of the city council. 
2.  City Manager Appointees. The city manager shall have the authority to appoint, remove and set compensation for all unclassified positions in the city, including department heads, as listed below: 
Limited hourly employees; 
Regular hourly employees; 
Volunteer personnel, including police reserve officer and auxiliary firefighters; 
All of those transitional positions, authorized by motion of the city council, which are funded, in whole or part, by a state or federal program designed to alleviate unemployment; 
Accountant; 
Accounting supervisor; 
Administrative management analyst; 
Administrative secretary; 
Administrative secretary—CRA; 
Administrative services technician; 
Assistant city manager; 
Assistant director of economic development—CRA; 
Assistant director of parks & recreation; 
Assistant golf course superintendent; 
Assistant director of transportation; 
Assistant parks maintenance supervisor; 
Assistant planner; 
Assistant street maintenance supervisor; 
Assistant tree maintenance supervisor; 
Associate civil engineer—CRA; 
Associate planner—CRA; 
Building maintenance crew supervisor; 
Building official; 
Business manager; 
Chief management analyst; 
City engineer; 
Clerk typist—HCDA; 
Code enforcement officer—CRA; 
Code enforcement supervisor; 
Combination building inspector—CRA; 
Communications supervisor; 
Community development analyst; 
Community development grant program monitor; 
Community development specialist; 
Community services specialist (CDBG) (USDA Food Service Program); 
Community services supervisor; 
Crime analyst—CCAP; 
Crime free multi-housing program analyst—CDBG; 
Crime free multi-housing program specialist—CDBG; 
Crime prevention coordinator; 
Crime prevention supervisor; 
Deputy director of transportation; 
Deputy fire marshal; 
Director of economic development; 
Director of finance; 
Director of human resources; 
Director of municipal services; 
Director of planning and community development; 
Director of planning and economic development; 
Director of public works; 
Director of transportation; 
Economic and community development manager—CRA; 
Economic development analyst—CRA; 
Economic development finance assistant—CRA; 
Economic development manager; 
Economic development project coordinator—CRA; 
Engineering technician—CRA; 
Equipment mechanic instructor; 
Finance services supervisor; 
Finance technician; 
Fire chief; 
Fire inspector II; 
Fire marshal; 
General services manager; 
Golf course and landscape management supervisor; 
Golf course superintendent facilities manager; 
Grants and projects administrator; 
Information systems supervisor; 
Junior accountant; 
Management analyst; 
Office manager; 
Parks maintenance supervisor; 
Personnel analyst; 
Planning manager; 
Planning specialist—CRA; 
Police cadet; 
Police chief; 
Police community service officer; 
Police records clerk—CCAP; 
Police trainee; 
Public affairs administrator; 
Public information officer; 
Public works manager; 
Records supervisor; 
Revenue and financial systems manager; 
Revenue supervisor; 
Risk management analyst; 
Senior management analyst/procurement; 
Senior planner; 
Shop maintenance supervisor; 
Street maintenance supervisor; 
Systems analyst; 
Telecommunications supervisor; 
Transit administration manager; 
Transit dispatcher supervisor; 
Transit fiscal supervisor; 
Transit grants and projects administrator; 
Transit operations manager; 
Transit operations supervisor; 
Transit stores and facility supervisor; 
Tree maintenance supervisor; 
Vehicle maintenance manager; 
Youth counselor (COPS). 
3.  Salary ranges and fringe benefits for each position in the unclassified service shall be established by the city council. 
(Ord. 2323 §§ 1, 2, 2008; Ord. 2306 §§ 1, 2, 2007; Ord. 2302 §§ 1, 2, 2007; Ord. 2301 §§ 1, 2, 2007; Ord. 2287 §§ 1, 2, 2005; Ord. 2279 §§ 1, 2, 2004; Ord. 2278 §§ 1, 2, 2004; Ord. 2275 §§ 1, 2, 2004; Ord. 2263 §§ 1, 2, 2003; Ord. 2255 § 1, 2002; Ord. 2254 § 1, 2002; Ord. 2250 §§ 1, 2, 2002; Ord. 2243 §§ 1, 2, 2002; Ord. 2238 § 1, 2002; Ord. 2237 § 1, 2002; Ord. 2233 § 1, 2001; Ord. 2232 § 1, 2001; Ord. 2220 §§ 1, 2, 2001; Ord. 2217 §§ 1, 2, 2000; Ord. 2216 §§ 1, 2, 2000; Ord. 2215 § 1, 2000; Ord. 2212 §§ 1, 2, 2000; Ord. 2204 §§ 1, 2, 1999; Ord. 2203 §§ 1, 2, 1999; Ord. 2196 § 1, 1999; Ord. 2189 § 1, 1999; Ord. 2185 § 1, 1999; Ord. 2183 § 1, 1998; Ord. 2182 § 1, 1998; Ord. 2181 § 1, 1998; Ord. 2177 § 1, 1998; Ord. 2176 § 1, 1998; Ord. 2173 § 1, 1998; Ord. 2169 §§ 1, 2, 1997; Ord. 2161 §§ 1, 2, 1997; Ord. 2159 § 1, 1997; Ord. 2157 § 1, 1997: Ord. 2150 §§ 1, 2, 1996; Ord. 2146 § 1, 1996; Ord. 2137 §§ 1, 2, 1996: Ord. 2135 § 1, 1996; Ord. 2129 § 1, 1995; Ord. 2127 §§ 1, 2, 1995; Ord. 2122 §§ 1, 2, 1995; Ord. 2093 §§ 1, 2, 1993; Ord. 2091 § 1, 1993; Ord. 2077 §§ 1, 2, 1993; Ord. 2072 § 1, 1993; Ord. 2069 § 1, 1992; Ord. 2065 §§ 1, 2, 1992; Ord. 2063 § 1, 1992; Ord. 2056 § 1, 1991; Ord. 2055 § 1, 1991; Ord. 2046 §§ 1, 2, 1991; Ord. 2040 § 1, 1990; Ord. 2039 §§ 1, 2, 1990; Ord. 2037 § 1, 1990; Ord. 2035 § 1, 1990; Ord. 2008 § 1, 1990; prior code § 2207) 
(Ord. No. 2326, § 1, 1-14-2009; Ord. No. 2328, §§ 1, 2, 2-11-2009; Ord. No. 2330, §§ 1, 2, 6-10-2009; Ord. No. 2337, § 1, 6-23-2010; Ord. No. 2340, §§ 1, 2, 11-10-2010; Ord. No. 2341, § 1, 2-9-2011; Ord. No. 2343, §§ 1, 2, 7-13-2011)  
2.60.110 - Adoption of rules. 
Civil service rules prepared by the civil service commission, subject to this chapter and to approval of the city council, shall be adopted by resolution of the city council establishing specific procedures and regulations governing the following phases of the civil service system: 
A.  Preparation, installation, revision, and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions in the classified service, including minimum standards and qualifications for each class; 
B.  Public announcement of all tests and the acceptance of application for employment; 
C.  Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use of resulting employment lists containing names of persons eligible for appointment; 
D.  Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists, and the making of provisional, temporary and emergency appointments; 
E.  Evaluation of employees during probationary period; 
F.  Transfer, promotion, demotion and reinstatement of employees in the classified service; 
G.  Separation of employees from the city's service, by layoff, suspension and dismissal, for disciplinary purposes, and separation of such employees based upon a lack of physical and mental ability; 
H.  Standardization of hours of work, attendance and leave regulations, working conditions, and the development of employee morale, welfare and training; 
I.  Suitable provisions for orderly and equitable presentation to the city council by employees or matters relating to general conditions of employment; 
J.  Content, maintenance and use of personnel records and forms; 
K.  The creating of temporary offices and positions, and the appointment of persons to fill the offices and positions. 
(Prior code § 2208)  
2.60.120 - Amendment of rules and regulations. 
An amendment to the rules and regulations for the administration of the civil service system may be made by the civil service commission only upon a public hearing thereon, to be held in the manner prescribed by the rules and regulations. 
(Prior code § 2209)  
2.60.130 - Vacancies—Submission of eligibility list. 
When an appointment is to be made to a vacancy in the classified service, the personnel officer shall transmit to the appointing authority the number of names of persons on the appropriate certified employment or promotional lists, in alphabetical order in accordance with the civil service rules and regulations. In no event shall the scores or ranking of the eligible persons be provided to the appointing authority. 
(Ord. 2070 § 6, 1992: prior code § 2211)  
2.60.140 - Provisional appointments. 
A.  In the absence of an appropriate employment or promotional list, a provisional appointment may be made by an appointing authority, subject to the approval of the city manager. The person so appointed shall meet the minimum training and experience qualifications for the vacant position. 
B.  The appointment shall be for a six-month period; and may be extended for an additional six-month period by the city manager for good cause. Within six months after such appointment, an eligibility list shall be established to allow a permanent appointment to be made. 
C.  Time served in a provisional capacity in any classified office or position immediately prior to probationary appointment shall be credited to the same degree and extent as though the appointment in provisional capacity had been a probationary appointment. 
(Prior code §§ 2212 and 2213)  
2.60.150 - Vacancies resulting from suspensions. 
During the period of suspension of any employee, or pending final action on proceedings to review suspension, demotion, or dismissal of any employee, the vacancy may be filled by the appointing authority only by provisional appointment. 
(Prior code § 2214)  
2.60.160 - Acting capacity appointments. 
A.  An appointing authority shall have the power to make an acting capacity appointment, subject to the approval of the city manager. Such appointment shall be made from a promotional list, if a current valid promotional list is in existence. No such appointment shall be for a period longer than six months. 
B.  Time served in an acting capacity in any classified office or position immediately prior to probationary appointment shall be credited to the same degree and extent as though the appointment in acting capacity has been a probationary appointment. 
(Prior code §§ 2215 and 2216)  
2.60.170 - Probationary period. 
A.  All initial appointments to miscellaneous positions in the classified service shall have a probationary period as provided in this section. 
1.  All initial appointments to miscellaneous positions shall have a probationary period of six months. 
2.  All promotional appointments to miscellaneous positions shall have a probationary period of six months. 
3.  The probationary period for a miscellaneous position may be extended for not more than an additional six-month period as determined by the appointing authority. 
4.  All initial appointments to public safety positions shall have a probationary period of twelve months; provided, however, that such probationary period may be extended for not more than a six-month period as determined by the appointing authority. Such initial probationary period for public safety positions in the fire department may be reduced by not more than a six-month period as determined by the appointing authority. 
5.  All promotional appointments to public safety positions shall have a probationary period of not less than six months nor more than twelve months, as determined by the appointing authority and approved by the personnel officer. 
B.  During the probationary period, the employee may be rejected at any time without right of appeal or hearing. Permanent appointment shall be as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 2217)  
2.60.180 - Classification and status of present employees. 
Any person holding a position or employment included in the classified service on the effective date of this chapter shall maintain and carry forward his classification and status, whether provisional, acting, probationary, permanent or otherwise, and shall thereafter be subject in all respects to the provisions of this amendment. 
(Prior code § 2219)  
2.60.190 - Additional powers granted to individuals authorized to make appointments. 
The city council and any other officer in whom is vested the power to appoint may make transfers, promotions, demotions, reinstatements, layoffs, and suspend or dismiss employees. 
(Prior code § 2220)  
2.60.200 - Suspension. 
Any person holding a position or employment in the classified service shall be subject to disciplinary suspension without pay by the appointing authority, but such suspension shall not exceed a total of thirty calendar days in any fiscal year. 
(Prior code § 2221)  
2.60.210 - Actions for demotion, dismissal or reduction in pay. 
A.  Any permanent employee in the classified service against whom action for demotion, dismissal or reduction in pay has been taken, shall be entitled to a written statement of the reasons for such action. The written statement of the reasons for the action shall be furnished to the employee by the appointing authority within three working days if the appointing authority has taken the action. The employee shall have ten days after receiving the written reasons for the action in which to answer in writing. Upon the filing of the answer by the employee with the personnel officer, the appointing authority shall file copies of the written reasons with the personnel officer, who shall transmit them to the commission. The filing of the written reasons and the answer shall constitute a request for hearing and an appeal. The commission shall then conduct a hearing as provided by the chapter. 
B.  In the event the appointing authority should fail to furnish the employee with a written statement of the reasons for the action within three working days after the action has been taken, the employee shall be reinstated to his position with full and complete rights and no further action shall be taken against him for any acts known or presumably known to appointing authority at the time the action was brought. 
C.  In the event the employee does not file an answer with the personnel officer and thus request a hearing and appeal before the commission in the manner provided in this section, the action shall become final and the employee shall have no right to request a hearing or appeal except by permission of the commission upon the showing of good and sufficient reason that the failure to request a hearing and appeal was because of some unavoidable circumstance or condition. 
D.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to reductions in pay which are a part of the general plan to reduce salaries and wages. 
(Prior code § 2222)  
2.60.220 - Appeals. 
A.  An employee in the classified service assigned to the fire public safety bargaining unit shall have the right to appeal to the commission any disciplinary action, demotion or dismissal. Any other classified employee shall have the right to appeal to the commission a reduction in pay, a suspension, a demotion or a dismissal. In addition, any employee in the classified service may appeal any alleged violation of this chapter or the civil service rules. Notwithstanding this section, no employee shall have the right of appeal to the commission where the right of appeal is otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
B.  At all hearings before the commission, the employee shall be entitled to be represented by counsel, to be present personally, and to produce witnesses and evidence on behalf of the employee. All such hearings shall be open to the public only upon the employee's request. 
C.  On any appeal to the commission, the commission shall make such investigations as it may deem necessary, but the hearings shall be held within twenty days after the request for a hearing is filed by the employee, or an answer if filed as provided by this chapter. 
D.  No hearing shall be continued for more than ten days without the consent of the employee, and not more than one such continuance shall be had. 
E.  The proceedings before the commission may be informally conducted and legal rules of evidence need not be observed. 
(Ord. 2119 §§ 1—3; prior code § 2223)  
2.60.230 - Hearing procedure. 
A summary of all pertinent testimony taken at the hearing and the names of all persons testifying shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent files of the case, together with the written decision of the commission. Upon completion of the hearing the civil service commission shall within twenty days thereafter render its decision on the matter heard. The determination of the civil service commission shall be final on all matters within its jurisdiction within this chapter except that the city council on its own motion may vote to review any decision of the civil service commission in the manner hereinafter provided. Such determination of the civil service commission shall become effective on the day following the next regularly held meeting of the city council. 
(Prior code § 2224)  
2.60.240 - Review of decisions. 
A.  If the city council on its own motion votes to review any decision of the civil service commission, the permanent file of the case shall be transmitted by the personnel officer to the city council. 
B.  A majority vote of the city council shall be required to review any decision of the civil service commission. The review before the city council shall be upon the permanent file of the civil service commission and shall not be a hearing de novo. A majority vote of the city council shall be sufficient to reverse, modify or amend any determination of the civil service commission or to grant a new hearing before the commission. The determination of the city council affirming, reversing, modifying, in whole or in part, any decision or determination or requirement of the civil service commission shall be final. 
(Prior code § 2225)  
2.60.250 - Reduction in force. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the provisions of this section is to establish an equitable and reasonable procedure for layoff of employees of the city for economy purposes. 
B.  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, unless the context clearly otherwise requires, the enumerated words and phrases shall be defined as follows: 
1.  "Demotion" means the demotion of an employee to a lesser position included within the same family of positions, occasioned by a reduction in force. 
2.  "Employee" means an employee in the classified service of the city. 
3.  "Family of positions" means a group of related positions which have been designated as such by resolution of the city council. As part of such designation, the city council shall rank each position in each such family for the purpose of establishing a line of lesser positions for the purpose of the demotion process, where such is ordered to effect a reduction in force. 
4.  "Length of service" means the total number of years of employee's employment in the classified service of the city, including such time spent in a probationary, provisional or leave status by any such employee; provided, however, that if an employee resigns from employment with the city and is subsequently rehired he or she shall have all time prior to the resignation excluded from the total number of years of employment for purposes of determining length of service under this section. 
5.  "Lesser position" means a position having a lesser ranking than one or more other positions in a family of positions. 
6.  "Notice," where notice is required pursuant to the section, shall be in written form, and given by personal service or by depositing the same in the custody of the United States Postal Service, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his last known address. Such notice shall be deemed, for all purposes, to have been given as of the time of personal service, or, as of the time of its deposit in the custody of the United States Postal Service. 
7.  "Position" means a position of employment in the classified service of the city, as defined in Section 2.60.100(B). 
C.  Reduction in Force. Whenever the city council determines, in its discretion, that for reasons of economy a reduction in the number of employees of the city is required, the city administration shall proceed with such a reduction in force by demotion and/or termination in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
D.  Demotion. 
1.  Family of Positions. Where reduction in force involves a position which is included within a family of positions, each employee holding such position shall be ranked, based upon his length of service with the city. The employee holding such position having a lesser length of service shall be demoted to the next lower position within the family of positions. The city manager shall give written notice of such demotion to each employee to be demoted, such order of demotion shall be effective on the thirtieth day after the giving of such notice. If within ten days after the giving of such notice, an employee files with the city manager a written statement declining such demotion, that employee's service with the city shall be terminated effective the thirtieth day after the giving of such notice. Any employee who is demoted pursuant hereto, shall not be subject to further demotion, by a subsequent reduction in force order, for a period of one year after the effective day of such order of demotion. 
2.  Request for Reassignment. An employee proposed to be demoted pursuant to subsection (D)(1) of this section may request, subject to the approval of the city manager, a reassignment to a lesser position in a family of positions. 
3.  Positions Not Included Within a Family of Positions. Where an ordered reduction in force involves a position which is not included within a family of positions, if only one employee holds such position, he shall be terminated from the city's service, effective on the thirtieth day after the giving of notice of such termination by the city manager. If more than one employee holds such a position, all employees holding the position shall be ranked based on their length of service with the city; an order of termination shall be given as to the employee or employees having the lesser lengths of service in the position. 
4.  Salary Determination. An employee affected by subsection D of this section shall be placed in the salary range of the position and the step closest to the salary held in the former position but not in excess thereof. 
E.  Subsequent Demotion or Termination. Where one or more employees have been demoted from a position within a family of positions, by reason of an ordered reduction in force, other employees holding the lesser positions in such family shall be subject to the same demotion process, upon the direction of the city manager in the time and manner as set forth in subsection D of this section. Where an employee holding a position, which is ranked last in a family of positions, is preempted such position by reason of the demotion process, he shall, upon the thirtieth day after the giving of notice thereof, be terminated from the city's service. 
F.  Reemployment List. An employee who is demoted to a lesser position, or who is terminated by reason of a reduction in force accomplished pursuant to this section, shall, automatically, have his name placed on a reemployment list for the position which he formerly held. The ranking of names upon such reemployment list shall be in accordance with the employee's length of service with the city in that position. Such reemployment list shall have priority for a period of two years over any other eligibility list for such affected position. 
(Prior code § 2226)  
2.60.260 - Political activities. 
No classified service employee, nor any unclassified service employee, of the city shall: 
A.  Engage in any political activity during such time as that person is required to be engaged in the performance of duties for and on behalf of the city; and 
B.  No person shall engage in any political activity while wearing a uniform required to be worn by such person while performing duties on behalf of the city. 
(Prior code § 2227)  
2.60.270 - Nondiscrimination. 
No person in the classified service or seeking admission thereto, shall be employed, promoted, demoted, disciplined or discharged or discriminated against in other terms and conditions of employment or in any way favored or discriminated against because of race, color, creed or religion, sex, national origin, age, physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of the person, or other factors which cannot be lawfully used as a basis for an employment decision. 
(Ord. 2118 § 1, 1995: prior code § 2229)  
2.60.280 - Right to contract for special service. 
A.  The civil service commission shall consider and make recommendations to the city council regarding the extent to which the city would contract for the performance of technical services in connection with the establishment or operation of the civil service system. 
B.  The council may contract with any qualified person or agency for the performance of all or any of the following responsibilities and duties imposed by this chapter: 
1.  The preparation of civil service rules and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof; 
2.  The preparation of a position classification plan and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof; 
3.  The preparation of a plan of compensation and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof; 
4.  The preparation, conduct and grading of competitive tests and the certification of employment lists; 
5.  Special and technical services of advisory or informational character on matters relating to personnel administration. 
(Prior code § 2231)  
2.60.290 - Continuous service. 
Notwithstanding any provisions of this code, or the civil service rules of the city, to the contrary, any classified employee, who is required to be absent from his position by reason of an injury or disease for which he is entitled to receive compensation pursuant to Section 3201 et seq. of the Labor Code of the state shall be entitled to salary adjustments, sick leave, vacation and seniority rights to the same extent as if he had not been required to be so absent; provided, that any employee who is absent from his position by reason of an injury or disease for which he is entitled to receive such compensation, shall not be entitled to accrue sick leave, vacation or annual leave during such period of time as he is so absent from his position unless otherwise provided in the city's civil service rules. 
(Prior code § 2234)  
2.60.300 - Retirement benefits. 
A contract is authorized between the city and the Board of Administration, California State Employees' Retirement System, providing retirement benefits for employees of the city. 
(Prior code § 2233)  
2.60.310 - City coordinator and department heads—Inapplicable provisions. 
The provisions of this code relating to hours and days of employment and leave of absence because of overtime shall not apply to the city coordinator or head of any department or division, it being the intention of the city council that such persons shall devote as much time to their employment as may be necessary for the efficient operation of the city government. 
(Prior code § 2810)  
2.60.320 - Duty and/or workweek of regular full-time employees to be established by resolution. 
The duty and/or workweek of all regular full-time employees, including public safety, shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 2811)  
2.60.330 - City office hours. 
General city offices, on days other than those days specified as holidays by annual resolution of the city council, shall be open for business from seven-thirty a.m. to five-thirty p.m., Monday through Thursday. 
(Ord. 2153 § 1, 1996: prior code § 2802)  
2.60.340 - Holidays. 
All classified employees who hold full-time probationary, provisional or permanent appointments shall receive compensated holidays during each calendar year as hereinafter provided: 
A.  Prior to January 1st of each year, the city council shall specify, and adopt by resolution, the holidays to be granted to employees during the calendar year, January 1st through December 31st. 
B.  Employees shall take holidays on the dates specified in the annual resolution unless their regular work schedule requires them to work holidays. However, a department head requiring an employee to work on a holiday shall, when based on needs of service, assign the employee to work and provide alternate time off or appropriate compensation. 
C.  Employees who are not covered by the annual leave plan will be credited with an amount of time equal to the scheduled state of California holidays as of January 1st of each year; provided, however, that those persons who are first employed after January 1st shall be credited a prorated portion of the holiday time rounded to the nearest full hour for that year. For the purposes of computing holiday time for such employees, a holiday shall be considered as one fifth of the number of working or duty hours in the established work week rounded to the nearest full hour, or twelve hours for firefighters, fire engineers, and fire captains who work an average of fifty-six hours per week as a result of the standard shift schedule. Holidays so credited may be incorporated in an annual work schedule, be taken at a time convenient to the department, or be paid for the number of hours represented by the holiday. 
D.  Employees who are covered by the annual leave plan will receive an hourly portion of the observed holidays with their monthly annual leave accrual. Annual leave time may be taken only at times approved by the employee's supervisor. 
E.  Additional holidays may be established by resolution by the city council as the public interest may require. 
(Ord. 2155 §§ 1—3, 1997; Ord. 2074 § 1 (Exh. A), 1993: prior code § 2802.1)  
2.60.350 - Appropriation of funds. 
The city council shall appropriate such funds as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 2232)  
2.60.360 - Violation of administrative provisions. 
The violation of any administrative provisions of this code by any officer or employee of the city may be deemed a failure to perform the duties under, or observe the rules and regulations of the department, office or board within the meaning of the civil service ordinances and rules and regulations of the city. 
(Prior code § 1202)  
Chapter 2.64 - MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEE SALARIES 
 
2.64.010 - Basic salary plan. 
The council shall adopt, by resolution, a basic salary plan for all classified, part-time and temporary positions within the city. 
(Prior code § 2400)  
2.64.020 - Rates explanation. 
All rates shown in the basic salary plan, except hourly rates set forth in the second column, are expressed in dollars per month. 
(Prior code § 2401)  
2.64.030 - Hiring rate. 
New employees, and employees who are promoted, shall, except as hereinafter provided, be employed or promoted at the hiring step of the appropriate range for that classification or position. Employment at a higher step on the appropriate range is authorized only where there is difficulty in obtaining qualified personnel; or such is necessary by reason of the hiring of persons of unusual qualifications; or in a case of an employee where the employee is already receiving an amount equal to, or higher than, the hiring step at the range for that position or as further specified in the civil service rules. Such exceptions are authorized only when recommended by the appointing authority, and approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. 2004 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1993: prior code § 2402)  
2.64.040 - Step advancements. 
An employee shall be eligible for a step advancement upon recommendation of his appointing authority, with the approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. 2004 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 1993: prior code § 2403)  
2.64.050 - Actions taken by city manager—Reporting requirements. 
All actions taken by the city manager, with reference to personnel, as described in Chapter 2.60 of this code shall be reported by him to the city council in writing. 
(Ord. 2070 § 8, 1992: prior code § 2404)  
2.64.060 - Basic salary plan—Rates shown constitute full payment for services rendered. 
All rates shown in the basic salary plan are in full payment for services rendered. Where part of the compensation is in the form of board, lodging or other consideration, the reasonable value of such consideration shall be deducted from the applicable rate to determine the amount payable in cash. Reimbursement of expenses shall have no effect upon salary. 
(Prior code § 2407)  
2.64.070 - Reductions. 
Reductions in salary may be made at any time that an employee fails to maintain the standards outlined for pay at the step on which his salary is based. Reductions may be made to any step within the salary range which is appropriate to his level of performance. Reductions shall be made in the same manner as advancements are made. 
(Prior code § 2408)  
2.64.080 - Computation of part-time pay. 
The rates set forth in the basic salary plan are for normal full-time service. All payments for part-time, intermittent, short-term or extra employment shall be based upon the monthly salary rate for the position or classification computed at the equivalent hourly rate set forth in the basic salary plan, unless otherwise fixed and determined by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 2409)  
2.64.090 - Duty to fix salaries for each class. 
The city council shall by resolution, fix salaries for each class of full-time positions in the classified service in the city. 
(Prior code § 2410)  
2.64.100 - Present employees. 
The city council shall fix and establish by resolution the step upon the appropriate salary range at which each present employee shall be paid, based upon merit and length of service, and each such employee shall be paid at such step on the range until changed as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 2411)  
2.64.110 - Council members. 
The salary of each member of the city council is affixed and established at the sum of nine hundred seventy-five dollars per month, effective December 1, 2003; and the salary of each member of the city council is affixed and established at the sum of one thousand thirty-two dollar per month, effective December 1, 2004. 
(Ord. 2253 § 1, 2002: Ord. 2078 § 1, 1993: prior code § 2413)  
2.64.120 - City clerk. 
The salary of the city clerk is affixed and established at the sum of six hundred ninety-five dollars per month, effective December 1, 1993. 
(Ord. 2078 § 2, 1993: prior code § 2414)  
2.64.130 - City treasurer. 
The salary of the city treasurer is affixed and established at the sum of six hundred ninety-five dollars per month, effective December 1, 1993. 
(Ord. 2078 § 3, 1993: prior code § 2415)  
2.64.150 - Temporary assignment to positions of higher rank—Police department employees. 
Any employee in a class or position of the police department temporarily acting in a position in a higher rank for more than ten consecutive working days shall, during the period in which such employee is acting in the higher rank, receive the same step in salary range to which he would be entitled were he promoted to that rank. 
(Prior code § 2417 (a))  
2.64.160 - Temporary assignment to positions of higher rank—Fire department employees. 
Any employee in a class or position of the fire department temporarily acting in a position in a higher rank shall, during the period in which such acting in the higher rank, receive the same step in the salary range to which he would be entitled were he promoted to that rank; provided, however, there shall be no such temporary duty pay for the first one hundred forty-four hours of such temporary duty in any fiscal year. 
(Prior code § 2417 (b))  
2.64.170 - Temporary assignment to positions of higher rank—Miscellaneous nonmanagement employees. 
Any nonmanagement miscellaneous employee in a class or position of the city temporarily acting in a position in a higher classification for more than ten consecutive working days shall, during the period in which such employee is acting in the higher classification, receive the same step in the salary range to which he would be entitled were he promoted to that classification. 
(Prior code § 2417 (c))  
2.64.180 - Reimbursement for damage to property. 
Any employee who suffers damage to his uniform or other personal property in the scope of his employment shall be reimbursed for the damage upon certification of his appointing authority that such damage occurred in the course of his employ. Upon approval of such item by the city manager, the director of finance shall prepare a warrant in that amount payable to the employee suffering the damage, and the warrant shall be submitted to the city council for approval at its next regular council meeting. 
(Prior code § 2219)  
Chapter 2.68 - OFFICERS' BONDS 
 
2.68.010 - Public official bonds. 
The city clerk, city treasurer and finance director are each required to execute, to the city, public official bonds in such sum as may be determined by the city council; provided, however, that such sum shall not be less than one hundred thousand dollars. The premium on such bonds shall be paid by the city. 
(Prior code § 2806 (1))  
2.68.020 - Faithful performance bonds. 
Each officer and employee as determined by the city manager shall be covered by an official bond to the city, as beneficiary, for the faithful performance of his duties and to account to the city for all moneys and other properties coming into his hands or control, such bond to be a blanket bond in such sum as may be determined by the city council. The premium on such bond shall be paid by the city. 
(Prior code § 2806 (2))  
2.68.030 - Honesty bonds. 
All officers and employees of the city not herein otherwise required to give and execute an official bond, shall be covered by a public employees honesty blanket bond with a limit as determined by the city council indemnifying the city against loss of money or other property through larceny, theft, embezzlement, forgery, misappropriation, wrongful abstraction, wilful misapplication or other fraudulent or dishonest act or acts committed by any one or more of the officers or employees. The premium on such bond shall be paid by the city. 
(Prior code § 2806 (3))  
Chapter 2.72 - WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION 
 
2.72.010 - Administration. 
The city manager of the city is charged with the administration of the city's workmen's compensation program, and the industrial disability fund (hereinafter "fund"). The city manager shall be empowered to take all steps reasonably necessary to insure the prompt, expeditious, and fair handling and processing of all claims filed by officers and employees of the city with respect to workmen's compensation benefits. 
(Prior code § 1400)  
2.72.020 - Processing of claims. 
The city manager shall establish rules and regulations, including appropriate forms, for processing claims of employees of the city, with regard to workmen's compensation benefits. 
(Prior code § 1401)  
Chapter 2.76 - YOUTH COMMISSION 
 
2.76.010 - Establishment. 
That there is created a youth and education commission ("youth commission") of, and for the city, which shall be composed of five members. Each city council member shall appoint one member and one alternate to the youth and education commission. All members shall be between the ages of fourteen and nineteen years of age at the time of appointment. An individual shall be eligible for appointment to the commission as long as he or she is a resident within the city at the time of his or her appointment and at all times during his or her term. Each member shall remain in good academic standing with their respective schools as defined by each school, and/or submit two letters of recommendations as a requirement of the application process. 
(Ord. 2202 § 1, 1999) 
(Ord. No. 2345, § 3, 8-24-2011; Ord. No. 2414, § 3, 3-27-2019)  
2.76.015 - Alternate member. 
A.  The alternate shall, like regular members, attend the regular and special meetings of the commission. The alternate shall review staff reports and documents and otherwise prepare for such meetings. At such meetings, the alternate shall be identified for the record. 
B.  The alternate shall publicly announce any items on the agenda that he or she is disqualified from participating in because of a conflict of interest. 
C.  If, as a result of an absence of a regular member or an abstention because a regular member believes he or she has a conflict of interest at a regular or special meeting, the alternate shall move to the seat of a regular member, then the alternate shall participate as a regular member. 
D.  The qualifications, appointment, removal and other requirements applicable to the alternate shall be the same as those for regular members of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 2414, § 4, 3-27-2019)  
2.76.020 - Members—Terms. 
The term of office for a member of the youth and education commission shall be as set forth in Section 2.30.050. In addition to the provisions of Section 2.30.050 governing the duration of a member's term, a youth and education commission member's term shall also immediately expire upon the member's reaching twenty-one years of age. 
(Ord. 2202 § 2, 1999) 
(Ord. No. 2345, § 4, 8-24-2011)  
2.76.030 - Powers and duties. 
The youth commission shall be for all purposes an advisory commission to the city council for matters relating specifically to youth. This includes activities orientated toward recreation and civic programs, and those activities that pertain to life issues, thus addressing leisure needs and creating awareness and improving quality of life for our youth. 
(Ord. 2202 § 3, 1999)  
2.76.040 - Meetings—Frequency—Place. 
That the commission shall hold regular meetings, at least once per month, at the city hall at 1600 W. Beverly Boulevard, Montebello, California, and may hold such additional meetings at the place as it may deem necessary or expedient. Each commissioner shall attend other commission meetings and city council meetings on rotation basis as a method of gaining valuable insight to the functions of the government process. 
(Ord. 2202 § 4, 1999)  
2.76.050 - Meeting—Absence from. 
A.  If a member of the commission shall be absent from three consecutive regular meetings of the commission, without cause, the office of such member shall be deemed to be vacant. The secretary of the commission shall immediately inform the city council of such vacancy. 
B.  An absence due to illness or other unavoidable absence from a meeting shall be reported to the secretary of the commission in advance of such regular meeting, otherwise it shall be deemed an unexcused absence. 
(Ord. 2202 § 5, 1999)  
2.76.060 - Quorum—Officers. 
A majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the purposes of transacting business. The commission shall annually select one of its members to act as chairperson and another to act as vice chairperson. The terms of office of both the chairperson and vice chairperson shall be for a period of one year. 
(Ord. 2202 § 6, 1999)  
2.76.070 - Records. 
The secretary of the commission shall keep a record of all the proceedings, resolutions, findings, determinations and transactions of the commission, which record shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. 2202 § 7, 1999)  
2.76.080 - Advisory capacity. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as restricting or curtailing any of the powers of the city council, or as a delegation to the commission, of any of the authority or discretionary powers vested and imposed by law in the city council. The city council declares that the public interest, convenience, welfare and necessity require the appointment of a youth commission, to act in a purely advisory capacity to the city council, for the purposes herein enumerated. 
(Ord. 2202 § 8, 1999)  
Chapter 2.80 - DESIGN REVIEW BOARD 
 
2.80.010 - Creation—Composition—Qualifications. 
There is created a design review board (hereinafter referred to as the "board") in and for the city. The design review board shall consist of five members appointed by a majority of the city council. Each member of the board shall be a person who resides and/or conducts business in the city at the time of appointment and during the term of office. At least one member of the board shall be a licensed architect. At least one member of the board shall be a member of the city's chamber of commerce. All other members of the board shall be persons who, as a result of their training, experience and/or attainments, are qualified to analyze and interpret design and architectural planning information, including but not limited to landscape architects, urban planners, engineers, builders and developers. For the purposes of this section, "conducts business" shall mean operating a licensed business in the city. 
(Ord. 2269 § 1, 2004: Ord. 2247 § 1 (part), 2002)  
2.80.020 - Term of members. 
Each member of the board shall serve for terms not to exceed four years each, provided that the city council may stagger the terms of the members so as to provide continuity in the membership of the board. Each member shall serve until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. Nothing in this section shall preclude a member from serving on the board after first leaving the board at the expiration of the person's term. 
(Ord. 2247 § 1 (part), 2002)  
2.80.030 - Powers and duties. 
The board shall have the power and it shall be its duty to review, approve, disapprove and attach conditions to design plans or design review applications, including but not limited to exterior color plans for structures in the commercial and manufacturing zone as specified in Sections 17.22.105 and 17.32.135 of the zoning code, in accordance with the intent, purpose and standards for design review established by the city's zoning code and design guidelines. The authority of the board shall be limited to color, appearance, design and general layout. The board shall have the authority to require plans, elevations, color renderings and a materials board for the purpose of its review. In the event of denial, the board shall specify the areas in which the project fails to comply with the standards set forth in the zoning code and/or the design guidelines. The applicant shall have the opportunity to submit changes to the project's design plans which comply with the specified reasons for denial for reconsideration by the board, or request appeal of the board's decision to the city council within fourteen days of the board's action or by the next city council meeting, whichever date is earlier. The board may delegate authority to the city planner for review and approval of minor changes, and to approve resubmitted plans with modifications or changes provided such modifications or changes are in substantial conformance with reviewed plans and are consistent with the determination and objectives of the board. 
(Ord. 2247 § 1 (part), 2002)  
2.80.040 - Meetings and quorum. 
A.  The board shall hold at least one regular meeting once every two weeks at city hall, or at another location designated by resolution of the board, at the time specified by resolution by the board. Special meetings may be called at any time by the chair or by any three members of the board not less than twenty-four hours before the time specified for the proposed special meeting. 
B.  Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The city planner, or his or her designee, shall be responsible for keeping a record of the voting and decision minutes of the meetings of the board. 
(Ord. 2247 § 1 (part), 2002)  
2.80.050 - Officers, rules and records, staff assistance, compensation. 
A.  The board shall select one of its members to act as chairperson and one of its members to act as vice-chairperson. The terms of office of both the chairperson and the vice-chairperson shall be for a period of one year. The chairperson shall preside over the meetings; if the chairperson is absent, the vice-chairperson shall preside over the meetings. 
B.  The board or the city council may adopt rules for transaction of business but, unless so adopted, the procedures set forth in the current edition of Robert's Rules of Order shall prevail. There shall be an accurate record of all proceedings, decisions, findings, recommendations and resolutions of the board. Such records shall be public and at all times available for public review in city hall. 
C.  The board shall be supported by staff from the planning division and/or other staff designated by the city council. 
D.  Members of the design review board shall be compensated as determined by the city council by resolution. 
(Ord. 2247 § 1 (part), 2002)  
2.80.060 - Fees. 
The city council shall by resolution prescribe fees for all reviews and appeals to the city council relating to the design review board. 
(Ord. 2247 § 1 (part), 2002)  
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 3.04 - CITY RECORDS 
Sections: 
 
3.04.010 - Custody. 
The official minutes of the city council, the book of ordinances, the book of resolutions, all original contracts to which the city or any agency or department thereof is a party, all original deeds, grants and conveyances to the city, and the indexes of any and all of the foregoing records shall be retained and kept in the office of the city clerk and under the custody and control of the city clerk unless otherwise directed by state law. 
(Prior code § 2662)  
3.04.020 - Checks, warrants and vouchers. 
All checks and all warrants and the vouchers therefor of the city, and all official checks of the officers of the city, which shall be in possession of the city clerk, shall be preserved for a period of five years from the respective dates of such checks and warrants and shall thereafter, between the first and thirtieth days of July, be destroyed by the city clerk, unless otherwise ordered in specific instances by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 2650)  
3.04.030 - Correspondence. 
The city clerk, city coordinator, and the heads of all departments of the city shall make and keep as permanent records in their respective offices the originals of all correspondence received and carbon copies of all letters sent pertaining to the business of the city or their respective offices and departments. 
(Prior code § 2656)  
3.04.040 - Equipment and personal property. 
A.  On or before the fifteenth day of July in each year, the head of each department of the city and each officer of the city having in his possession or under his control any equipment or other personal property belonging to the city shall prepare an original and a duplicate verified inventory of such property, shall file the duplicate inventory in his office and shall file the original thereof with the city manager, and such original and duplicate so filed shall be and remain permanent records of the city. 
B.  From and after the filing of the first inventory required by subsection A of this section the head of each department and each officer of the city shall enter in a property book, kept for that purpose and as a permanent record of the city, each item of personal property coming into his possession or under his control and each such head of department and officer shall enter, at a separate place in the property book, the date, to whom, the reason for and by whose order any item of such property left his possession or control, and a copy of all such entries of properties so received and so disposed of during the year ending June 30th immediately preceding the filing of the inventory shall accompany the inventory. 
C.  At the time of filing the first inventories required by subsection A of this section and prior to the making of any other entries in their respective property books, the heads of departments and officers of the city shall enter therein a record of all property in their possession or under their control at the time of filing such inventories. 
D.  The city coordinator is authorized to purchase the property books described in subsection B of this section for the heads of departments and officers of the city and the property books shall be and remain the property of the city. 
(Prior code §§ 2652, 2653, 2654, 2655)  
3.04.050 - Departmental budgets. 
Before the first day of June of each year, the head of each department of the city shall prepare and submit to the city coordinator, on a form to be prescribed by the city coordinator, the proposed budget of such department for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(Prior code § 2657)  
3.04.060 - Receipts. 
Each officer and employee of the city who receives any money, warrant, check or security on behalf of the city shall, at the time of such receipt give a written receipt therefor from a receipt book to be obtained from the city treasurer. One carbon copy of each such receipt shall be delivered to the city treasurer and one carbon copy thereof shall be delivered to the city clerk. 
(Prior code § 2658)  
3.04.070 - Receipt books. 
The city treasurer shall procure printed blank receipt books, each of which books shall be numbered, and each receipt form therein shall be in triplicate and shall be numbered consecutively. The city treasurer shall issue such books to the officers and employees requiring the same, and shall keep as accurate register of all receipt books printed, the name of the person to whom each receipt book is issued, the date of issue, and consecutive numbers of the receipts contained in each such book, and a record of the carbon copies of all receipts returned to him. Each officer and employee shall be responsible to account for each receipt book issued to him and for each receipt form contained therein. The receipt book register and records shall be available to the auditors for their annual audit. 
(Prior code § 2659)  
3.04.080 - Refunds. 
Whenever a fee is paid to the city in error, the affected department head, upon receiving a claim for refund, shall recommend to the city coordinator whether such refund should be made. If the city coordinator approves the claim for refund, a warrant shall be prepared, in the amount claimed, payable to the claimant, and placed on the next register of audited demands to be submitted to the council. Where the coordinator denies the claim, he shall notify the claimant, who may appeal the same to the council. 
(Prior code § 2663)  
3.04.090 - Transportation department. 
All records of the transportation department of the city, except its ledgers, shall be preserved for a period of five years from making thereof and shall thereafter, between the first and thirtieth days of July, be destroyed under supervision of the city clerk, unless otherwise ordered in specific instances by resolution of the city council. All ledgers of the department shall be perpetually preserved. 
(Prior code § 2651)  
3.04.100 - Use of public property. 
None of the equipment, tools, or other articles of personal property belonging to the city shall be used for other than city business and shall not in any event be used for private purposes. 
(Prior code § 2661)  
Chapter 3.08 - CLAIMS, DEMANDS AND WARRANTS 
Sections: 
 
3.08.010 - Claims and demands—Person to present. 
No city officer shall, except for his own service, present any claim, account or demand for allowance against the city, or in any way, except in the discharge of his official duty, advocate the relief asked in the claim or demand made by any other person. Any person may appear before the city council and oppose the allowance of any claim or demand made against the city. 
(Prior code § 2620)  
3.08.020 - Claims and demands to be itemized. 
The city council shall not hear or consider or allow or approve any claim, bill or demand against the city unless the same be itemized giving names, dates, and particular services rendered, character of process served and upon whom, distance traveled, character of work done, the number of days engaged, materials and supplies furnished, when and to whom and in what quantity furnished, the price therefor, and other pertinent details as the case may be. Salaries and wages of officers and employees of the city shall not be considered to be claims, accounts, bills or demands against the city hereunder. 
(Prior code § 2621)  
3.08.030 - Claims and demands—Presentation and filing—Deadlines. 
Claims and demands arising out of tort and all claims and demands not founded upon contract shall set forth the time and place the claim arose, the public property, officers and employees alleged to be at fault, the nature and extent of the injury or damage claimed, and full details as to the nature of the claim, shall be signed and verified to be correct by the claimant or someone authorized by him, and shall be filed with the city clerk within ninety days after the incident or event occurred. All other claims and demands shall be presented in writing to and filed with the city clerk within one year after the last item of the account or claim accrued and need not be signed or verified. Unless so presented and filed, no such claim or demand shall be approved, allowed or paid and the city shall not be liable upon any suit or action based upon such claim or demand which is not filed in the form and within the time herein provided. 
(Prior code § 2622)  
3.08.040 - Claims and demands—Prerequisites to filing suits. 
Any claim or demand against the city or against any city officer in his official capacity, payable out of any city fund or any fund under control of the city treasurer shall be filed and presented to the city council as herein provided before any suit may be brought thereon. No suit may be brought on any claim until it has been rejected in whole or in part. If the city council refuses or neglects to allow or reject a claim for ninety days after it is filed with the city clerk, the claimant may treat such refusal or neglect as final action and rejection on the ninetieth day. 
(Prior code § 2623)  
3.08.045 - Refund procedures for certain taxes. 
A.  Any claim for a refund of taxes paid to the city (or for damages associated with the collection of those taxes) which is governed by the claims presentation requirements of the Tort Claims Act, including claims for the refund of business license taxes and development taxes, shall be governed by the procedures of this section. 
B.  A claim for a refund or associated damages shall be presented to the city within the period required by the Tort Claims Act and the city shall take action on the claim within the periods allowed or required by the Act. 
C.  A hearing on the claim shall be scheduled before the city council and notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the claimant at least ten days prior to the hearing. All materials and arguments in support of a claim shall be provided to the city five days prior to the hearing, if possible. Additional evidence may be presented to the city council up and through the hearing by following applicable municipal procedures for the presentation of information to the city council on agenda items which are not scheduled as public hearings. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
D.  In deciding whether to honor a claim, the city council shall determine if a refund or payment would serve the interests of justice and promote the public interest and welfare. The city council shall consider the following factors, among others: 
1.  Whether the city engaged in miscalculations of a tax or submitted duplicative billings to a taxpayer upon which the taxpayer relied; 
2.  Whether the claimant bears any responsibility for the wrongful, erroneous or duplicative payment of taxes; 
3.  Whether the claimant provided notice to the city of the possible claim for refund concurrently with the payment of the tax or immediately upon becoming aware of the facts giving rise to the claim; and 
4.  The effect a refund or payment would have on the city and its ability to provide public services. 
E.  No suit for money, damages or a refund may be brought against the city until a timely claim is presented and acted upon by the city council in accordance with the Tort Claims Act. Only the person who filed the claim may bring such a suit and if another person should do so, judgment shall not be rendered for the plaintiff. 
(Ord. 2138 § 2, 1996)  
3.08.050 - Claim form. 
All claims shall be made in form substantially as shown in Exhibit 3.08.050. 
(Prior code § 2624) 
EXHIBIT 3.08.050 
DEMAND 
TREASURER 		Demand No.___________ 
of the 		
CITY OF MONTEBELLO 		Montebello, California_______, 20___ 
California 		

In the sum of _____ $_______ 
Demand of: 		
		Certified correct and justly due: 
		By___________ 

Signature of Claimant 
	NOT TO BE CASHED 	
_____
DATE 	ITEMS 	AMOUNT 
 
  
	Attach additional sheet if necessary 		
FUND 	Amount 	DISTRIBUTION ACCOUNT 	AMOUNT 
General 			ACCOUNT NUMBER 			D 
E 
M 
A 
N 
D 
  
N 
O. 
Retirement 						
Traffic Safety 						
Gas Tax ( ) 						
Golf Course 						
Natorium 						
Transportation 						
Capital Outlay 						
City Shop 						
Cash Bond 						
						
						
 
(Attach verification if required) 
Examined and approved:___________ 
Officer who authorized expenditure 
Allowed by the City Council of the City of Montebello on the ___ 
day of _______, 20___ by Resolution No._______. 
___________ 
City Clerk 
Rejected by the City Council. 
___________ 
City Clerk  
3.08.060 - Claims and demands—Audit—Method of approval. 
The filing of claims or demands upon contracts or purchases directly with the city coordinator or director of finance shall be deemed the equivalent of filing the same with the city clerk. Each claim or demand shall be presented by the city clerk or other officer with whom the same is filed to the city coordinator who shall approve or disapprove the same in writing and then transmit the same to the director of finance. The approval or disapproval of the city coordinator shall be intended only as an assistance to the director of finance in auditing the claim and determining whether or not the same should be allowed. The director of finance shall thereupon audit all claims and demands presented to him to determine the accuracy of each such demand, whether or not the same is a proper charge against the city, and the appropriation and availability of funds for the payment thereof. He shall prepare a register of audited demands in the form of a resolution ready for adoption by the city council, setting forth all demands which should be approved and allowed and shall attach to at least one copy thereof his affidavit certifying as to the accuracy of the demands and the appropriation and availability of funds for the payment thereof. He shall then submit the register of audited demands to the city council for approval or rejection. The director of finance shall prepare a separate written list of all claims or demands which he fails to approve and which he believes should be rejected in whole or in part together with his reasons therefor and such list shall be submitted separately to the city council. 
(Prior code § 2625)  
3.08.070 - Claims and demands—Disposition of claims. 
If the city council finds that any audited claim or demand is not a proper charge against the city, it shall be rejected by resolution or minute action, and the fact of rejection shall be plainly endorsed upon the claim by the city clerk. If any audited claim or demand or register of audited demands is approved, the same shall be allowed by resolution setting forth as to each claim the name of the claimant, a brief statement of the claim, the amount allowed, and a designation of the fund out of which it is to be paid. Any claim may be allowed in part and rejected in part by the city council. 
(Prior code § 2626)  
3.08.080 - Claims and demands—Certification of approval. 
If any register of audited demands or any claim or demand be approved and adopted by the city council by resolution as aforesaid, the city clerk shall endorse upon a copy of such resolution a certificate setting forth the fact that it is a true copy of a resolution adopted by the city council and the date of adoption and shall attest the same with his signature and shall deliver the copy so certified to the director of finance as soon as can practicably be done after the adoption of such resolution. The city clerk shall also deliver a copy of such resolution so certified, to the city treasurer. 
(Prior code § 2627)  
3.08.090 - Warrants—Form. 
If any claim or demand is approved and allowed by the city council, a warrant upon the city treasurer for the same, which warrant shall be countersigned either manually or by a facsimile signature by the mayor and/or the city clerk and shall specify for what purpose the same is drawn and out of what fund it is to be paid. The warrant shall be made in form substantially as follows: 
TREASURER 

of the 

CITY OF MONTEBELLO 		
California 	Montebello, California_______ 
Pay the Sum of___________ 	$_______ 
To the Order of: 		
	Drawn by: 	
	_____
		Mayor 
	Attest: 	
	_____
		City Clerk 
	Accepted: 	
	_____
		City Treasurer 
 
(Prior code § 2628)  
3.08.100 - Warrants—Necessity for sufficient money in treasury. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, no warrant shall be drawn or evidence of indebtedness issued unless there be at the time sufficient money in the treasury legally applicable to the payment of the same. 
(Prior code § 2629)  
3.08.110 - Warrants—Acceptance by treasurer. 
Upon presentation to the treasurer of any warrant drawn and countersigned as aforesaid, the treasurer shall accept the same by his signature, and the warrant shall thereupon become a check in payment of the claim or demand for which it is drawn, and shall be delivered to the claimant. 
(Prior code § 2630)  
Chapter 3.12 - LOST OR UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
3.12.010 - Custody—Retention period. 
All lost, abandoned or unclaimed personal property, other than live animals, coming into the possession of the city or any officer or department thereof shall immediately be turned over to the custody of the police department. Such property shall be held by the police department for a period of at least three months unless sooner claimed and restored. 
(Ord. 2070 § 10, 1992: prior code § 2700)  
3.12.020 - Claiming property. 
If, at any time prior to the sale or destruction thereof as hereinafter provided, any such property is claimed by any person who establishes his right to the possession thereof to the satisfaction of the chief of police or his authorized deputy in charge of such property, such personal property shall be delivered to such person provided the person shall first pay to the police department the reasonable cost to the city of holding, protection and returning the property. 
(Prior code § 2701)  
3.12.030 - Sale at public auction. 
If any such property shall remain unclaimed and unrestored for at least four months, the property shall be sold at public auction to the highest bidder at such time or times as the chief of police shall determine. Such action shall be conducted by the chief of police or any agent appointed by him for that purpose. Such property may be sold separately or in such lot or lots as the auctioneer may determine. The purchaser at such auction sale shall take a clear title to the property purchased free of any equity of redemption. 
(Prior code § 2702)  
3.12.040 - Notice of public auction. 
Notice of each such action sale shall be given by the chief of police at least five days and not more than twenty days before the time fixed therefor by publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, printed, and published and circulated in the city. 
(Prior code § 2703)  
3.12.050 - Retention for city use. 
If the chief of police determines that articles to be sold at auction are needed for public use, he shall notify the city purchasing agent and have the property transferred to the appropriate department. 
(Prior code § 2706)  
3.12.060 - Destruction of property. 
If any such property shall be so offered for sale at such public auction as herein provided, and shall not be sold, such property shall be destroyed by the chief of police. 
(Prior code § 2704)  
3.12.070 - Disputes over administration of provisions. 
In the event of any dispute regarding the administration or application of this chapter, appeal may be made to the city council and the city council shall thereupon settle such dispute. 
(Prior code § 2705)  
3.12.080 - Donation of unclaimed bicycles and toys. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the chief of police may direct that bicycles or toys, or both, in the possession of the police department, which have been unclaimed for a period of at least sixty days, may, instead of being sold at public auction to the highest bidder, be turned over to the probation officer, to the welfare department of Los Angeles County, or to any charitable or non-profit organization which is authorized under is articles of incorporation to participate in a program or activity designed to prevent juvenile delinquency and which is exempt from taxation under federal or state law, or both, for use in any program or activity designed to prevent juvenile delinquency. 
(Ord. 2163 § 1, 1997)  
Chapter 3.16 - CITY FUNDS 
Sections: 
 
3.16.010 - Capital outlays funds—Created. 
A fund is created for capital outlays under the provisions of Sections 53730.5 through 53737 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 2070 § 9, 1992: prior code § 2600)  
3.16.020 - Capital outlays fund—Uses. 
Such fund shall be known as "special fund for capital outlays" and it shall remain inviolate for the making of any capital outlays and no moneys shall be disbursed therefrom excepting upon consent of the electors obtained as provided in the Government Code. 
(Prior code § 2600.1)  
3.16.030 - Capital outlays fund—Taxation. 
Taxes may be levied upon the taxable property in the city for the raising of moneys for the fund, but no levy so made shall exceed the limitation imposed by the general laws of the state upon the right of the city to impose taxes, without the assent of two-thirds of the qualified electors of the city voting at any general or special election at which such proposition may be submitted. 
(Prior code § 2600.2)  
3.16.040 - Capital outlays fund—Transfer of surplus funds. 
The city council may transfer to such fund any unencumbered surplus funds remaining on hand in the city at the end of any fiscal year. 
(Prior code § 2600.3)  
3.16.050 - Golf course fund—Created. 
To comply with terms and provisions of that certain agreement made and entered into April 7, 1941, by and between Edna Bicknell Bagg, a widow, and Mary E. Cates, a widow, and the city, there is created in the city treasury and in the official books of accounts and records of the city, a special fund to be known as the "golf course fund." 
(Prior code § 2601)  
3.16.060 - Golf course fund—Deposits. 
There shall be deposited in the fund all revenues received from all operations conducted by the city on the property known as the golf club property, and all revenues from rentals from any leases or concessions on the premises. 
(Prior code § 2601.1)  
3.16.070 - Golf course fund—Payments. 
All payments of principal and interest on account of the purchase price, and all expenses of the operation, improvement and maintenance of the property shall be paid exclusively out of the golf course fund. 
(Prior code § 2601.2)  
3.16.080 - Golf course fund—Shortages. 
If the golf course fund should prove to be insufficient to pay all costs and expenses of acquiring the property and operating, improving and maintaining same, in no event may recourse be had against any other funds, taxes or sources of revenues of the city or is the city obligated directly or indirectly to feed the special fund from general funds or other revenues of the city. The property shall be acquired, maintained and operated on a self-sustaining, self-liquidating basis. 
(Prior code § 2601.3)  
3.16.090 - Special gas tax street improvement fund—Created. 
There is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the "special gas tax street improvement fund." 
(Prior code § 2602)  
3.16.100 - Special gas tax street improvement fund—Deposits. 
All moneys received by the city from the state under provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein for, or the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways other than state highways shall be paid into the fund. 
(Prior code § 2602.01)  
3.16.110 - Special gas tax street improvement fund—Expenditures. 
All moneys in the fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by and subject to all of the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division 1 of the Streets and Highways Code. 
(Prior code § 2602.2)  
3.16.120 - Cash bond fund. 
A special fund is created in the city treasury to be known as the "cash bond fund," into which fund shall be deposited all cash bonds accepted by the city council pursuant to the provisions of this code or any other ordinance or resolutions of this code or any other ordinance or resolution of the city under the terms of which a cash bond is deposited with the city guaranteeing the faithful performance of any agreement with the city. Funds may be withdrawn from the cash bond fund only upon warrant drawn and approved in the normal manner and upon certification by the proper officer having supervision of the performance of such agreement as to the partial completion or final completion and acceptance of the work to be performed under any such agreement. 
(Prior code § 2603)  
3.16.130 - Parking meter fund. 
A special fund is created in the city treasury and in the official books of account and records of the city to be known as the "parking meter fund," into which fund shall be deposited all proceeds of parking meters within the city, exclusive of penalties, fines and forfeitures. Moneys deposited in the fund shall be withdrawn and used exclusively for the purchase, installation, maintenance, repair and policing of parking meters and parking meter zones, and for the purchase, leasing, improvement and operation of off-street parking facilities. 
(Prior code § 2604)  
Chapter 3.20 - PURCHASING SYSTEM[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2412, § 2, adopted Feb. 27, 2019, amended Ch. 3.20 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 3.20, §§ 3.20.010—3.20.130, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the prior code §§ 2900, 2901, 2903—2912; Ord. 2045, 1991; Ord. 2070, 1992; Ord. 2088, 1993; Ord. 2315, 2008; Ord. No. 2410, 3-27-2019. 
 
3.20.010 - Adoption—Purpose. 
In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies and equipment, to secure the city supplies and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function and to assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing system is adopted. 
(Ord. No. 2412, § 2, 2-27-2019)  
3.20.020 - Purchasing officer. 
The director of finance shall be ex officio purchasing officer under the direction of the city manager and the words "purchasing officer" as used in this chapter shall be deemed to refer to the director of finance or his or her duly authorized designee. The purchasing officer shall have the duty and authority to: 
A.  Purchase or contract for supplies and equipment required by any using agency in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by this chapter, such administrative regulations as the purchasing officer shall adopt and such other rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the city council; 
B.  Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies and equipment; 
C.  Act to procure for the city the needed quality in supplies and equipment at least expense to the city; 
D.  Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases; 
E.  Prepare and recommend to the city council rules governing the purchase of supplies and equipment for the city; 
F.  Prepare and recommend to the city council revisions and amendments to the purchasing rules; 
G.  Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products; 
H.  Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter and other rules and regulations; 
I.  Supervise the inspection of all supplies and equipment purchased to ensure uniform conformance with specifications; 
J.  Recommend the transfer of surplus and unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed and the sale of all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any agency or which have become unsuitable for city use; 
K.  Maintain a bidders' list, vendors' catalog file and records needed for the efficient operation of the purchasing department. 
L.  Maintain a list of duly authorized designees and the authorization limits, which shall be less than fifty thousand dollars for each designee. 
(Ord. No. 2412, § 2, 2-27-2019)  
3.20.030 - Exemptions from centralized purchasing. 
The purchasing officer, with approval of the city council, may authorize, in writing, any agency to purchase or contract for specified supplies and equipment independently of the purchasing department, but he shall require that such purchases or contracts shall be made in conformity with the procedures established by this chapter and shall further require periodic reports from the agency on the purchases and contracts made under such written authorization. 
(Ord. No. 2412, § 2, 2-27-2019)  
3.20.040 - Requisitions. 
Using agencies shall submit requests for supplies and equipment to the purchasing officer by standard requisition forms. 
(Ord. No. 2412, § 2, 2-27-2019)  
3.20.050 - Conformance with bidding procedures. 
Purchases of supplies and equipment for city use shall be made and accomplished in conformity with Section 3.20.080 or Section 3.20.090 except: 
A.  When an emergency, as determined by the purchasing agent with the approval of the city manager, is deemed to require that an order be placed with the nearest available source of supply; 
B.  When the supplies and equipment needed can be obtained from one source only; 
C.  When the city council by a four-fifths vote determines to dispense with such bidding and other procedures required by the above-mentioned sections in every individual instance upon a finding by the council that it would be impractical, useless, or uneconomical in such instance to follow the procedures, and that the welfare of the public would be promoted by dispensing with the same; or 
D.  When the amount of the purchase involved is less than two thousand dollars. 
E.  Compliance with the requirements set forth in the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all contracts awarded after the effective date of this subsection, as may be amended. 
F.  Notwithstanding the exceptions under this section, no commitment or contract with a definitive term may exceed five years. 
(Ord. No. 2412, § 2, 2-27-2019)  
3.20.060 - Use of purchase orders. 
A.  The purchase of goods and services including contracts totaling three thousand dollars or more shall be made by purchase order. Exceptions may be processed by request for warrant and shall be limited to dues and subscriptions; travel and meeting expense, telephone, utility, and postal services; pay for elected officials, commissions, police reserve and auxiliary firefighters; legal fees, FICA, PERS, employee group insurance, workers' compensation premiums, claims and expenses; insurance premiums, claims and expenses; reimbursements, refunds and replenishment of petty cash funds; contracts; debt payments; and payments to other government agencies. 
B.  Also exempted is the purchase of inventory stock replenishment for all stores materials. Such purchases shall be transacted with a purchase requisition form. 
C.  The finance director may authorize any variance up to ten percent of the original purchase order price, in addition to sales tax and shipping. 
D.  No commitment or contract with a definitive term may exceed five years. 
(Ord. No. 2412, § 2, 2-27-2019)  
3.20.070 - Unencumbered funds required for purchase order issuance. 
Except in cases of emergency, the purchasing officer shall not issue any purchase order for supplies or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which the purchase is to be charged. 
(Ord. No. 2412, § 2, 2-27-2019)  
3.20.080 - Formal contract procedure. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, purchases and contracts for supplies and equipment of an estimated value of five thousand dollars or more for a public project as defined by Section 20161 of the Public Contract Code, and fifty thousand dollars or more for contracts which do not constitute a public project as defined by Section 20161 of the Public Contract Code, shall be by written contract with the lowest responsible bidder pursuant to the procedure prescribed herein. 
A.  Notice Inviting Bids. Notices inviting bids shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased, shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured and the time and place for opening bids. 
1.  Published Notice. Notices inviting bids shall be published at least ten days before the date of opening of the bids. Notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the city, or if there is none, it shall be posted in at least three public places in the city that have been designated by ordinance as the places for posting public notices. 
2.  Bidders' List. The purchasing officer shall also solicit sealed bids from all responsible prospective suppliers whose names are on the bidders' list or who have requested their name be added thereto. 
3.  Bulletin Board. The purchasing officer shall also advertise pending purchases by a notice posted on a public bulletin board in the city hall. 
B.  Bidders' Security. When deemed necessary by the purchasing officer, bidders' security may be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security; provided that a successful bidder shall forfeit his bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the city is responsible for the delay. The city council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible bidder. If the city council awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidders' security shall be applied by the city to the difference between the low bid and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. 
C.  Bid Opening Procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the purchasing officer and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty calendar days after the bid closing. 
D.  Rejection of Bids. In its discretion, the city council may reject any and all bids presented and re-advertise for bids. 
E.  Award of Contracts. Contracts shall be awarded by the city council to the lowest responsible bidder except as otherwise provided herein. 
F.  Tie Bids. If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay or re-advertising for bids, the city council may accept the one it chooses or accept the lowest bid made by negotiation with the tie bidders at the time of bid opening. 
G.  Performance Bonds. The city council shall have authority to require a performance bond before entering a contract in such amount as it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. If the city council requires a performance bond, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids. 
H.  No commitment or contract with a definitive term may exceed five years. 
(Ord. No. 2412, § 2, 2-27-2019)  
3.20.090 - Open market procedure. 
Purchases of supplies and equipment of an estimated value in the amount of less than five thousand dollars for a public project as defined by Section 20161 of the Public Contract Code, and fifty thousand dollars for contracts which are not for a public project as defined by Section 20161 of the Public Contract Code, may be made by the purchasing officer in the open market without observing the procedure prescribed by Section 3.20.080. 
A.  Minimum Number of Bids. Open market purchases shall, wherever possible, be based on at least three bids, and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. 
B.  Notice Inviting Bids. The purchasing officer shall solicit bids by written requests to prospective vendors or by telephone or by public notice posted on a public bulletin board in the city hall. 
C.  Written Bids. Written bids or quotations shall be submitted to the purchasing officer who shall open them and keep a record of all open market orders and bids for a period of one year after the submission of bids or the placing of orders. This record, while so kept, shall be open to public inspection. 
D.  No commitment or contract with a definitive term may exceed five years. 
(Ord. No. 2412, § 2, 2-27-2019)  
3.20.100 - Inspection and testing. 
The purchasing officer shall inspect supplies and equipment delivered to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract. The purchasing officer shall have authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications. 
(Ord. No. 2412, § 2, 2-27-2019)  
3.20.110 - Bidding procedure prescribed. 
Whenever bids are required by law or by this code for the letting of contracts, the doing of work or the furnishing of supplies, equipment or materials, all of the steps, acts and proceedings required by law or by this code shall be fully complied with, and in particular and supplementary to the acts, steps and procedures, the procedure hereinafter set forth in this section regulating the notices inviting bids, the publication and posting of the notices, and the opening of the bids shall be followed: 
A.  Notice—Contents. The notice inviting bids shall set a date for the opening of bids. All such notices, whether mailed, published, or posted, shall state the date, the hour, and the place at which the bids called for are to be opened, and shall also state the date, the hour, and the place of the council meeting at which the city council intends to take action on the bids. 
B.  Bids—Opening. All bids shall be returnable to the purchasing officer or to the office of the city clerk, and at the hour and date stated in the notice, all bids shall be publicly opened at the office of the city clerk in the presence of the city clerk, purchasing officer, a representative of the department, or departments, to which the purchase or contract is to be charged, and all other interested parties who wish to attend and witness the opening of the bids. As each bid is opened, it shall be read aloud so that all persons interested in the bidding may hear the contents thereof, although no more of the bid need be read or announced than would ordinarily be announced in an open council meeting for the same purpose. From and after the time of their opening, the city clerk shall, upon request of any interested party, read or give such further information from the bid as may be requested. 
C.  Bids—Compiling. After they have been opened, all bids shall be examined and studied by the city clerk, purchasing officer and any other officials necessary for the proper analysis of the bids to see if they comply with the notice inviting bids and are in all other respects in good order. A report shall then be made by the appropriate department to the city council announcing the results of the investigation and particularly designate which bid is found to be the lowest bid, the next lowest bid, and all of the other bids in ascending order of the figure or figures quoted. 
D.  Bids—Report—Awarding. 
1.  At the meeting of the city council at which the bids are acted upon, the report shall be read publicly and the bid of the lowest bidder shall be publicly announced. 
2.  After having complied with the foregoing procedure, the city council shall proceed in accordance with applicable provisions of law or this code either to award the bid and to let the contract therein referred to, or to take such other action as may be authorized by law. 
E.  Officer—Deputies. In the absence of the city clerk or purchasing officer, a duly authorized assistant or deputy may act in his place. 
(Ord. No. 2412, § 2, 2-27-2019)  
3.20.120 - Joint purchasing agreements. 
A.  Whenever the council finds that the public interest and convenience require, it may enter into joint purchasing agreements for the acquisition of city supplies and equipment, with any other public agency; provided, that such agreements are authorized by the laws of the state. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to purchases made under such an agreement: provided, that the council shall, by resolution, prior to the execution of such an agreement, establish rules for administrative practices to be followed by the purchasing agent with respect to such joint purchasing agreements. 
(Ord. No. 2412, § 2, 2-27-2019)  
3.20.125 - Piggybacking purchasing agreements. 
A.  The purchasing officer may arrange for the city and enter into purchase contracts with a vendor(s) for the purchase of supplies, equipment, services, including but not limited to materials, vehicles and apparatus, the pricing and terms of which have been previously established by another local, county, state, federal or other public entity, school district, League of California Cities, California Communities Program, or other nonprofit association or group consisting of governmental entities, provided that: 
1.  The purchase contract with the vendor(s) is the result of competitive bidding or negotiation and is made in compliance with the competitive bid or proposal requirements of any participating entity or organization; 
2.  The purchase is made within two years of the competitive bid or negotiation; 
3.  The purchase conforms to the city's specifications for the item or service; and 
4.  The estimated price of the purchase is lower than that estimated for the purchase if made directly by the city pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection 3.20.125(A), approval of a "piggyback" purchasing agreement pursuant to this section shall be obtained from city council for an award of a purchase in an amount exceeding fifty thousand dollars. 
(Ord. No. 2412, § 2, 2-27-2019)  
3.20.130 - Local vendor preference. 
A.  Whenever practical, the purchasing officer shall first ascertain the availability of goods and services from responsible local sources within city limits before considering outside sources and, if available, shall (as provided for in Section 3.20.050) solicit formal and/or informal bids from responsible local sources seeking the best price, quality, and delivery possible that best serves the interests of the city. 
B.  The purchasing officer may seek competitive pricing outside the city when it is determined that the best interests of the city related to price, quality and delivery will not be served by local sources. 
C.  The purchasing officer may establish competitively priced purchase agreements, open purchase, and blanket purchase orders with responsible local vendors via written quotes or negotiated agreement as provided for in Section 3.20.050. 
D.  For purposes of determining final cost, Montebello vendors may be allowed a one percent allowance in determination of low bid based upon estimated sales and business tax return and local service convenience, except when such an allowance is prohibited by the grantor of funds to purchase such goods and services. All requests for sealed bids must include notification of local vendor allowance. 
(Ord. No. 2412, § 2, 2-27-2019)  
Chapter 3.21 - CONTRACTS FOR PROFESSIONAL AND SPECIAL SERVICES[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2412, § 3, adopted Feb. 27, 2019, amended Ch. 3.21 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 3.21, §§ 3.21.010—3.21.080, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. 2304, 2007; Ord. 2315, 2008: 
 
3.21.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
"Professional/special services" means services which require special performance criteria; special or specific equipment; specific experience, knowledge, training, personal judgment, quality of work or factors other than simply obtaining the service at the lowest cost to the city. Such services include, but are not limited to, those provided by attorneys, architects, engineers, land surveyors, construction managers, appraisers, experts, accounting firms, security firms, computer consultants/programmers and/or other specialized consultants. Professional/special services do not include services rendered by city officers or employees. 
(Ord. No. 2412, § 3, 2-27-2019)  
3.21.020 - Experience and qualifications of professional/special service providers. 
A.  In contracting for professional/special services, such contracts shall only be awarded to firms or persons who have demonstrated adequate levels of experience, competence, resources/equipment, staffing and other professional qualifications necessary for more than a satisfactory performance of the services required in the time period needed. 
B.  Once the department requesting the professional/special service has determined a firm has an adequate level of competence, the cost of the service may be considered, however, price may not be the sole factor in determining to whom a contract shall be awarded. The city's best interests may be served by awarding the contract to a higher priced contractor based on the scope of services available, unique skills, staffing levels, timing, prior experience, past working relationship, and other factors required by the department or proposed by the contractor. 
C.  No commitment or contract with a definitive term may exceed five years. 
(Ord. No. 2412, § 3, 2-27-2019)  
3.21.025 - Conformance with bidding procedures. 
The acquiring of professional/special services shall be made and accomplished in conformity with Section 3.21.050 or Section 3.21.060 except: 
A.  When an emergency, as determined by the purchasing agent with the approval of the city manager, is deemed to require that an order be placed with the nearest available source; 
B.  When the professional/special services needed can be obtained from one source only; 
C.  When the city council by a four-fifths vote determines to dispense with such bidding and other procedures required by the above-mentioned sections in every individual instance upon a finding by the council that it would be impractical, useless, or uneconomical in such instance to follow the procedures, and that the welfare of the public would be promoted by dispensing with the same; or 
D.  When the amount of the professional/special services involved is less than two thousand dollars. 
E.  Compliance with the requirements set forth in the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all contracts awarded after the effective date of this subsection, as may be amended. 
F.  Notwithstanding the exceptions under this section, no commitment or contract with a definitive term may exceed five years. 
(Ord. No. 2412, § 3, 2-27-2019)  
3.21.030 - Request for proposals. 
The acquiring of professional/special services shall be procured through a negotiated contract and should include a request for proposals ("RFP"), unless Section 3.21.025 or Section 3.21.050 applies. 
(Ord. No. 2412, § 3, 2-27-2019)  
3.21.040 - Decentralized bid solicitation. 
Soliciting bids for professional/special services is decentralized and shall be the responsibility of the department director requesting the service; however, the city manager may be contacted to assist with bids requiring the formal sealed RFP process set forth in Section 3.21.060. 
(Ord. No. 2412, § 3, 2-27-2019)  
3.21.050 - Contracts for less than fifty thousand dollars. 
The following procedure shall be used when seeking professional/special services estimated to have an annual cost of less than fifty thousand dollars. 
A.  In nonemergency situations, the requesting department shall contact a minimum of three consultants or firms. 
B.  Unless the city council authorized the entering into or the award of a specific contract for professional/special services, the city manager shall approve in writing the award of all such contracts, taking into consideration the recommendation of the department director requesting the professional/special services at issue. 
C.  The city manager or his or her duly authorized designee is authorized to approve professional/special service contracts with an annual estimated cost of less than fifty thousand dollars. 
(Ord. No. 2412, § 3, 2-27-2019)  
3.21.060 - Contracts of fifty thousand dollars or more. 
The following procedure shall be used when seeking professional/special services estimated to have an annual cost of fifty thousand dollars or more. 
A.  In nonemergency situations, departments shall utilize the following formal sealed RFP process: 
1.  A formal sealed RFP template shall be developed for solicitation of professional services contracts of fifty thousand dollars or more. 
2.  The department shall advertise in appropriate publications and/or use the professional services listings, as available, during the solicitation process. 
3.  Notice inviting RFP's shall be posted at city hall and on the city's website at least fourteen calendar days before the due date of submission of the RFP, when reasonably possible. 
4.  The notice shall at least describe the general type of service needed, how the RFP minimum scope of work can be obtained, the requirement of a written sealed proposal, state the closing date, place, and time for submission of the RFP. 
5.  Sealed request for proposals shall be submitted directly to the requesting department and need not be opened publicly. 
6.  Departments shall analyze proposals for compliance with RFP requirements, value of the total scope of services and make a recommendation to city council for selection or for follow up interviews with those consultants/firms submitting proposals. 
B.  Contracts for professional/special services of fifty thousand dollars or more require the approval of the city council and the signature of the mayor, or in his or her absence, the mayor pro tempore, pursuant to the provisions of Gov. Code Sections 40601 and 40602. 
C.  Contracts for professional/special services shall be on the city's standard form and shall be reviewed and approved as to form by the city attorney. 
D.  No commitment or contract with a definitive term may exceed five years. 
(Ord. No. 2412, § 3, 2-27-2019)  
3.21.070 - City manager authority to execute certain contracts. 
The city manager or his or her duly authorized designee shall be authorized to sign on behalf of the city all contracts for professional/special services, which are less than a total contract amount of fifty thousand dollars in any one fiscal year period. 
(Ord. No. 2412, § 3, 2-27-2019)  
3.21.080 - Splitting purchases or contracts—financial interest prohibited. 
A.  No officer or employee of the city or its agencies shall split or separate a purchase/procurement of professional/special for the purpose of evading the dollar amount bid threshold provisions of this chapter. The acquisition of professional/special services should be made with a single contract covering all services to be provided. 
B.  No city employee who participates in the selection or approval of a professional/special service provider, nor any person who has supervisory responsibility for any such employee, shall have a financial interest in any professional/special service provider business entity under consideration. 
(Ord. No. 2412, § 3, 2-27-2019)  
Chapter 3.24 - DEVELOPMENT TAX[3] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2331, §§ 6, 7, adopted June 24, 2009, repealed former §§ 3.24.010 and 3.24.020, and enacted new §§ 3.24.010 and 3.24.020, as set out herein. The repealed sections pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
 
3.24.010 - Imposed. 
A.  In addition to the taxes imposed pursuant to the other provisions hereof, the following fees are imposed: 
1.  Every person constructing a new dwelling unit, or one-family dwelling, shall pay a fee in the amount of one thousand two hundred six dollars and twelve cents for each dwelling unit, or one-family dwelling; and 
2.  Every person who files for approval, a subdivision map having the effect of creating a condominium, as to an existing apartment house, shall pay a fee of one thousand two hundred six dollars and twelve cents for each dwelling unit shown on such map; and 
3.  Every person who constructs or establishes a mobile house park, having one or more trailer sites therein, shall pay a fee of six hundred ninety-three dollars and eighty-seven cents for each trailer site. 
B.  The phrases "dwelling unit," "one-family dwelling," and "mobile home park" shall be defined for purposes of this section as set forth in title be defined for purposes of this section as set forth in title of this code. 
C.  All fees imposed, pursuant to subsection (A)(1) and (3) of this section, shall be paid prior to the issuance of a building permit for such projects, fees imposed, pursuant to subsection (A)(2) of this section, shall be paid prior to the approval and recordation of a final subdivision tract map. 
D.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section no such fee shall be required for any housing development or project funded, in whole or part, under the provisions of Section 236 of the National Housing Act, as amended. 
E.  The fee imposed by this section shall be increased or decreased annually as of July 1 of each calendar year, commencing on July 1, 1979, in an amount equal to the increase or decrease from the base index in the then latest available consumer price index, as prepared and released by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Statistics, for the Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County area. The last index published for the month of June 1978 shall be deemed to be the base index for the purpose of this section. 
(Ord. 2319 § 6, 2008: Ord. 2305 § 6, 2007: Ord. 2293 § 6, 2006: Ord. 2286 § 6, 2005: prior code § 6203) 
(Ord. No. 2331, § 6, 6-24-2009)  
3.24.020 - Suspension of portion of development impact fee. 
Notwithstanding the provision of Section 3.24.010(A) of this code, during the period July 1, 2009, through and including June 30, 2010, the development impact fee to be collected pursuant to that section shall not exceed the following: 
A.  Development impact fee. In addition to the taxes imposed pursuant to the other provisions of this chapter, the following fees are hereby imposed: 
1.  Every person constructing a new dwelling unit, or one-family dwelling, shall pay a fee in the amount of one thousand two hundred six dollars and twelve cents for each dwelling unit, or single-family detached dwelling; and 
2.  Every person who files for approval, a subdivision map having the effect of creating a condominium, as to an existing apartment house, shall pay a fee of one thousand two hundred six dollars and twelve cents for each dwelling unit shown on such map; and 
3.  Every person who constructs or establishes a mobile house park, having one or more trailer sites therein, shall pay a fee of six hundred ninety-three dollars and eighty-seven cents for each trailer site. 
B.  That during such time as this section of the Montebello Municipal Code is in effect, the amount of the development impact fee imposed by said Section 3.24.010(A) contrary to the amount above set forth, shall be suspended, and shall not be collected. 
(Ord. 2319 § 7, 2008: Ord. 2286 § 7, 2005: Ord. 2272 § 7, 2004: Ord. 2257 § 7, 2003: Ord. 2241 § 7, 2002; Ord. 2224 § 7, 2001: Ord. 2207 § 5, 2000: Ord. 2191 § 5, 1999: Ord. 2173A § 5, 1998: Ord. 2165 § 5, 1997: Ord. 2142 § 5, 1996: Ord. 2125 § 6, 1995: Ord. 2110 § 6, 1994: Ord. 2105 § 11, 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2331, § 7, 6-24-2009)  
Chapter 3.28 - TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ASSESSMENT AND TAX COLLECTION DUTIES TO COUNTY 
Sections: 
 
3.28.010 - Assignment of tax assessment and collection duties. 
From and after the effective date of this chapter, the duties of assessing property and collecting taxes, provided by law to be performed by the assessor and tax collector of the city, shall be performed by the county assessor and the county tax collector of the county of Los Angeles, state of California, in accordance with the provisions of Sections 51500 and 51519, inclusive, of the Government Code. 
(Prior code § 2500)  
3.28.020 - City's contribution to PERS on behalf of city employees. 
The city shall collect property taxes at a rate of $0.197875 per one hundred dollars of assessed value for the purpose of paying the city's contribution to PERS on behalf of its employees which was approved by the voters on July 9, 1946. The city manager and director of finance shall provide any information required by and take any action necessary for the county assessor, county auditor/controller and county tax collector of Los Angeles County to collect such tax. 
(Ord. 2148 § 1, 1996)  
Chapter 3.32 - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.32.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the real property transfer tax law of the city of Montebello. 
(Prior code § 6700)  
3.32.020 - Adoption authority. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, to which reference is made. 
(Prior code § 6701)  
3.32.030 - Imposed. 
A.  There is imposed, on each deed, instrument or other writing, by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the amount of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents for each five hundred dollars and each fractional part of the value or consideration given for such transfer. 
B.  The tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any such document subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. 
(Prior code § 6702)  
3.32.040 - Exemptions. 
Taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply: 
A.  To any instrument in writing given to secure a debt; or 
B.  To the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to which it is a party, but the tax shall be collected by assessment, from any other party to such transaction who is liable therefor pursuant to the provisions hereof; or 
C.  To the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment: 
1.  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended, 
2.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended, 
3.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended, or 
4.  Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected. 
Subsection c(1) through (4), inclusive, of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change; or 
D.  To the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if: 
1.  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, in obedience to which such conveyance is made, recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935, and 
2.  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed, and 
3.  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order; or 
E.  By reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if: 
1.  Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, and 
2.  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned; or 
F.  To any deed, instrument, or writing to a beneficiary or mortgagee, which is taken from the mortgagor or trustor as a result of or in lieu of foreclosure; provided, that such tax shall apply to the extent that consideration exceeds the unpaid debt, including accrued interest and cost of foreclosure. Consideration, unpaid debt amount and identification of grantee as beneficiary or mortgagee shall be noted on the declaration under penalty for tax purposes; 
G.  To any deed, instrument, or other writing which purports to transfer, divide, or allocate community, quasi-community, or quasi-marital property which is required by a judgment decreeing a dissolution of the marriage or legal separation, by a judgment of nullity, or by any other judgment or order rendered pursuant to Part 5 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 4 of the Civil Code, or by a written agreement between the spouses, executed in contemplation of any such judgment or order, whether or not the written agreement is incorporated as part of any of those judgments or orders. In order to qualify for this exemption, the deed, instrument, or other writing shall include a written recital, signed by either spouse, stating that the deed, instrument, or other writing is entitled to the exemption; 
H.  To any deed, instrument, or other writing by which realty is conveyed by the state, any political subdivision thereof, or agency or instrumentality of either thereof, pursuant to an agreement whereby the purchaser agrees to immediately reconvey the realty to the exempt agency; 
I.  To any deed, instrument, or other writing by which the state, any political subdivision thereof, or agency or instrumentality of either thereof, conveys to a nonprofit corporation realty the acquisition, construction, or improvement of which was financed or refinanced by obligations issued by the nonprofit corporation on behalf of a government unit, within the meaning of Section 1.103-1(b) of Title 26 of the Code of Federal Regulations; 
J.  If there is a termination of any partnership, within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. For the purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. Provided, that not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant hereto by reason of a termination described in this subsection, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(Ord. 2070 § 16, 1992; prior code § 6703)  
3.32.050 - Administration. 
The county recorder shall administer the provisions of this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any Los Angeles County ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Prior code § 6704)  
3.32.060 - Refunds. 
Claims for refunds of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. 
(Prior code § 6705)  
Chapter 3.36 - SALES TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.36.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Uniform local sales and use tax ordinance." 
(Prior code § 6500)  
3.36.020 - Purpose. 
The city council declares that the provisions of this chapter are adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
B.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the state insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation code; 
C.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State sales and use taxes; 
D.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6503)  
3.36.030 - Rate. 
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. 
(Prior code § 6501)  
3.36.040 - Sales tax imposed. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.36.030 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. 
B.  For the purpose of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Prior code §§ 6505, 6506)  
3.36.050 - Use tax. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in Section 3.36.030 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Prior code § 6507)  
3.36.060 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city, in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of the state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
D.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Prior code § 6511)  
3.36.070 - Adoption of state law provisions. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 or Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
B.  In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "state" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of that code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797, or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Prior code § 6508 and 6509)  
3.36.080 - Additional sellers permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6510)  
3.36.090 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Prior code § 6515)  
3.36.100 - Amendments. 
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part hereof. 
(Prior code § 6514)  
3.36.110 - Administration. 
Prior to the operative date of this chapter, this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax ordinance; provided, that if this city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6504)  
3.36.120 - Operative date. 
This chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1974. 
(Prior code § 6502)  
Chapter 3.40 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.40.010 - Title. 
The tax levied by this chapter shall be known as the "transient occupancy tax." 
(Prior code § 6630)  
3.40.020 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter: 
"Hotel" means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied, or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming-house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof. 
"Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
"Operator" means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
"Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received for occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
"Tax administrator" means the license collector of the city. 
"Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered. 
(Prior code § 6631)  
3.40.030 - Tax imposed. 
A.  For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to, and shall pay, a tax in the amount of thirty-seven percent of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city, which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the tax administrator. 
B.  The tax imposed by this section shall be increased or decreased annually as of July 1 of each calendar year, commencing on July 1, 1979, in an amount equal to the increase or decrease from the base index in the then latest available consumer price index, as prepared by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Statistics, for the Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County area. The last index published for the month of June 1978 shall be deemed to be the base index for the purpose of this section. 
(Ord. 2319 § 8, 2008: Ord. 2305 § 7, 2007: Ord. 2293 § 7, 2006: Ord. 2286 § 8, 2005: prior code § 6632) 
(Ord. No. 2331, § 8, 6-24-2009) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2331, § 8, adopted June 24, 2009, repealed the former § 3.40.030, and enacted a new § 3.40.030 as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List.  
3.40.040 - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed upon: 
A.  Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided; 
B.  Any federal or state officer or employee when on official business; 
C.  Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty. No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. 
(Prior code § 6633)  
3.40.050 - Registration requirements. 
Within thirty days after the effective date of this chapter, or within thirty days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register the hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from him a transient occupancy registration certificate to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. The certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
A.  The name of the operator; 
B.  The address of the hotel; 
C.  The date upon which the certificate was issued; and 
D.  The following statement: 
This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of this part by registering with the Tax Administrator the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this City. This certificate does not constitute a permit. 
(Prior code § 6635)  
3.40.060 - Collection. 
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(Prior code § 6634)  
3.40.070 - Reporting and remitting. 
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by him or her, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he or she deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and he or she may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. 
(Prior code § 6636)  
3.40.080 - Recordkeeping. 
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter, to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for collection of and payment to the city, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Prior code § 6639)  
3.40.090 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsection B of this section provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, if filed with the tax administrator within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator. 
B.  An operator may claim a refund, or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted, the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
(Prior code § 6641)  
3.40.100 - Failure to collect and report tax. 
If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he or she may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his or her estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator shall procure such facts and information as he or she is able to obtain, upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he or she shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his or her last known place of address. Such operator may within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive, and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days' written notice, in the manner prescribed herein, to the operator to show cause, at a time and place fixed in the notice, why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.40.110. 
(Prior code § 6638)  
3.40.110 - Appeals. 
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days of serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give five days' notice in writing thereof, to such operator at his or her last known place of address. The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive, and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner previously prescribed for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. 
(Prior code § 6639)  
3.40.120 - Penalties and interest. 
A.  Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any portion of any tax imposed by this chapter, within the time required, shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax, in addition to the amount of the tax. 
B.  Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed. 
C.  Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section. 
D.  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
E.  Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. 
(Prior code § 6637)  
3.40.130 - Suspension of a portion of transient occupancy tax. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 3.40.030(A) of this code, during the period July 1, 2009, through and including June 30, 2010, the tax imposed thereby shall not exceed the following: 
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to, and shall pay, a tax in the amount of ten percent of the rent charged by the operator. Such tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city, which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the same time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the tax administrator. 
(Ord. 2319 § 9, 2008: Ord. 2305 § 8, 2007: Ord. 2293 § 8, 2006: Ord. 2286 § 9, 2005: Ord. 2272 § 6, 2004: Ord. 2257 § 8, 2003: Ord. 2241 § 6, 2002; Ord. 2224 § 6, 2001: Ord. 2207 § 4, 2000: Ord. 2191 § 4, 1999: Ord. 2173A § 4, 1998: Ord. 2165 § 4, 1997: Ord. 2142 § 4, 1996: Ord. 2125 § 5, 1995: Ord. 2110 § 5, 1994: Ord. 2105 § 9, 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2331, § 9, 6-24-2009) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2331, § 9, adopted June 24, 2009, repealed the former § 3.40.130, and enacted a new § 3.40.130 as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List.  
Title 5 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 5.04 - BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
5.04.010 - Title. 
This title shall be known and referred to as the "business license code" of the city. 
(Prior code § 6100)  
5.04.020 - Purpose. 
It is the intent of the city council of the city, by the adoption and amendment of the provisions of this title, to provide regulatory provisions only, with regard to specific businesses, as set forth hereinafter, and, to prescribe a schedule of business licenses taxes, for revenue purposes only, for all businesses, in the amounts and manner as set forth hereinafter. It is also the intent of the city council of the city to ensure that all businesses intending to operate in the city meet certain minimum zoning, fire, building and safety, and other requirements of the Montebello Municipal Code prior to and during the operation of said business. In the event that any business regulated by the provisions of this title, which is now, or hereafter, declared by appropriate legal authority, to be regulated by the laws of the state, to the exclusion of the right of regulation by this city, the provisions of this title which are regulatory, in nature, shall not be deemed to apply to such business or businesses, except that the imposition of the business license tax, as set forth herein, shall, notwithstanding such determination, apply thereto. 
(Prior code § 6101) 
(Ord. No. 2338, § 1, 10-27-2010)  
5.04.030 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this title, certain words and phrases are herein defined, and the same shall be construed in accordance with the same, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
"Advertising vehicle" means the business of operating upon the streets, any motor or other vehicle equipped with music or a musical device, loudspeaker or other device for attracting attention by sound, for commercial advertising purposes. 
"Apartment house" shall be defined as set forth in Chapter 17.08 of this code. 
"Business" means the conduct of any enterprise, trade, calling, vocation, profession, occupation, including, but not limited to, the renting or leasing of apartments located within the city, or any other means of livelihood carried on within the city, whether or not the same has a fixed place of business in the city. 
"Business by vehicle" means the business of operating any motor vehicle, wagon, or any other vehicle for the purpose of transporting refuse or rubbish, or transporting, selling or repairing of goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property of any kind, from such vehicle, or for the purpose of soliciting for work, labor or services, to be performed at a residence or place of business of the consumer, or to be performed upon goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property of such consumer, which are to be taken, for such purpose, to a plant or establishment inside or outside of the city. Business by vehicle shall not be deemed to include the delivery and pickup of goods, wares or merchandise as an incident to the conduct of another business. 
"Business license tax" or "tax" means a business license tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this title by reason of the conduct of business within the city. 
"Chief" means a duly appointed, acting and qualified chief of police of the city, or his authorized deputy. 
"City" means the city of Montebello. 
"City manager" means the duly appointed, acting and qualified city manager of the city. 
"City attorney" means the duly appointed, acting and qualified city attorney of the city. 
"Coin" means any slug, token, plate, disc, plug, key, check or other device or thing of value. 
"Conduct" means and includes the conducting, managing or carrying on of a business in any capacity. 
"Contractor" means any person licensed, or required to be licensed, as such, by virtue of the provisions of the Business and Professions Code of the state of California. 
"Council" means the city council of city. 
"Engaged in business" means the operating, conducting, managing or the carrying on of any business in the city, as owner, officer, manager, employee, servant or lessee, whether or not a profit or gain therefrom is actually made. 
"Gross receipts" means and includes the total amount received as and for the sale price of all goods, wares and merchandise sold and/or the total amount charged and received for the performance of any act, service or employment of whatever nature, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act, service or employment is done as part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise or the rendition of personal services. Included in gross receipts shall be all receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the property sold, the materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, losses or other expenses whatsoever attributable to sale activities or personal services. 
"Itinerant vendor" means the same as peddler. 
"License" means a business license issued pursuant to the provisions of this title. 
"Licensee" means a person holding a valid business license issued pursuant to the provisions of this title. 
"License collector" means an officer or employee of the city who is appointed as the city's license collector, whose primary duty is to enforce the provisions of this title. 
"Mechanical amusement device" or "amusement game machine" means any machine or device, whether mechanical, electrical or electronic, which upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token or similar object operates for use as a game, contest or amusement. It includes devices commonly referred to as pinball machines and video game machines; also means the use of any microscope, kinetoscope, giograph, projectoscope or other instrument or machine of like character, lung tester, muscle tester, galvanic battery, weighing machine, ball, knife or ring throwing, and all devices or contraptions of a similar nature. Each such device or contraption shall be considered and licensed as a separate business. 
"Peddler" means any person who goes from house to house, place to place, or in or along the streets within the city selling or making immediate delivery, or offering for sale and immediate delivery, any goods, wares or merchandise, or anything of value, in possession of the peddler, or offering to perform personal services, to persons other than manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers or retailers in such commodities. 
"Permit" means a permit required to be issued prior to the conduct of any business referred to hereinafter. 
"Permittee" means a person holding a valid permit issued pursuant to the provisions thereof. 
"Person" shall mean any individual, corporation, partnership, association, incorporated or not, Massachusetts business or common law trust, societies, joint venture or other associations of individuals transacting or conducting any business in the city. 
"Premises" means all land, buildings, structures, equipment and appurtenances connected with, or used in, conducting any business. 
"Solicitor" means any person who engages in the business of going from house to house, place to place, in or along the streets within the city, selling or taking orders for goods, wares or merchandise, or other things of value for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the future. 
"Vending machines" includes any self-service device or machine available for public use, which upon insertion of coins or tokens will disperse or provide a service, music, food, drink or other type of merchandise. 
"Written notice" means a written communication which shall be addressed to the party involved, at his last known address, postage prepaid, deposited in the course of transmission of the United States Postal Service. 
(Prior code § 6102)  
5.04.040 - Applicability of other regulatory provisions. 
Persons required to pay a tax pursuant hereto shall not be relieved from the payment of any tax for the privilege of doing such business required under any other applicable law of the city, and such persons shall remain subject to all other applicable regulatory provisions of other ordinances and provisions of this code, except as hereinafter expressly provided. 
(Prior code § 6103)  
5.04.045 - Administrative review of certain business license tax calculations. 
A.  The amount of tax due under this chapter or Chapter 5.08 may be calculated by the license collector. If the tax is not calculated by the license collector, it shall be calculated by the taxpayer pursuant to this code, subject to a review and revision of the calculation by the license collector. Failure of the taxpayer to calculate the tax or to remit the tax shall not excuse its payment or the payment of any associated interest or penalties. If license collector calculates or recalculates a tax, the determination shall be sent in writing to the taxpayer. All notices and communications by the city under this section shall be sent by first class mail or personal service to the last known address for the taxpayer. 
B.  If a taxpayer disputes the amount of the assessed or recalculated tax, the taxpayer may make application in writing to the license collector for a hearing on the amount assessed within fifteen days after the date of the notice of assessment or recalculation. If application by the taxpayer for a hearing is not made and received within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the license collector shall become final and conclusive, and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the license collector shall give not less than five days' written notice to the taxpayer to show cause, at a time and place fixed in the notice, why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the taxpayer may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing, the license collector shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days, unless an appeal is taken as provided herein. 
C.  Any taxpayer aggrieved by any decision of the license collector with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days of serving or mailing the determination of tax due. The council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give five days' notice in writing thereof to such taxpayer at his last known place of address. The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be conveyed in writing to the taxpayer. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the mailing or service of the notice. 
(Ord. 2140 § 2, 1996)  
5.04.050 - Effect of provisions on past actions. 
Neither the adoption of this title nor its superseding of any portion of any other law of the city, shall, in any manner, be construed to effect the pending prosecution for the violation of any other such law committed prior to the effective date hereof; nor shall the same be construed as a waiver of any license or any penal provision applicable to any such violation; nor shall the same be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit or tax imposed, whether or not paid, required by any other such law. 
(Prior code § 6104)  
5.04.060 - Exemption from payment of taxes. 
A.  Exemption. 
Licenses shall be issued, but no tax shall be required for, of, or from the following: 
1.  Those persons engaged in a business exempted from the payment of a tax imposed by the provisions hereof, by virtue of the Constitution and the laws of this state or of the United States; 
2.  Any institution or organization which conducts a business wholly for the benefit of charitable, religious, educational or benevolent purposes and from which profit is not derived either directly or indirectly by any person; 
3.  Any employee or direct agent of a licensee conducting the business of such licensee; 
4.  To conduct a sale at public auction of articles of personal property belonging to residents of the city, which articles are not part of the stock in trade or any part of such stock in trade of any business; or any such auction which is conducted pursuant to appropriate judicial authority; 
5.  Disabled war veterans shall not be required to pay a business license tax for peddling or soliciting; provided, that the persons exhibit to the license collector evidence of such character as shall satisfy him that the applicant has received an honorable discharge from the United States military or naval service and of service-connected disability; nor 
6.  Farmers, poultrymen and horticulturists shall not be required to pay a business license tax for the privilege of selling exclusively their own produce. The exemption shall not apply to nurseries or other commercial establishments who buy goods for resale as well as selling their own produce. 
B.  Procedure. 
1.  Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this section shall file a verified statement with the license collector stating the facts upon which exemption is claimed. The license collector, upon a proper showing contained in the verified statement, shall issue a license to such persons claiming exemption under the provisions of this section, without payment to city of the tax required by this chapter. 
2.  The burden of proof in all cases, shall be upon the applicant to establish, pursuant to the provisions hereof, a valid basis for the exemption for the payment of a tax imposed by this title. 
3.  Where the license collector declines to issue an exempt license for the reason that the applicant has not qualified for such exemption pursuant to the provisions hereof, the license collector shall, within five days of such decision, give the applicant written notice of such denial. The applicant shall, within ten days after the mailing of such notice, have the right of appeal to the city manager. Upon receipt of such an appeal, the city manager shall consider all applicable documents and staff reports relating to the matter, and shall permit the applicant, either in writing or in person, to present the factual basis claimed for such exemption. The city manager, based upon such evidence, in accordance with the purpose and intent of this code, shall determine whether or not the applicant is qualified for such exemption. Upon reaching a conclusion, the city manager shall give the applicant written notice of such decision. Within ten days after the mailing of such notice of decision, the applicant may appeal the decision of the city manager to the city council. Such an appeal shall be perfected by the applicant's filing with the city clerk, such an appeal, in writing, stating the basis therefor. Upon receipt of such an appeal, the city clerk shall place the same upon the next most convenient city council agenda, and shall give the applicant at least five days' written notice of the time and place of the hearing. At the time of the hearing, the city council shall consider all relevant evidence, including, but not limited to, all applicable staff reports, relating to the matter. The applicant shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard in conjunction therewith. Based upon such evidence and the purpose and intent of this code, the city council shall determine whether the exemption should be granted. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
C.  Compliance with Other laws. 
Nothing in this section, or any subsection hereof, shall exempt any person from complying with any other applicable law of the city. 
(Prior code § 6105)  
5.04.070 - Required. 
No person shall engage in, or conduct, any business in the city without first paying the business license tax for such business, in the amounts hereinafter set forth, and obtaining the license therefor, except as hereinbefore expressly provided. 
A.  No person shall conduct any business in the city without having a license from the city so to do, valid and in effect at the time, and without complying with any and all regulations pertaining to such business as contained in this code. No person who is an employee or who is the direct representative of a licensee shall be required to obtain such license or pay such tax for the doing of any part of work in the business of such licensee. 
B.  Every person who operates any business, whether upon a cost, rental or commission basis, as a concession or upon rented floor space in or upon the premises of any person licensed hereunder shall be required to obtain a separate license pursuant to the appropriate provisions hereof. 
(Prior code § 6150)  
5.04.080 - Separate licenses required for each branch or separate location. 
Separate licenses shall be obtained for each branch or separate place of business which is a part of any business licensed, or required to be licensed, hereunder; provided, that only one tax shall be imposed upon such business, but a two dollar and fifty cent filing and processing fee shall be paid to the city by such persons for each separate license. 
(Prior code § 6151)  
5.04.090 - Conduct of more than one business at same location. 
In the event that any person is conducting, managing or carrying on, at one location, more than one business required to be licensed hereunder, a separate license for each such business shall be obtained, and the applicable taxes therefor, which is classified in one or more categories hereunder shall pay a tax equal to the highest of the taxes imposed thereon. 
(Prior code § 6152)  
5.04.100 - Unexpired licenses heretofore issued. 
Where a business license has heretofore been issued to any person by the city and the tax paid therefor under the provisions of any ordinance heretofore enacted and the term of such license has not expired as of the effective date hereof, a new license for the business shall not be required until the expiration of the term of such unexpired license. 
(Prior code § 6154)  
5.04.110 - Application—Issuance, denial, and appeal. 
A.  Application. Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this title, shall make an application therefor, in a form prescribed by the city manager, to the license collector of the city. Upon the payment of the prescribed tax therefor and upon determination that none of the grounds for denial as specified in Section 5.04.110.B exist, the license collector shall issue to such person a license which shall contain: 
1.  The name of the person to whom the license is issued; 
2.  The business licensed; 
3.  The place where such business is to be transacted and carried on; 
4.  The date of the expiration of such license; 
5.  Such other information as may be deemed necessary. 
B.  Grounds for Denial. The license collector of the city shall deny any application for a business license or for the renewal thereof if the license collector makes any of the following findings and/or determinations: 
1.  The applicant has not first obtained or has not maintained in full force and effect any separate and distinct regulatory permit, conditional use permit, or other entitlement that is required pursuant to the provisions of the Montebello Municipal Code or other applicable law; 
2.  The building, structure, premises, location, or the equipment used to conduct the business activity fails to comply with all applicable health, zoning, fire, building and safety laws and regulations; 
3.  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for the business license, in the application for renewal of the business license, in the application for any permit which is a pre-requisite to the acquisition of a business license, or in any report or statement required to be filed with the license collector; 
4.  The business is prohibited by any federal, state, or local law or regulation, or prohibited in the particular location or zone by any law or regulation; 
5.  The applicant is in violation of a provision of the Montebello Municipal Code or owes taxes, fees, or penalties pursuant to this chapter or any other provision of the Montebello Municipal Code; 
6.  The application is for a license (new or renewal) for the same or substantially similar business activity for which the applicant has had a business license denied or revoked by the City of Montebello within the preceding twenty-four months. 
C.  Notice of Denial. Upon determining the existence of any factors specified in Section 5.04.110.B, the license collector shall advise the applicant by serving upon the applicant a notice of denial in writing within ten business days of such determination. The notice of denial shall state the license collector's findings and/or determinations that justify denial of the business license application, and shall include a summary of the evidence upon which such findings and/or determinations are based. 
D.  Appeal of Denial of License. The denial of any business license by the license collector may be appealed to the city council pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.04.310.F of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6157) 
(Ord. No. 2338, § 2, 10-27-2010)  
5.04.120 - Term. 
Annual licenses shall date from the day of issue thereof, and shall be in effect for a period of one year thereafter. 
(Prior code § 6160)  
5.04.130 - Duplicates. 
A duplicate license shall be issued by the license collector to replace any license previously issued hereunder which has been lost or destroyed, upon the licensee filing an affidavit attesting to such fact, and the payment of a filing and processing fee in the sum of two dollars and fifty cents. 
(Prior code § 6155)  
5.04.140 - Posting and keeping. 
All licenses shall be kept by the licensee conspicuously posted and located on the premises utilized by the licensee. Any licensee transacting and carrying on business, but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city, shall keep the license upon his person at all times while transacting and carrying on such business. Any licensee to whom a license has been issued for the operation of a wheeled vehicle, shall be issued by the license collector, in addition to the license certificate, a paper or metal license device, as prescribed by the city manager. The device shall at all times during the effective dates thereof be affixed to the vehicle in a location designated by the city manager. A fee of one dollar per device shall be paid in addition to the tax required hereunder. 
(Prior code § 6156)  
5.04.150 - Transfer. 
No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable. Where a license is issued to a person at a particular place, such license may, upon application therefor, and payment of a filing and processing fee in the sum of two dollars and fifty cents, be amended so as to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such business under the license at a different location. A new license shall be obtained, and the tax required therefor, shall be paid where an existing license is sold or transferred. 
(Prior code § 6153)  
5.04.160 - Amount of license taxes. 
The amount of license taxes to be paid to the city by any person engaged in or carrying on any business in the city, shall be as set forth in Chapter 5.08 of this code. 
(Prior code § 6158)  
5.04.170 - Submission of statement of gross receipts. 
A.  In all cases where the amount of business license tax to be paid by any person is based upon the amount of gross receipts, as set forth in this title, such person shall, before obtaining a license, render to the license collector for his guidance, a written statement showing the total amount of gross receipts, or other facts upon which the license collector may determine the license tax under the provisions of this title, as applied to the particular business involved. Such statement shall so be filed within ten days of the commencement of such business, or within five days after written notice so to do, given to such person by the license collector. 
B.  All statements filed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be deemed confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection. It shall be the duty of the license collector to preserve and keep such statements so that the contents thereof may not become known to any unauthorized person. The filing of a false statement hereunder shall be deemed to be a violation of this code. 
C.  Such statements shall not be conclusive upon the city or upon any officer thereof as to the matters set forth therein, and the same shall not prejudice the rights of the city to recover any amount that might be ascertained to be actually due from such person. The correctness of all such statements shall be subject to verification by the license collector of the city who is authorized and empowered to inspect and audit the books and records of any and all persons licensed to carry on any business in this city, for which a tax is imposed. 
D.  If any person fails to file any required statement or application within the prescribed time, the license collector shall assess the maximum license tax prescribed for the business carried on by such person; if such tax is based upon gross receipts, the tax which shall be imposed for the purposes of this section shall be in the sum of one hundred dollars. The license collector shall give the person conducting such business written notice of the determination made pursuant hereto, which determination shall be final and conclusive, unless within ten days after the mailing of such notice, such person files with the license collector, a written statement showing good cause (i.e., "good cause for the purpose of this section means mistake, inadvertence, surprise or excusable neglect, resulting in failure to timely file such statement). If good cause is shown, the license collector shall permit the late filing of such statement. 
(Prior code § 6159)  
5.04.180 - Annual license taxes—How and when payable. 
All annual license taxes imposed hereunder, shall be due and payable in lawful money of the United States, in advance, not later than the anniversary of the date of issuance of such license. 
(Prior code § 6161)  
5.04.190 - License tax fees other than annual—How and when payable. 
A.  Except as otherwise herein provided, license tax fees, other than annual, required hereunder, shall not be prorated and shall be due and payable in advance in lawful money of the United States as follows: 
1.  Quarterly license fees on the first day of January, April, July and October of each year; 
2.  Monthly license fees on the first day of each and every calendar month; 
3.  Weekly license fees on Monday of each week; 
4.  Daily license fees each day in advance. 
B.  No license shall be issued or authorized for any period of time other than those provided in this title. 
(Prior code § 6162)  
5.04.200 - Identification of licensed machines. 
A.  Concurrently with the issuance of a license for a mechanical amusement device and/or vending machine, the license collector shall issue and furnish an identification card or device, as prescribed by the city manager, for each such machine so licensed. Such identification card or device shall be and remain attached to the device or machine at all times. Such identification cards or devices shall be issued by the license collector for new or replacement machines upon the payment of a filing and processing fee of one dollar each. Such identification devices shall be valid so long as a license allowing such business is in full force and effect. 
B.  Each person owning or operating either mechanical amusement devices or vending machines, shall file with the license collector a complete list of all such machines or devices owned by him or under his control and operated within the city, including the kind of machine or device, its serial number, the location where each machine or device is to be operated, and such other information as the license collector deems necessary, upon a form to be provided by the license collector. The owner or person in control of the business establishment wherein the machine or device is located shall be responsible for the full amount of the business license tax required hereunder if the owner of the machine or device has not paid the license tax due and payable thereon. 
(Prior code § 6163)  
5.04.210 - Sealing of unlicensed machines. 
A.  The license collector shall seal the coin opening or slots, in a manner which will render inoperative the coin-operating device upon any vending machine or any mechanical amusement device which is available to the public for operation, and to which no city identification card or device is attached as required by this code. 
B.  A filing and processing fee in the amount of ten dollars shall be paid to the license collector by the owner or operator of any such vending machine, or mechanical amusement device so sealed for the removal of any such seal. No person shall operate or permit the operation of any machine so sealed, without first submitting evidence to the license collector that a valid business license is in effect, and that the filing and processing fee has been paid. It is unlawful for any person other than the license collector to break or remove any such seal. 
(Prior code § 6164)  
5.04.220 - Permits required. 
No person shall engage in any of the enumerated businesses without first obtaining a permit therefor in the manner prescribed in this chapter: 
A.  Amusement or recreation parlors or places; 
B.  Automobile or truck wrecking business; 
C.  Billiard room; 
D.  Bowling alley; 
E.  Device and contraption; 
F.  Itinerant vendor; 
G.  Junkyard or junk dealer; 
H.  Mechanical amusement device; 
I.  Pawnbroker; 
J.  Peddler; 
K.  Poolroom; 
L.  Private patrol; 
M.  Riding academies, clubs, corrals and schools; 
N.  Salvage yard or salvage dealer; 
O.  Side shows; 
P.  Skating rink; 
Q.  Solicitors. 
(Prior code § 6300)  
5.04.230 - Permit—Application—Content. 
Before any permit is issued by the license collector and inspector of the city (hereinafter "license collector") pursuant to this chapter, an application shall be verified by the applicant (if a corporation or association, by an officer thereof; if a partnership, by a general partner) and accompanied by the fee required therefor, and shall include the following information: 
A.  Name and address of applicant (names of partners, if a partnership; officers and directors, if a corporation; principals, if an association); 
B.  Nature of the business enterprise; 
C.  The location and address of business or enterprise; 
D.  Brief description of the nature and amount of equipment to be used in business or enterprise; 
E.  A personal description of applicant (or each officer, partner or principal); 
F.  Evidence of identity of such applicant (or each officer, partner or principal) including, but not limited to, a suitable photograph of such person; 
G.  Fingerprints and thumb prints of applicant (or each officer, partner or principal). 
(Prior code § 6301)  
5.04.240 - Permit—Application—Determination. 
The license collector shall refer such applications to the city department heads for investigation in the manner and to the extent deemed necessary by collector to determine whether the applicant (or each officer, partner or principal) is of good moral character and proposes to engage in the business in a manner which shall not be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety, morals or welfare, either by reason of the character of the applicant or the nature of the business or the manner in which the business is proposed to be conducted. After such investigation, the chief of police or other department heads shall, in writing, indicate to the license collector the conclusions of such investigation. If as a result of such investigation, it is found that the applicant, or each officer, partner or principal), are of good moral character and that the business or enterprise will not be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the city or its inhabitants, either by reason of the character of the applicant, the nature of the business or the manner in which the business is proposed to be conducted, the license collector shall forthwith issue a permit upon such terms, conditions and restrictions as are not in conflict with any permanent law, and as may be necessary or expedient to protect the public peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the city and its inhabitants. 
(Prior code § 6302)  
5.04.250 - Permit refusal—Appeal. 
Should the license collector refuse to issue such a permit, the applicant may file an appeal with the city clerk within ten days of the denial thereof. Within thirty days after filing an appeal, the council shall review the matter, applicant shall be given at least five days' notice of the time and place of such review. The review need not be a hearing de novo, but the applicant shall have the right to be heard. If the council determines that the proposed enterprise would be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety, morals or general welfare of the city or its inhabitants, either by reason of the character of the applicant or the nature of the business or enterprise, or the manner in which the business or enterprise is proposed to be operated, it shall refuse to issue such permit. If it is found that the public peace, health, safety, morals or general welfare will not be adversely affected by the issuance of the requested permit, the council shall order the same issued. The action of the council shall be final. 
(Prior code § 6303)  
5.04.260 - Permit—Posting or exhibiting. 
A.  Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be posted on the premises where the business or enterprise for which the permit is issued is conducted and shall remain so posted during the period the permit shall be in force. 
B.  Any permit issued to a person who goes from place to place within the city for the purpose of carrying on the business or activity permitted, shall carry such permit with him at all times, and shall exhibit the same upon request thereafter. 
(Prior code § 6304)  
5.04.270 - Permit—Duration. 
Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be for the same duration as the business license issued to such person or business pursuant to this code. 
(Prior code § 6305)  
5.04.280 - Permit—Renewal. 
Permits issued pursuant to this chapter may be renewed upon the filing of an application therefor with the license collector. The application for renewal shall be in the same form as an application for an original permit. It shall be issued or denied in a like manner as in the case of the original permit. 
(Prior code § 6306)  
5.04.290 - Permit—Fees. 
A filing and processing fee of fifteen dollars shall be submitted with each application for an original permit. For any renewal thereof, such fee shall be in the sum of ten dollars. 
(Prior code § 6307)  
5.04.300 - Permit—Transfer. 
No permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable except by consent of the city council expressed by a council minute order. Any transfer made without such consent shall void the permit. 
(Prior code § 6309)  
5.04.310 - Licenses/permits—Modification, suspension, and revocation. 
A.  The city council finds that the provisions of this section are to be used for those general business activities when there are no express provisions regulating the modification, suspension, and/or revocation of licenses and/or permits for a particular type of business. To the extent that this chapter may be in conflict with other chapters of this title which expressly provide for suspension, revocation or denial of a business license and/or permit for a specific type of business, the express provisions of that specific chapter shall control over the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Grounds for Suspension or Revocation. The license collector shall may suspend or revoke any license and/or permit issued pursuant to this chapter, if the license collector makes any of the following findings and/or determinations: 
1.  There exists any ground for denial of the license/permit pursuant to Section 5.04.110.B of this chapter. 
2.  The licensee/permittee or his/her agent, employee, partner, director, controlling stockholder, or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material facts in the application for a license or permit or in any report or record required to be filed by law; 
3.  The licensee/permittee or any employee, agent, or manager of the licensee/permittee, has violated or is violating any condition of approval imposed upon such license and/or permit, or upon any other entitlement granted by the city or other government agency; 
4.  The licensee/permittee or any employee, agent, or manager of the licensee/permittee has violated or is violating any ordinance, law, or regulation of the city, County of Los Angeles, State of California, or the United States of America, in the course of exercising any rights under the business license/permit; 
5.  The licensee/permittee, or any employee, agent, or manager of the licensee/permittee, has caused, allowed, suffered, or failed to exercise reasonable diligence and care to prevent the use of the business or the business premises as a base for unlawful or criminal activity, including, but not limited to, solicitation, prostitution, illegal gambling, or the use and/or sale of illegal narcotics; 
6.  The licensee/permittee, or any employee, agent, or manager of the licensee/permittee, operates the business in violation of any notice of denial, order of suspension, or order of revocation issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; 
7.  The licensee/permittee has been held liable for, or has been convicted of, any offense involving the maintenance of a nuisance resulting from any act performed in exercising any rights under the business license/permit; and/or 
8.  The continued operations under the license and/or permit would endanger, disrupt or otherwise be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety, morals or general welfare of the city or its inhabitants, or constitute a public nuisance. 
C.  Grounds for Summary Suspension or Revocation. The license collector shall summarily suspend or revoke any license and/or permit issued pursuant to this chapter, if the license collector determines that any ground for suspension or revocation pursuant to Section 5.04.310.B exists to the extent or degree that it creates an imminent peril to the public health, welfare, morals, or safety. 
D.  Order of Suspension/Revocation. 
1.  Suspension. The license collector shall serve a written order of suspension upon the licensee/permittee (in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.04.080 of this code) stating the grounds for suspension and informing the licensee/permittee of his/her appeal rights (including method and timeline for requesting appeal). The order shall also advise the licensee/permittee of the length of the suspension and the effective date of the suspension. 
a.  A license/permit may be suspended for a period not to exceed fifteen calendar days for each violation. 
2.  Revocation. The license collector shall serve a written order of revocation upon the licensee/permittee (in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.04.080 of this code) stating the grounds for revocation and informing the licensee/permittee of his/her appeal rights (including method and timeline for requesting appeal). The order shall also advise the licensee/permittee of the effective date of the revocation. 
E.  Effective Date of Suspension or Revocation. 
1.  General. Except as provided at Section 5.04.310.E.2, any license or permit suspended or revoked pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.04.310.B of this chapter shall become effective, and the licensee/permittee shall cease all operations authorized under such license and/or permit, no later than ten calendar days from the service of the order of suspension or order of revocation. Where an appeal is timely filed in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.04.310.F, the notice of suspension or notice of revocation shall be stayed pending the city council's resolution of the appeal pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  Summary Suspension/Revocation. Any license or permit suspended or revoked pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.04.310.C ("Summary Suspension/Revocation") of this chapter shall become effective immediately upon service of the order of summary suspension/revocation, and the licensee/permittee shall immediately cease all operations authorized under such license and/or permit, pending the city council's resolution of the appeal pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. A suspension or revocation pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.04.310.C shall not be stayed by the filing of a request for an appeal or during the pendency of an appeal thereof. 
F.  Appeal. 
1.  Request for Appeal. Any licensee/permittee may appeal any notice of denial, order of suspension, or order of revocation issued by the license collector by filing a request for an appeal with the city clerk, and tendering a filing and processing fee as set by resolution of the city council, within ten calendar days of service of the notice/order of such denial, suspension, or revocation. The request for an appeal must be made in writing and must contain the following information: 
a.  The name of the appellant and the address of the applicable business establishment where the appellant was authorized (or was seeking to be authorized) to conduct business pursuant to the license or permit that was denied or is subject to the order; 
b.  The date of denial, suspension, or revocation by the license collector; 
c.  A statement as to all grounds for appeal in sufficient detail to enable the city council to understand the nature of the controversy, however, a licensee/permittee may only challenge a summary suspension/revocation based upon the grounds for the suspension/revocation and not the license collector's determination that such grounds existed to the extent or degree that it creates an imminent peril to the public health, welfare, or safety; 
d.  The signature of the appellant under penalty of perjury as to the contents of the request for appeal. 
2.  Upon receipt of such written appeal and fee, the city clerk shall immediately set the matter for consideration by the city council at its next most convenient regular meeting, or otherwise transmit the appeal to the mayor for the purpose of calling a special meeting to consider the appeal, provided that no appeal hearing related to a suspension or revocation pursuant to Section 5.04.310.C shall be commenced in excess of thirty days from the timely filing of a request for appeal and payment of applicable fees without the consent of the appellant. The city clerk shall issue written notice of the time and place of an appeal hearing to the appellant at least seven consecutive calendar days' prior thereto. If a request for an appeal is not timely submitted (with all applicable fees) to the city clerk, the notice of denial, order of suspension, or order of revocation shall be deemed final and binding, and the licensee/permittee shall be deemed to have failed to exhaust all administrative remedies. 
3.  Appeal Hearing. An appeal hearing conducted pursuant to the provisions of this section, shall comply with the following: 
a.  The appeal hearing shall proceed solely on those issues or defenses raised in the request for an appeal filed by the appellant, and all matters not contested in said request shall be deemed admitted into evidence; 
b.  The city shall have the burden to establish the grounds for the denial, suspension, or revocation that has been contested by the appellant by a preponderance of the evidence. The notice of denial, order of suspension, or order of revocation (and all documents or reports relied upon and/or prepared in relation to the notice or order) shall be admitted into evidence and shall constitute prima facie evidence of the grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation; 
c.  The appellant shall be given an opportunity to testify and to present written and/or oral evidence relevant to the matters raised in the request for an appeal filed by the appellant, and shall have the right to examine and cross-examine any documents and witnesses presented by the city in support of the denial, suspension or revocation. The unexcused failure of the appellant to appear at the appeal hearing shall constitute a withdrawal of his/her request for an appeal hearing and the denial, suspension, or revocation as issued by the license collector shall be deemed final and binding; 
d.  Appeals hearings are to be conducted informally, and formal rules of evidence need not be followed; 
e.  Written notice of the city council's determination of whether to suspend, revoke, reinstate or conditionally reinstate the license and/or permit shall be issued to the appealing party within ten business days of the decision. The determination of the city council shall be final and conclusive; 
f.  The licensee/permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative actions in a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law, pursuant to Section 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. 2272 § 8, 2004: prior code § 6308) 
(Ord. No. 2338, § 3, 10-27-2010)  
5.04.320 - Unlawful business. 
No license or permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be construed as authorizing the conduct of or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business or practice, or the furnishing, sale, provisioning of any service, good, or product that is illegal under this code, the laws of the County of Los Angeles, the laws of the State of California, and the laws of the United States of America. Licenses issued to an unlawful business or businesses providing or selling illegal services or products shall be subject to revocation in accordance with this code. 
(Prior code § 6106) 
(Ord. No. 2338, § 4, 10-27-2010)  
5.04.330 - License/Permit nontransferable. 
No license or permit issued hereunder shall be transferred to or assigned, nor shall such be construed as authorizing any person other than the licensee or permittee, to engage in the licensed business, except as hereinafter provided 
(Prior code § 6107)  
5.04.340 - Taxes—Amounts to be collected—Mistakes. 
In no event shall any mistake, made by the license collector in stating the amount of the tax or receiving such tax, prevent or prejudice the collection by the city of the amount of tax actually due, together with any penalty applicable thereto, and all costs of collection, from any person for conducting any business activity without a license or for refusing to pay the taxes specified herein. Overpayments, erroneous or duplicate payments, shall be reimbursed upon approval of the city council. 
(Prior code § 6108)  
5.04.350 - Taxes—Penalties for failure to pay tax when due. 
For failure to pay a tax when due, the license collector shall add a penalty of ten percent of the amount of such tax on the last calendar day of each month after the due date thereof. In no event shall any penalty imposed hereunder exceed an amount equal to one hundred percent of such tax. 
(Prior code § 6109)  
5.04.360 - Amount due considered debt. 
The amount of any tax, penalty and filing and processing fee imposed hereunder, shall be deemed to be a debt to the city. Any person carrying on any business without first having procured a license from the city to do so, shall be liable to the city for an amount equal to the amount of such tax, penalty and filing and processing fee, if any, together with all appropriate costs of collection, including reasonable attorney fees, if litigation is reasonably required to collect the same. 
(Prior code § 6110)  
5.04.370 - Failure to pay required amount—Collection. 
All amounts due and unpaid, as and for business license taxes, penalties, filing and processing fees, and all appropriate costs of collection, including reasonable attorney fees, shall be collectable by civil actions filed in the name of the city. All remedies prescribed or permitted by law shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions hereof. 
(Prior code § 6111)  
5.04.380 - Failure to obtain license/permit—Conviction—Effect on debt. 
The conviction and punishment of any person having engaged in business without a license and/or permit, as required by this title, shall not excuse or exempt such person from the payment of any business license tax, penalty, any applicable filing and processing fee, and costs of collection due and unpaid at the time of such conviction. 
(Prior code § 6114)  
5.04.390 - Enforcement authority. 
The license collector/finance services supervisor, and any city police officer or firefighter shall have, and may exercise the authority to, enter, free of charge, at any time, any place of business for which a license and/or permit is required hereunder, and to demand the exhibition of a current license and/or permit by any person engaged or employed in the transaction of such business. Failure to exhibit such license and/or permit upon demand shall be deemed to be a violation of the provisions of this title. 
(Prior code § 6113)  
5.04.400 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the penalty therefor, as set forth in Chapter 1.12 of this code. Any such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which a portion of which a violation of the provisions of this title is committed, continued, or permitted to be continued, by such person. 
(Prior code § 6112)  
5.04.410 - Reapplication following denial, suspension, or revocation. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, and except as provided otherwise in this section, no business license shall be issued to any individual or organization, or to any employee or agent thereof, during a period of license restriction. As used herein, "period of license restriction" means a period of twenty-four months commencing immediately upon the effective and final date of denial, suspension, or revocation of the business license for that individual or organization. 
B.  Prior to issuing any business license, the license collector may request that an applicant provide additional information and/or documentation that the license collector reasonably deems necessary to determine whether the applicant is an agent or employee of an individual or organization subject to a period of license restriction. An applicant's failure or refusal to provide such information or documentation shall constitute grounds for denial of the business license application. 
C.  Any individual or organization, or employee or agent thereof, may apply for relief from the period of license restriction by filing an appeal in the manner set forth in Section 5.04.310.F. herein. Upon such filing, the city council shall conduct a hearing on the appeal in the manner, and according to the timeline, set forth in Section 5.04.310.F of this chapter. If the city council determines that good cause exists, the individual or organization, and employees or agents thereof, shall not be subject to any period of license restriction as specified in this section. Otherwise, the period of license restriction shall remain binding upon the individual or organization, and employees or agents thereof, subject to subsequent appeals which may be filed no more frequently than once every six months from the date of the last city council denial. As used herein, "good cause" exists when the city council makes each of the following determinations and/or findings: 
1.  The appellant has demonstrated that all circumstances and/or conditions which gave rise to the original business license suspension or revocation have been fully and satisfactorily cured or corrected; 
2.  The appellant has demonstrated proof of his/her commitment and ability to prevent such circumstances from reoccurring, and to prevent any other violations from occurring; 
3.  Neither the appellant nor any other individuals employed by or associated with the proposed business are subject to any civil, criminal, or administrative proceedings which would affect the business's good standing; 
4.  The appellant has demonstrated that the proposed business is materially different from that originally licensed or, if not materially different, will be subject to standards of operation which would prevent violations from occurring or reoccurring; 
5.  The appellant has demonstrated that the proposed business will be sited at a different location from that originally licensed or, if it will be sited at the same location, sufficient modifications to the location have been or will be made which would prevent violations from occurring or reoccurring; and 
6.  The appellant has demonstrated that all other necessary permits, entitlements, and approvals for the proposed business have been approved and are in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2338, § 5, 10-27-2010)  
Chapter 5.08 - BUSINESS LICENSE TAXES[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2331, §§ 1—5, adopted June 24, 2009, repealed former §§ 5.08.010—5.08.030, 5.08.050 and 5.08.060, and enacted new §§ 5.08.010—5.08.030, 5.08.050 and 5.08.060 as set out herein. The repealed sections pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
 
5.08.010 - Designated. 
A.  The following businesses, occupations and professions shall be required to pay, as and for business license taxes, the amounts hereinafter set forth in this section, pertaining thereto: 
1.  Advertising vehicle: Fifty-one dollars and thirty-three cents per vehicle, per day; 
2.  Rental of real property: Residential property, excluding condominiums, having an apartment house (as defined in Chapter 17.08 of this code) located thereon, with three or more dwelling units therein: five hundred fifteen dollars and twenty-two cents per year and one hundred seventy-one dollars and seventy-four cents per year for each additional unit; 
3.  Auctions: One hundred fifty-two dollars per day unless conducted as an integral part of a business otherwise licensed hereunder; 
4.  Business by vehicle: 
a.  Refuse trucks: Six hundred seventy-six dollars and ten cents per year for each vehicle; 
b.  All others: One hundred forty-seven dollars and seven cents per year per vehicle; 
5.  Contractors: Seventy-three dollars and four cents per quarter, two hundred ninety-two dollars and sixteen cents per year; 
6.  Junk dealer, automobile or truck dismantler: Five hundred sixty-eight dollars and fifty-two cents per year; 
7.  Outdoor advertising signs: 
a.  Outdoor advertising on signs: Two hundred eighty-four dollars and twenty-six cents per year (plus twenty-two dollars and seventy-one cents per year for each sign in excess of ten); 
b.  Advertising on benches: Two hundred eighty-four dollars and twenty-six cents per year (plus twenty-two dollars and seventy-one cents per year for each sign in excess of ten) (excluding benches which contain no advertising); 
8.  Peddler, solicitor, or itinerant vendor: Two hundred eighty-four dollars and twenty-six cents per year; 
9.  Public dump: One thousand three hundred thirty-eight dollars and thirty-eight cents per month or two percent of the gross receipts derived therefrom, whichever is greater; 
10.  The activities for which a temporary use permit is required hereunder pursuant to Chapter 12.16 of this code, shall pay the following taxes: 
a. Circuses, per day 
Per mechanical ride 	$165.82 
50.34 
b. Parades per day 	130.29 
c. Carnivals per day 
Per mechanical ride 	165.82 
50.34 
d. Fairs, per event 	130.29 
e. Temporary outdoor exhibits per day 
Montebello businesses exempt 	130.29 
f. Tents, per event (if over 20 × 20) 
Montebello businesses, per event 	130.29 
70.08 
g. Aircraft and helicopter landings and demonstrations per day 	130.29 
h. Public demonstration of gatherings of more than 25 people, per day 	165.82 
i. Christmas trees/pumpkin patch sales, per year 	130.29 
j. Moving and/or estate sales, per day 	30.60 
k. Filming, per day 	165.82 
 
11.  Dance permit: Every person who is required to obtain a dance permit for a public dance or cabaret dance pursuant to Chapter 5.32 of this code, shall pay a business license tax as follows: 
a.  Public dance: One hundred thirty-six dollars and twenty-one cents per day for each day and for each location at which such dance is conducted, 
b.  Cabaret, per year: Two thousand three hundred forty-four dollars and thirteen cents per year for each location at which such dance is conducted; 
12.  Pool or billiard rooms or halls: The rate of license fees for billiard rooms or halls and pool rooms shall be forty-three dollars and forty-three cents for each billiard, pool or snooker table per year; 
13.  Oil well operator: A tax equal to $.3329 per barrel of oil produced from wells owned or operated by such person located within the city; 
14.  Shoe shine stands: Fifty-one dollars and thirty-three cents per year; 
15.  Vending machines: Every individual or firm whose business is limited exclusively to renting, leasing or operating coin-operated vending machines dispensing tangible personal property, shall pay a tax based on the entire gross receipts which are directly attributable to the business activities conducted within the city, and no minimum license tax shall be imposed upon any business location, nor shall such license tax be measured by the number of business locations or machines of the taxpayer within the city. The city may demand an audit of any such licensee and require him or her to submit a copy of the state sales and use tax return filed relative to such machines; 
16.  Child care center (as defined in Chapter 17.08 of this code) nine children and more: Fifty-one dollars and thirty-three cents per year; 
17.  Mechanical amusement device or amusement game machine: One hundred seventy-two dollars and seventy-three cents per device or machine per year; 
18.  Fortune telling, as regulated and defined in Chapter 5.44 of this code: Seven hundred eighty-eight dollars and sixty-two cents. 
B.  Except where otherwise stated, the tax imposed by this section shall be increased or decreased annually as of July 1st of each calendar year, commencing on July 1, 1979, in an amount equal to the increase or decrease from the base index in the then latest available consumer price index, as prepared and released by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Statistics, for the Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County area. The last index published for the month of June 1978 shall be deemed to be the base index for the purpose of this section. 
(Ord. 2319 § 1, 2008: Ord. 2305 § 1, 2007: Ord. 2293 § 1, 2006: Ord. 2286 § 1, 2005: Ord. 2272 § 1, 2004: Ord. 2257 § 1, 2003: Ord. 2241 § 1, 2002; Ord. 2224 § 1, 2001: prior code § 69200) 
(Ord. No. 2331, § 1, 6-24-2009)  
5.08.020 - Additional tax based on gross receipts. 
A.  Each person engaged in a business, occupation or profession, in addition to the business license taxes imposed by Section 5.08.010, shall pay a business license tax based upon the annual gross receipts of such business, occupation or profession for the preceding calendar year, in accordance with the following schedule, plus eighty cents per one thousand dollars or fractional part thereof over one million dollars of all gross receipts: 
Over 	To and Including 	Fee 
$ 0 	$ 25,000 	$ 133.25 
25,001 	50,000 	154.96 
50,001 	100,000 	210.24 
100,001 	150,000 	260.57 
150,001 	200,000 	311.90 
200,001 	300,000 	362.23 
300,001 	400,000 	414.54 
400,001 	600,000 	520.15 
600,001 	800,000 	691.89 
800,001 	1,000,000 	1,038.33 
1,000,001 	Over 	1,380.82 
 
B.  The taxes imposed by this section shall be increased or decreased annually as of July 1st of each calendar year, commencing on July 1, 1979, in an amount equal to the increase or decrease from the base index in the then latest available consumer price index, as prepared and released by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Statistics, for the Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County area. The last index published for the month of June 1978 shall be deemed to be the base index for the purpose of this section. 
(Ord. 2319 § 2, 2008: Ord. 2305 § 2, 2007: Ord. 2293 § 2, 2006: Ord. 2286 § 2, 2005: Ord. 2272 § 2, 2004: Ord. 2257 § 2, 2003: Ord. 2241 § 2, 2002; Ord. 2224 § 2, 2001: prior code § 6201) 
(Ord. No. 2331, § 2, 6-24-2009)  
5.08.030 - Suspension of a portion of certain business license taxes. 
A.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 5.08.010(A)(2) of this code, during the period July 1, 2009 through and including June 30, 2010, the business license tax to be collected pursuant to that subsection, shall not exceed the following: 
Residential property, excluding condominiums having an apartment house (as defined in Chapter 17.08 hereof) located thereon, with three or more dwelling units therein. 	$150.00 per year, plus $50.00 for each additional unit over three 
 
B.  That during such time as this section of the Montebello Municipal Code is in effect, the amount of the business license tax imposed by said Section 5.08.010(A)(2) contrary to the amount above set forth, shall be suspended, and shall not be collected. 
(Ord. 2324 § 1, 2008: Ord. 2319 § 3, 2008: Ord. 2305 § 3, 2007: Ord. 2293 § 3, 2006: Ord. 2286 § 3, 2005: Ord. 2272 § 3, 2004: Ord. 2257 § 3, 2003: Ord. 2241 § 3, 2002; Ord. 2224 § 3, 2001: Ord. 2207 § 1, 2000: Ord. 2191 § 1, 1999: Ord. 2173A § 1, 1998: Ord. 2165 § 1, 1997: Ord. 2142 § 1, 1996: Ord. 2125 § 1, 1995: Ord. 2110 § 1, 1994: Ord. 2105 § 1, 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2331, § 3, 6-24-2009)  
5.08.050 - Suspension of a portion of certain business license taxes. 
A.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 5.08.010(A)(17) of this code, during the period July 1, 2009, through and including June 30, 2010, the business license tax to be collected pursuant to that said subdivision, from persons engaged in the business of mechanical amusement devices or amusement game machines, shall not exceed the following: 
Mechanical amusement device or amusement game machine: fifty-four dollars per device or machine per year. 
B.  That during such time as this section of the Montebello Municipal Code is in effect, the amount of the business license tax imposed by said Section 5.08.010(A)(17) contrary to the amount above set forth, shall be suspended, and shall not be collected. 
(Ord. 2319 § 4, 2008: Ord. 2305 § 4, 2007: Ord. 2293 § 4, 2006: Ord. 2286 § 4, 2005: Ord. 2272 § 4, 2004: Ord. 2257 § 4, 2003: Ord. 2241 § 4, 2002; Ord. 2224 § 4, 2001: Ord. 2207 § 2, 2000: Ord. 2191 § 2, 1999: Ord. 2173A § 2, 1998: Ord. 2165 § 2, 1997: Ord. 2142 § 2, 1996: Ord. 2125 § 3, 1995: Ord. 2110 § 3, 1994: Ord. 2105 § 5, 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2331, § 4, 6-24-2009)  
5.08.060 - Suspension of a portion of certain business license taxes. 
A.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 5.08.020 of this code during the period of July 1, 2009, through and including June 30, 2010, the business license tax to be collected pursuant to that said section shall not exceed the following: 
Each person engaged in a business, occupation or profession, in addition to the business license taxes imposed by Section 5.08.010 hereof, shall pay a business license tax based upon the annual gross receipts of such business, occupation or profession for the following schedule, plus forty-six cents per one thousand dollars or fractional part thereof over one million dollars of all annual gross receipts to five million dollars, and thirty-five cents per one thousand dollars or fractional part thereof over five million dollars, with the maximum not to exceed nine thousand three hundred seventy-six dollars. 
Over 	To and Including 	Fee 
$ 0 	$ 25,000 	$ 124.00 
25,001 	50,000 	142.00 
50,001 	100,000 	192.00 
100,001 	150,000 	240.00 
150,001 	200,000 	289.00 
200,001 	300,000 	336.00 
300,001 	400,000 	384.00 
400,001 	600,000 	480.00 
600,001 	800,000 	640.00 
800,001 	1,000,000 	961.00 
1,000,001 	Over 	1,324.00 
 
B.  That during such time as this section of the Montebello Municipal Code is in effect, the amount of the business license tax based on gross receipts imposed by said Section 5.08.020, contrary to the amount above set forth, shall be suspended, and shall not be collected. 
(Ord. 2319 § 5, 2008: Ord. 2305 § 5, 2007: Ord. 2293 § 5, 2006: Ord. 2286 § 5, 2005: Ord. 2272 § 5, 2004: Ord. 2257 § 5, 2003: Ord. 2241 § 5, 2002; Ord. 2224 § 5, 2001: Ord. 2207 § 3, 2000: Ord. 2191 § 3, 1999: Ord. 2173A § 3, 1998: Ord. 2165 § 3, 1997: Ord. 2142 § 3, 1996: Ord. 2125 § 4, 1995: Ord. 2110 § 4, 1994: Ord. 2105 § 7, 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2331, § 5, 6-24-2009)  
Chapter 5.12 - BINGO 
Sections: 
 
5.12.010 - Intent. 
Nothing contained herein is intended to or shall be construed to prohibit the playing, maintaining or operating of any bingo game as if played, maintained or operated in accordance with all provisions of Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code and of Chapter IV of the Montebello Municipal Code. As used herein, "bingo" means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random. 
(Prior code § 4213.1)  
5.12.020 - License—Required. 
No person shall maintain or operate a bingo game, as the term "bingo" is defined in Section 5.12.010, unless a license for such game has been obtained pursuant to this chapter and is in full force and effect, and such game is maintained or operated in compliance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code and each term and condition of the license issued therefor. No person shall play in a bingo game unless a license for such game has been issued pursuant to this chapter and is in full force and effect. 
(Prior code § 4213.2)  
5.12.030 - License—Application form—Filing. 
Eligible organizations under Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code desiring to obtain such license to conduct bingo games in the city shall file an application in writing therefor in the office of the finance director on a form to be provided by the finance director. The license issued shall be for a term of one year from the date of issuance, subject to renewal and annual fee. 
(Prior code § 4213.3)  
5.12.040 - License—Application—Contents. 
The application for license shall contain the following: 
A.  The name of the applicant organization and a statement that applicant is an eligible organization; 
B.  The name and signature of at least two officers of the organization which will conduct the bingo game; 
C.  The particular property within the city, including street number, owned or leased by the applicant, used by such applicant for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the applicant is organized, on which property bingo games will be conducted, together with the occupancy capacity of such place; 
D.  Acknowledgement by applicant of the requirement to notify the chief of police in writing of the location, time and date of any bingo games at least forty-eight hours in advance of such operation and that the operation of such bingo sessions shall be conducted only between the hours of twelve p.m. and twelve a.m. with a six-consecutive-hour maximum per session per day; 
E.  Acknowledgement by the applicant that current and accurate records shall be kept of all bingo games and such records shall be available for on-site inspection at any time or the applicant may be required to submit the records for audit by the director of finance upon his request. On or before the fifteenth day of each month, the licensee shall report on the forms prescribed by the finance department an accounting of all receipts and expenditures for the prior calendar month; 
F.  That the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code and this chapter as they may be amended from time to time and agrees that the license to conduct bingo games may be revoked by the city manager, or his designated representative, upon violation of any such provisions; 
G.  The application shall be signed by a duly authorized officer (or trustee if applicant is a trust) of the applicant under penalty of perjury; 
H.  At the time of filing application for a bingo license or upon renewal thereof, a fee of fifty dollars shall be paid. One-half of such fee shall be refundable to any organization denied a bingo license. An additional fee for law enforcement costs incurred by the city that are directly related to bingo activities may be imposed and shall be collected monthly by the city; however, the fee shall not exceed the actual costs incurred in providing the services; 
I.  The applicant shall also submit, with its application, a certificate of determination of exemption under Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code, or a letter of good standing from the Exemption Division of the Franchise Tax Board in Sacramento, showing exemption under Section 326.5. 
(Ord. 2218 § 1, 2000; prior code § 4213.4) 
(Ord. No. 2350, § 1, 5-8-2013)  
5.12.050 - License—Application—Investigation. 
Upon receipt of the completed application and the fee, the finance director shall refer the same to interested departments of the city, including, but not limited to, the city manager, police department, planning department, and the fire department for investigation as to whether or not all the statements in the application are true and whether or not the property of the applicant qualifies and the extent to which it qualifies, as property on which bingo games may be lawfully be conducted, as to fire, occupancy and other applicable restrictions. 
(Prior code § 4213.5)  
5.12.060 - License—Issuance—Contents. 
Upon being satisfied that the applicant is fully qualified, under the law, to conduct bingo games in the city, the city manager shall instruct the finance officer to issue a license to the applicant, which shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name and nature of the organization to whom the license is issued; 
B.  The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted; 
C.  The occupancy capacity of the room in which bingo games are to be conducted; 
D.  The date of the expiration of such license; 
E.  Such other information including conditions as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 4213.6)  
5.12.070 - License—Denial—Reasons. 
If the city manager, or his designated representative, finds that the issuance of a bingo game license will endanger or jeopardize the public peace, safety, health and general welfare, he shall decline to issue such license. 
(Prior code § 4213.7)  
5.12.080 - License—Application or suspension—Notice of decision. 
Within ten days after reaching a determination with reference to a license application, or suspension of a license, the city shall give written notice of his decision to the applicant. 
(Prior code § 4213.8)  
5.12.090 - License—Term. 
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. 
(Prior code § 4213.11)  
5.12.100 - License—Fee—Renewal. 
A license fee of fifty dollars is fixed and imposed upon each organization authorized hereunder for each year or any portion thereof during which a license shall be in effect pursuant to this chapter. Such license fee shall not be apportioned or prorated for any period of less than a year. A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be renewable, in the absence of revocation or grounds for revocation, during the thirty-day period prior to its expiration. The licensee may apply for renewal on a form prescribed by the finance director accompanied by payment of the annual license fee. If it appears that there are grounds for revocation, the license renewal may be denied; provided, however, that the procedure specified in Section 5.12.070 with respect to revocation shall be followed in connection with denial of renewal on such grounds. A license not so renewed shall expire automatically at the end of the license year. The amount of the license fee is found to be not more than the actual cost of issuing a license hereunder. 
(Prior code § 4213.13)  
5.12.110 - License—Transfer. 
No license issued hereunder shall be transferable. 
(Prior code § 4213.12)  
5.12.120 - Appeals. 
A.  Any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the city, with reference to the issuance, conditional issuance or denial of a license, shall have the right of appeal, within ten consecutive calendar days after the service of written notice of the city's action. Such appeal shall be in writing, briefly stating therein the basis for such appeal, and shall be filed with the city clerk. Upon receipt of such letter of appeal, the city clerk shall immediately set the matter for consideration by the council at its next most convenient meeting, and give the appealing party at least five consecutive calendar days written notice of the time and place of such hearing. 
B.  At the time and place set for the hearing upon the appeal, the city council shall give the appealing party, and any other interested party, a reasonable opportunity to be heard. In all such cases, the burden of proof to show that the action of the city was arbitrary, capricious or in excess of his authority, shall be upon the appealing party. The determination of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 4213.9)  
5.12.130 - License—Suspension—Revocation. 
A.  The city shall suspend any license issued hereunder, if it finds that the license or such licensee's agent and/or employees, have been, or are: violating any condition of approval imposed upon such license; or violating any provisions of this code, or other applicable law; or that the continued operations under the license would endanger, jeopardize or disrupt the public peace, safety, health or general welfare; or any other cause, as set forth in this chapter. 
B.  The determination of the city with regard to matters of suspension shall be appealable to the city council in the time and manner set forth in Section 5.12.120. 
C.  The city, in the case of such suspension, shall serve, the licensee with a written order of suspension, which shall state the reasons for such suspension. The order shall be effective immediately upon the same having been personally served, or forty-eight hours after the same has been deposited in the course of transmission in the United States Postal Service. 
D.  Immediately upon such an order becoming effective, the licensee shall cease all operations authorized under such license. Where an appeal is timely filed, no further operations shall be deemed authorized pursuant to such license, until such appeal is fully determined. 
E.  The order of suspension shall be deemed a revocation of a license unless the licensee within ten consecutive calendar days after the order is deposited in the course of transmission in the United States Postal Service, files an appeal from the order, in the manner hereinbefore prescribed. 
F.  Where an appeal is taken, the city council shall act upon the same in the time and manner set forth in Section 5.12.120. The action of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
G.  Any organization whose license is finally revoked may not apply for a license to conduct bingo games in the city for a period of one year from the date of such revocation; provided, however, if the ground for revocation is cancellation of the exemption granted under Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code, such organization may again apply for a license upon proof of reinstatement of the exemption. 
(Prior code § 4213.10)  
5.12.140 - City may enjoin violations. 
The city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a violation of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code or of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 4213.14)  
Chapter 5.13 - REMOTE CALLER BINGO 
 
5.13.010 - Legislative authorization. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to Section 19 of Article IV of the California Constitution, as implemented by Sections 326.3 and 326.4 of the Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2358, § 1, 4-9-2014)  
5.13.020 - Remote caller bingo authorized. 
"Remote caller bingo," as defined in Penal Code § 326.3(u)(1), may be lawfully played in the city pursuant to the provisions of Sections 326.3 and 326.4 of the Penal Code, and this chapter, and not otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2358, § 1, 4-9-2014)  
5.13.030 - Qualified applicants: applications for licensing. 
A.  The following organizations are qualified to apply for a remote caller bingo license to operate a remote caller bingo game if the receipts of those games are used only for charitable purposes: 
(1)  An organization exempt from the payment of the taxes imposed under the Corporation Tax Law by Section 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, 23701k, 23701/, or 23701w of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(2)  Senior citizen organizations. 
(3)  Charitable organizations affiliated with a school district. 
(b)  A qualified organization shall comply with all provisions of Chapter 5.13 and be issued a remote caller bingo license prior to conducting remote caller bingo games. The application shall be in a form prescribed by the city and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee in an amount determined by resolution of the city council from time to time. The following documentation shall be attached to the application, as applicable: 
(1)  A certificate issued by the franchise tax board certifying that the applicant is exempt from the payment of the taxes imposed under the Corporation Tax Law pursuant to Section 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, 23701k, 23701/, or 23701w of the Revenue and Taxation Code. In lieu of a certificate issued by the franchise tax board, the city may refer to the franchise tax board's internet website to verify that the applicant is exempt from the payment of the taxes imposed under the Corporation Tax Law. 
(2)  Other evidence as the city determines is necessary to verify that the applicant is qualified to operate remote caller bingo within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2358, § 1, 4-9-2014)  
5.13.040 - License application: verification. 
The license shall not be issued until the city has verified the facts stated in the application and determined that the applicant is qualified. 
(Ord. No. 2358, § 1, 4-9-2014)  
5.13.050 - Annual licenses. 
A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance, at which time the license shall expire. A new license shall only be obtained upon filing a new application and payment of the license fee. The fact that a license has been issued to an applicant creates no vested right on the part of the licensee to continue to offer bingo for play. The city council expressly reserves the right to amend or repeal this chapter at any time by ordinance or resolution as applicable. If this chapter is repealed, all licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall cease to be effective for any purpose on the effective date of the repealing resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2358, § 1, 4-9-2014)  
5.13.060 - Conditions of license. 
A.  Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the conditions contained in Sections 326.3 and 326.4 of the Penal Code, and each licensee shall comply with the requirements of those provisions. 
B.  Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the following additional conditions: 
(1)  Bingo games shall not be conducted by any licensee on more than two days during any week, except that a licensee may hold one additional game, at its election, in each calendar quarter. 
(2)  The licensed organization is responsible for ensuring that the conditions of this chapter and Sections 326.3 and 326.4 of the Penal Code are complied with by the organization and its officers and members. A violation of any one or more of those conditions or provisions shall constitute cause for the revocation of the organization's license. 
C.  In all respects the process of application, issuance, denial, term, renewal, transfer, appeal, suspension, revocation, or other action to enjoin a violation of Section of the Penal Code or of this chapter shall be governed by Chapter 5.12. 
(Ord. No. 2358, § 1, 4-9-2014)  
Chapter 5.16 - CAMPGROUND OR TRAILER PARKS 
Sections: 
 
5.16.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be construed as herein set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
A.  "Camp car" or "Trailer" means any unit used for living or sleeping purposes which is equipped with wheels or similar devices used for the purpose of transporting the unit from place to place, whether by motive power or other means. 
B.  "Campground" or "trailer park" means a parcel of land designed, intended or maintained for the purpose of supplying a location or accommodation for any trailer, and upon which any trailer is parked, and shall include all buildings used or intended for use as part of the equipment of such trailer park whether or not a change is made for the use of the trailer park and its facilities. Trailer park shall not be construed to include automobile or trailer sales lots on which unoccupied trailers are parked for purposes of inspection and sale. 
(Prior code §§ 6404, 6404.1 and 6404.2)  
5.16.020 - Compliance with provisions. 
No person shall park any trailer on any street or other public place, or park or occupy any trailer on any tract of land, occupied or unoccupied, or establish, operate or maintain any campground or trailer park, except as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6404.11)  
5.16.030 - Permit required. 
No person shall operate or maintain, or offer for public use, any campground without first applying for and receiving from the city council a permit so to do, in the manner hereinafter provided, which permit shall be in full force and effect, and without complying with regulations hereinafter set forth, and any rules and regulations which may be formulated by the health department or city council from time to time and the laws of the state. 
(Prior code § 6404.4)  
5.16.040 - Permit—Application—Inspection fee. 
Each application for such permit shall be in writing, upon a form provided by the city clerk for that purpose. It shall state the name and address of the applicant and a description of the property wherein or wherein it is proposed to conduct a campground. It shall also contain such other information as the health department or city council may require and it shall be filed by the applicant with the city clerk not less than three days, nor more than six days before the campground is made ready for use, and it shall be accompanied by an inspection fee of two dollars for which the city clerk shall issue a receipt. 
(Prior code § 6404.5)  
5.16.050 - Inspection fees—Disposition. 
All monies received by the city clerk as inspection fees, under provisions of this chapter shall be paid into the city treasury and placed in the general fund. 
(Prior code § 6404.6)  
5.16.060 - Permit—Application—Investigation—Determination. 
Upon filing of such application accompanied by the inspection fee, it shall be the duty of the health department or any of its duly authorized representatives to investigate the premises and determine whether the proposed campground or the site selected therefor conforms with the requirements of this code, the rules and regulations of the health department and the laws of the state, and no permit shall be issued unless such campground or the site selected therefor complies with such requirements and meets the approval of the health department and the department may at its discretion recommend the approval or rejection of any proposed campground site. 
(Prior code § 6404.7)  
5.16.070 - Permit—Transfer. 
Such permit shall be transferable only upon the written application of the holder of the permit to the city council with its consent. 
(Prior code § 6404.9)  
5.16.080 - Permit—Posting. 
No person shall establish, maintain, conduct or carry on any campground unless there shall be at all times posted in a conspicuous place at the campground the permit obtained from the city council in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6404.10)  
5.16.090 - Permit—Revocation or suspension. 
Any permit granted hereunder shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the city council in the following manner. A notice shall be served on the person holding the permit specifying wherein he has failed to comply with this code, and requiring him to appear before the city council at a day and hour therein specified, not less than five days after the personal service of the notice on such permit holder, requiring him to show cause at the time and place why the permit should not be revoked or suspended. At the time and place mentioned in the notice, the person holding the permit shall have the right to appear in person, or by counsel, and to introduce such evidence as he may desire, and after the hearing the city council may, at its discretion, revoke or suspend the permit. 
(Prior code § 6404.8)  
5.16.100 - Trailers—Registration. 
No trailer parked on any premises shall be occupied by any person for more than fifteen days in any calendar year unless such trailer shall have been registered with the Motor Vehicle Department of the state for such calendar year. 
(Prior code § 6404.12)  
5.16.110 - Trailers—Emergency parking. 
Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any street for not longer than twenty-four hours, subject, however, to any other and further prohibitions, regulations or limitations imposed by the traffic and parking regulations governing the use of the streets. 
(Prior code § 6404.13)  
5.16.120 - Trailers—Parking on private property. 
No trailer shall be parked on any premises other than a licensed campground or trailer park, and no person shall occupy any trailer parked on any premises other than a licensed campground or trailer park; excepting, however, that any trailer owned by the owner or occupant of any premises may be parked on such premises owned or occupied by such person, and a trailer owned by a guest of such owner or occupant of any premises may be parked on such premises and occupied by such guest; provided, however, that altogether any and all such parkings and occupancies on any such property by any guest shall not exceed a total of fifteen days in any calendar year. The owner or occupant of any such premises, immediately after the entry on such premises of any trailer owned by a guest shall report to the building department the date of such entry, the registration number of such trailer, and immediately after the departure of such trailer shall report the date of such departure, and failure of such owner or occupant of any such premises to make any such report shall constitute prima facie evidence of the existence of such parking and occupancy for a period of fifteen days in such calendar year. 
(Prior code § 6404.14)  
5.16.130 - Trailers—Parking in yards. 
No trailer parked on any premises other than a licensed campground or trailer park shall be parked within the required front, side or rear yards, or other required unoccupied spaces of a lot in the zoning district where such trailer is parked. 
(Prior code § 6404.15)  
5.16.140 - Sanitation and housing development regulation development. 
The health department is empowered to formulate from time to time and to enforce any rules and regulations that the department may deem advisable governing the operation of campgrounds or camp cars and/or trailers bearing on any matters of sanitation or housing. 
(Prior code § 6404.16)  
5.16.150 - Minimum ground area for trailers. 
No camp car or trailer in any campground shall be located within ten feet of any other camp car or trailer or structure, nor shall any camp car or trailer be located within fifteen feet of any lot line. Camp cars or trailers shall be arranged in rows abutting or facing on a driveway or clear unoccupied space of not less than ten feet in width, which space shall have unobstructed access to a public street or alley. 
(Prior code § 6404.17)  
5.16.160 - Dogs—Running at large prohibited. 
Dogs at no time shall be permitted to run at large in any campground. 
(Prior code § 6404.21)  
5.16.170 - Grading and drainage. 
Every campground hereafter established shall be located on a well-drained area and the premises of every such campground or any existing campground shall be properly graded so as to prevent the accumulation of storm or casual waters. 
(Prior code § 6404.18)  
5.16.180 - Water supply. 
An adequate supply of pure water for drinking and domestic purposes shall be supplied to meet the requirements of any campground. The water supply shall be obtained from faucets only, conveniently located in the campground, and no dipping vessels or common cups shall be permitted. 
(Prior code § 6404.19)  
5.16.190 - Removal of wheels or similar devices. 
No person owning or operating a camp car or trailer located in a campground shall remove the wheels or any similar transporting devices from the camp car or trailer or otherwise permanently fix it to the ground in a manner that would prevent the ready removal of the camp car or trailer, without first obtaining a permit so to do, from the building department. Any alteration to any camp car or trailer, as above set forth shall be construed as removing it from the requirements of this chapter and converting it into a dwelling and it shall thereupon be subject to the requirements of the building code of the city and State Housing Act. 
(Prior code § 6404.20)  
5.16.200 - Toilets. 
There shall be provided in every campground one water closet for each sex. One of such water closets shall be distinctly marked "men" and one of such water closets shall be distinctly marked "women" and there shall be not less than one closet for each fifteen or fractional part of fifteen persons of each sex living in the campground existing at the effective date of this section from fully complying with the provisions of the section when, in its discretion, such deviation will not be detrimental to the health of persons occupying the campground or to the proper sanitation of the premises. The floors of every water closet compartment thereafter installed shall be constructed of cement or some other nonabsorbent material, the wall shall be a smooth, hard and durable material; and the interiors shall be well painted at all times. 
(Prior code § 6404.22)  
5.16.210 - Garbage receptacles. 
There shall be provided in every campground, such number of metal receptacles with close-fitting metal covers for garbage, refuse, ashes and rubbish as may be deemed necessary by the health department and such receptacles shall at all times be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Prior code § 6404.23)  
5.16.220 - Slop sinks. 
There shall be provided in every campground one or more slop sinks properly connected with the city sewer system or a cesspool or septic tank, such sinks to be conveniently located at no greater distance than one hundred feet from any camp car or trailer. 
(Prior code § 6404.24)  
5.16.230 - Waste water disposal. 
No person shall permit any waste water or material from sinks, baths, showers or other plumbing fixtures in camp cars or trailers to be deposited upon the surface of the ground and all such fixtures, when in use, must be connected to the city sewer system; or, in lieu thereof, they may be connected to a cesspool or septic tank constructed in a manner satisfactory to the health department. 
(Prior code § 6404.25)  
5.16.240 - Lighting. 
Every campground shall be provided with means of lighting the same at night and all public water closets and bath units shall be provided with sufficient lighting facilities which shall be kept lighted during the time from one-half hour after sunset until one-half hour before sunrise. 
(Prior code § 6404.26)  
5.16.250 - Sanitary facilities to be approved by health department. 
Any water faucets, toilets, garbage receptacles, or other equipment required by the provisions of this chapter in campgrounds, or which may hereafter be required by any rules and regulations of the health department pertaining to campgrounds, shall not be construed to mean water faucets, toilets, garbage receptacles or other equipment now located in or adjacent to campgrounds unless the same have been approved for use by the health department. 
(Prior code § 6404.27)  
5.16.260 - Appeals—Grounds. 
In the event that any person believes that unreasonable restrictions or unnecessary and extraordinary hardship or damage will be imposed upon him by the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter or by the application of any of the standards, adopted or application of any rules or regulations by the building inspector or health department, such person may appeal therefrom to the city council in writing, and request a public hearing thereon by the city council. 
(Prior code § 6404.28)  
5.16.270 - Appeals—Procedure. 
In the event of such appeal, the city council shall fix a time and place for a public hearing thereon and shall give notice thereof, in writing, to the person requesting such hearing by mail, postage prepaid to the address shown in such request, and shall also give notice thereof to the building inspector and health officer. At the time fixed for such hearing or any later time to which such hearing may be adjourned, the city council shall proceed to hear the testimony of the appellant and of others in his behalf and of he building inspector or health officer and others in his behalf and of other competent persons who may be present and desire to testify or who may be called by the city council to give testimony at such hearing. 
(Prior code § 6404.29)  
5.16.280 - Appeals—Decision. 
Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall be resolution declare its findings and decision in the matter. If it finds that unreasonable restrictions or unnecessary and extraordinary hardship or damage will be imposed upon the appellant, then it may grant an exception or variance from the application in whole or in part of such provisions of this chapter or of such standards, rules and regulations, or it may modify, rescind or otherwise alter such standards, rules and resolutions; provided, that in granting such an exception or variance or in taking such other action as it may deem justified, it may do so only in the event that such action may be taken in harmony with the general purposes and objectives of this chapter to preserve the public health, safety and welfare. The decision of the city council rendered after a hearing held in the manner prescribed herein shall be final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 6404.30)  
5.16.290 - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the health department and police department to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter and for the purpose of securing enforcement thereof, the health officer, or chief of police or any of his duly authorized representatives, shall have the right and are empowered to enter upon the premises of any campground now operating or which may hereafter be operated within the city to inspect the same and all accommodations connected therewith. 
(Prior code § 6404.3)  
Chapter 5.20 - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS 
Sections: 
 
5.20.010 - Permit—Required. 
No person, without having first obtained a permit therefor, as provided in this chapter, shall make any appeal to the public for a charity or charitable or religious purpose, either by soliciting or collecting gifts, contributions, donations, or subscriptions, or by promoting or conducting any sale, bazaar or exhibition by any other means, at any place or to any person within the city. 
(Prior code § 6411)  
5.20.020 - Sale of tickets for charitable causes—Permit required—Misrepresentations prohibited. 
No person, without first having obtained a permit therefor, as provided in this chapter, shall sell or solicit, for or on behalf of any person, the sale of any ticket or right to admission to any amusement, show, entertainment, lecture or other enterprise not regularly carried on for private profit or gain by any person at a fixed place of business in the city, or solicit any contribution or gift in connection with such amusement, show, entertainment, lecture or other enterprise, where such sale or solicitation is for other than a charitable purpose and is made to persons other than the bona fide members of the firm, association or corporation, causing such solicitation or sale, or for or on whose behalf such solicitation or sale is made and where, in connection with any such amusement, show, entertainment, lecture or other enterprise, it is represented advertised, held out, implied, or made to appear that such sale, solicitation, contribution or gift, or any part of the proceeds therefrom, shall belong to or be devoted or used for the benefit of any person, firm, association or corporation. 
(Prior code § 6411.1)  
5.20.030 - Permit—Application—Controls. 
Any person desiring a permit to do any of the acts referred to in Sections 5.20.010 and 5.20.020, shall file a written application therefor with the license collector of the city containing the following information: 
A.  Name and address of applicant (if applicant is a corporation, partnership or association, the names and addresses of all officers, partners and/or principals); 
B.  Location of national, state and local headquarters, if any; 
C.  The names and addresses of all persons directly interested in or who in any manner will be engaged in the activity; 
D.  The purpose for which the proceeds of the solicitations, sales, bazaar, exhibition, promotion, amusement, show, lecture, entertainment or other enterprise, or any part thereof, are to be used, including the manner and amount of any compensation intended to be paid to any person, firm, association or corporation, out of such gross proceeds; 
E.  The total amount sought to be raised, and the bank or place where all or any part of such funds will be placed on deposit or invested; 
F.  The type of records proposed to be kept of funds received, and the location of such records and the custodian thereof; 
G.  The type of identification to be carried or uniform to be worn by persons engaged in the activity; 
H.  Such other information relating to the applicant and the parties directly interested or engaged in the activity, as may be necessary to enable a full and complete investigation to be conducted including, but not limited to, suitable photographs and fingerprints. 
(Prior code § 6411.2)  
5.20.040 - Permit—Application—Investigation. 
The license collector of the city, upon receipt of an application for a permit under this chapter, shall refer the same to the police department for investigation. After the investigation has been conducted, the chief of police or his authorized deputy shall transmit to the license collector, for referral to the city manager, the report of the investigation. 
(Prior code § 6411.3)  
5.20.050 - Permit—Application—Determination. 
A.  The city manager shall consider each application and the investigation report related thereto, together with such other information as he may deem relevant to determine whether such permit should be issued. If he finds from his examination that the applicant has not stated true facts in the application, or if it reasonably appears to him that the issuance of the permit would, in all probability, permit the perpetration of a fraud upon members of the general public, he shall refuse to issue such permit. He shall give written notice of such refusal to the applicant, and to any other person requesting such notice, by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his last known address. 
B.  If he finds that the application is truthful, that the applicant is acting in good faith, and that in all probability a fraud will not be perpetrated upon members of the general public, he shall issue such permit for a reasonable period of time not in excess of three calendar months. Any permit so issued may be conditioned by the city manager in such manner as to insure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6411.4)  
5.20.060 - Permit—Suspension. 
The city manager shall have the power to suspend any permit if he finds that the permittee is not operating in conformity with the application pursuant to which the permit was issued, or if he finds that further activity of the permittee would, in all probability, cause or allow a fraud to be perpetrated upon the public or members thereof. Notice of such suspension shall be given to permittee, in writing, addressed to the permittee at his last known address, postage prepaid, and deposited in the United States mail. The permit in such a case shall be suspended and no further activity otherwise permitted thereunder shall be permitted, effective three days after date of mailing the letter. In such case, permittee shall have the right of appeal to the city council in the manner hereinafter described. 
(Prior code § 6411.6)  
5.20.070 - Appeals. 
A.  Any person aggrieved by any decision, determination or action taken by the city manager in connection with a permit, shall have the right of immediate appeal to the city council. Such an appeal shall be in writing, and shall be filed with the city clerk within thirty days of the date of mailing notice of the action appealed from. Upon receipt of an appeal, the city clerk shall notify the city manager, and shall set the matter on the city council agenda for its next regularly scheduled meeting. The city clerk shall give the party appealing, and any other person requesting the same at least five days' written notice, in the manner described in Section 5.20.060, of the time and place of such hearing. 
B.  The applicant or appellant shall have the burden of proof to show that the suspension or other decision was not justified, was unreasonable, or was otherwise incorrect. At the time of the hearing, the applicant shall have the right to present any relevant written or oral evidence. The council shall consider such evidence, together with appropriate staff reports and other information deemed by it to be relevant, and shall determine whether the decision appealed from was justified. 
C.  The hearing before the council in such cases shall not be a formal public hearing. 
D.  The council's decision shall be final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 6411.7)  
5.20.080 - Exception—Existing institutions. 
No permit shall be required for any of the acts or activities described in Sections 5.20.010 and 5.20.020 by the members of any religious or charitable organization which has been in existence in, and which regularly has maintained a headquarters or a place of worship in the city for a period of at least five years next preceding the date on which such activity is proposed to be commenced; provided, that the city manager has issued a permit authorizing the acts or activities described in Section 5.20.010 and 5.20.020 by such organization. Permits issued to organizations as described in this section shall be valid until revoked. 
(Prior code § 6411.5)  
5.20.090 - Exception—Solicitation by mail or telephone. 
No permit shall be required for any solicitation carried on, exclusively, by the United States mail, or by telephone. 
(Prior code § 6411.8)  
Chapter 5.24 - COMMERCIAL HANDBILLS 
Sections: 
 
5.24.005 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to impose necessary regulations to prevent the unreasonable distribution of handbills and circulars, particularly commercial handbills, which if left unrestricted, could result to the detriment of the public's health, safety and welfare, and cause nuisance problems. 
The purpose also includes protecting local residents against the trespassing by handbill distributors upon the private property of such residents if they do not wish to be solicited by such persons or do not desire to receive commercial handbills; and to protect the people against the potential menace to their private property by the accumulation of advertising matter and handbills. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1, 2003)  
5.24.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases hereinafter set forth, shall have the following meanings ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires to the contrary: 
"Commercial handbill" means any handbill which is distributed for the purpose of advertising for sale goods, wares, merchandise or services or any other commercial activity. 
"Handbill" means a printed, including all forms of reproduced writing, paper or circular, which is circulated or distributed, other than by United States mail, for the purpose of advertising goods, wares, merchandise or services, or soliciting support or opposition, to any public issue or political figure or party, partisan or nonpartisan. Handbill shall not include newspaper. 
"Identity card" means a card required pursuant to Sections 5.24.070(D). 
"Newspaper" means a periodical published for the dissemination of local or telegraphic news and intelligence of a general character, which is printed and published at regular intervals; or a periodical which is eligible for entry as second-class mail pursuant to applicable rules and laws relating to the United States postal system. 
"Noncommercial handbill" means any handbill other than a commercial handbill. 
"Notice" means a notice given by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to applicant, at his last known address. 
"Permit" means a permit required pursuant to this chapter for the distribution of commercial handbills. 
"Residential property" means any real property located within this city which is, pursuant to the city's zoning regulation, classified in any of the R zones, or any property which is, notwithstanding its zoning classification, utilized for residential dwelling purposes. 
(Ord. 2262 § 2, 2003; prior code § 6403)  
5.24.020 - Permit—Required. 
No person shall circulate or distribute, or cause to be circulated or distributed, any commercial handbill in or upon any residential property within this city without first obtaining a permit therefor in the manner prescribed in this chapter. Nor shall any person distribute or circulate or cause to be circulated or distributed any such commercial handbill in or upon any residential property within this city, except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6403.1)  
5.24.030 - Permit—Requirements. 
The license collector shall not accept an application for a handbill distribution permit from any person unless the following requirements are met: 
A.  That a filing and processing fee of twenty-five dollars has been paid to the license collector; 
B.  That the application offered for filing, on a form designated by the license collector, is fully and completely filled out with the collector; 
C.  That a valid business license in the name of such applicant is in effect, or the fee and application therefor, has been filed contemporaneously with the filing of the permit application; 
D.  That the applicant for a handbill distribution permit shall file with the license collector the full name, address, driver's license number and social security number of each person who will be engaged in the physical process of distribution and/or circulation pursuant to such permit; and for the purpose of obtaining a distribution identity card, such applicant shall pay a filing, processing and investigation fee of five dollars for each such person. The license collector shall, by an appropriate investigation, determine whether such persons are of good moral character; if the license collector finds that any such person has been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude, or is otherwise not of good moral character, he shall refuse to issue the permit requested, and/or shall decline an identity card pursuant to this section. 
E.  That the applicant for a handbill distribution permit shall provide the license collector with the following information and documentation: 
1.  The full name, mailing address and principal business or residential address and telephone number, of each individual who will be in charge of supervising the distribution of the handbills; 
2.  The exact purpose of the distribution and the exact geographic area in which the distribution will be conducted; 
3.  The time during the day when the distribution will be made, and the dates for the commencement and termination of the distribution; 
4.  A short outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the distribution, including the number of distributors; 
5.  A statement by the applicant that he received and read a copy of this chapter; 
6.  A statement that the applicant assumes responsibility that all distributors comply with the requirements of this chapter; 
7.  A statement by that if a permit is granted it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the city or any department, officer or employee thereof. 
(Ord. 2262 § 3, 2003; prior code § 6403.3)  
5.24.040 - Permit—Issuance determination. 
The license collector, upon receipt of a permit application, shall issue such permit, together with the required identity cards, unless he finds that the same fails to comply with the provisions hereof, or if it is found that within the preceding three years, a handbill permit has been revoked as to the same applicant. No permit or identity card issued under this chapter shall be transferred or assigned, and any attempt at transfer or assignment shall render the permit void. 
(Ord. 2262 § 4, 2003; prior code § 6403.5 (part))  
5.24.050 - Permits—Suspension and revocation. 
Where the license collector has been issued a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and thereafter finds that the permittee or any of such permittee's agents, employees or servants have failed to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter with regard to its activities pursuant to such permit, the license collector shall suspend such permit. The license collector shall give written notice to the permittee of such suspension. Such order of suspension shall become effective twenty-four hours after the same has been deposited in the course of transmission of the United States mail. As of the effective date of such suspension, all operations pursuant to such permit shall be ceased. Within not to exceed a period of five days after the effective date of the order of suspension, the permit shall be deemed revoked unless within the period of time, the permittee files a written letter of appeal, appealing the decision of the license collector to the city council in the manner set forth in Section 5.24.070. 
(Prior code § 6403.6)  
5.24.060 - Appeals. 
Any action of the license collector pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to an appeal to the city council. The license collector shall give written notice to the applicant of such decision. Such right of appeal shall be perfected by the applicant's filing of a written letter or appeal with the city clerk, not later than five calendar days after the date of filing of such notice, or, in the case of a suspension, within five days after the effective date of the suspension order. Such letter of appeal shall briefly indicate the basis of such appeal. Upon receipt of such an appeal, the city clerk shall notify the license collector thereof, and shall set the matter on the next most convenient city council agenda for its consideration. The appealing party shall be given not less than five consecutive days' written notice of the time and place of such council meeting; provided, that the appealing party may, in writing, waive such notice requirement. At the time of its consideration of such appeal, the council shall consider the report of the license collector and such other relevant evidence as may be presented at the time of such hearing. The hearing need not be a formal public hearing; provided, that all interested parties shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard on the issue. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 6403.5 (part))  
5.24.070 - Distribution regulations. 
The following regulations shall apply to the distribution and circulation of commercial handbills within the city. Failure to comply with the regulations contained in this section and in this chapter, shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor punishable in the manner prescribed in Chapter 1.12 of this code, and shall be a cause for permit revocation pursuant to Section 5.24.060. Said regulations are as follows: 
A.  Name of Distributor. No person shall circulate or distribute, or cause to be circulated or distributed, any commercial handbill within the city unless the same bears, conspicuously thereon, the name, address and permit number of the distributor or other person responsible for such distribution; and 
B.  Distribution on Public Property. No person shall distribute or circulate, or cause to be circulated or distributed, any commercial handbill in or along any public street, alley or other public place within the city; and 
C.  Distribution on Motor Vehicles. No person shall circulate or distribute, or cause to be circulated or distributed, any commercial handbill by placing the same in or upon any motor vehicle, as the phrase is defined in the Vehicle Code of the state, which is parked upon any public street, alley or public parking area, or upon any such vehicle parked upon any private property; and 
D.  Identity Cards. No person shall engage in the physical process of distribution and/or circulation of commercial handbills without first obtaining a distribution identity card in the time and manner as provided in Section 5.24.030(D). 
E.  Distribution Hours. No person shall distribute any commercial handbill in or upon any private property in the city between the hours of seven p.m. to eight a.m. 
(Ord. 2262 § 5, 2003; prior code § 6403.4)  
5.24.075 - Violation regarding distribution on public property. 
Any handbill distributed on public property may be removed by any duly authorized employee of the city. In the event that such handbills are removed by an employee of the city, the person responsible for distributing such handbills and/or the person or entity directing, controlling, employing or hiring the handbill distributor shall be liable to the city for the cost of cleaning up such handbills in addition to any other penalties provided by law. 
(Ord. 2262 § 6, 2003)  
5.24.080 - Premises with signs posted prohibiting solicitation. 
Notwithstanding the issuance of a permit hereunder, no person shall circulate, distribute or cause to be circulated or distributed, any commercial handbill on any residential property within the city, which has conspicuously posted therein or thereon, a sign or other visible notice, which prohibits solicitation or the delivery of handbills in or upon such premises. 
(Prior code § 6403.2)  
Chapter 5.28 - COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEMS 
Sections: 
 
5.28.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations, shall have the following meaning given herein, except when a contrary meaning is clearly intended: 
"CATV" means a community antenna television system hereinafter defined. 
"City" means the city of Montebello. 
"Community antenna television system" means a system of antenna, coaxial cables, wires, wave guides, or other conductors, equipment or facilities designed, constructed or used for the purpose of providing television or FM radio service by cable or through its facilities as herein contemplated. 
"Code" means the Montebello Municipal Code. 
"Council" means the city council of the city. 
"Franchise" means and includes the authorization granted hereunder in terms of a franchise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system in the city. Such authorization shall not waive the licensing requirement for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city in accordance with Chapter 5.04 of this code. 
"Grantee" means the person, firm or corporation to whom a franchise, as herein defined, is granted by the council pursuant to this chapter. 
Gross annual receipts" means any and all compensation and other consideration in any form whatever including, but not limited to, the following: 
A.  Receipts paid directly to the grantee for an English language pay-TV channel but not to include the revenue collected for or on behalf of the program supplier; 
B.  Any charge or subsidy received directly or indirectly by a grantee from subscribers for initial installation and basic monthly subscription fees for the delivery of broadcast signals. 
Gross annual receipts shall not include consideration received by the grantee for ancillary services such as reconnection charges, the sales of advertising, the leasing of channels, the rental of equipment, or per-program. 
Gross annual receipts shall not include any property or sales and use taxes on services furnished by the grantee imposed directly on any subscriber or user by any city, state or other governmental unit and collected by the grantee for such governmental unit. 
"Property of grantee" means all property owned, installed or used by a grantee in the conduct of a CATV business in the city under the authority of a franchise granted hereunder. 
"Street" means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway or drive, now or hereafter existing as such within the city. 
"Subscriber" means any person or entity receiving for any purpose the CATV services of a grantee. 
(Prior code § 7400)  
5.28.020 - Operation—Franchise required. 
From and after the effective date of this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to establish, operate or to carry on the business of distributing to any person in this city any television signals or radio signals by means of a CATV system unless a franchise therefor has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. 
(Prior code § 7421 (a))  
5.28.030 - Authority to grant franchise. 
A.  Nonexclusive franchise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system within all or any portion of the city may be granted by the council to any qualified person, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  No provision of this chapter shall be deemed or construed so as to require the granting of a franchise when in the opinion of the council it is in the public interest to restrict to a specific number the franchises for such service. 
(Prior code § 7401)  
5.28.040 - Required filings to be made with city clerk. 
When not otherwise prescribed herein, all matters herein required to be filed with the city shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Prior code § 7417 (a)  
5.28.050 - Franchise—Application—Content. 
Application for a new franchise shall be in writing, shall be filed with the city clerk and shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of each partner shall also be set forth. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall also state the names and addresses of its directors, officers, major stockholders and associates, and the names and addresses of parent and subsidiary companies; 
B.  1.  A statement and description of the CATV system proposed to be constructed, installed, maintained or operated by the applicant; 
2.  The proposed location of such system and its various components; 
3.  The manner in which applicant proposes to construct, install, maintain and operate the same; and 
4.  In particular, the extent and manner in which existing or future poles or other facilities of other public utilities will be used for such system; 
C.  A description, in detail, of the public streets, public places and proposed public streets within which applicant proposes or seeks authority to construct, install or maintain any CATV equipment or facilities proposed to be constructed, installed or maintained therein; and the proposed specific location thereof; 
D.  A map specifically showing and delineating the proposed service areas within which applicant proposes to provide CATV services and for which a franchise is requested; 
E.  A statement or schedule in a form approved by the city manager of proposed rates and charges to subscribers for installation and services, and a copy of proposed service agreement between the grantee and its subscribers shall accompany the application. For unusual circumstances, such as underground cable required, or more than one hundred and fifty feet of distance from cable to connection of service to subscribers, an additional installation charge over that normally charged for installation as specified in the applicant's proposal may be charged, with easements to be supplied by subscribers. For remote, relatively inaccessible subscribers within the city, service may be made available on the basis of cost of materials, labor and easement, if required, by the grantee; 
F.  A copy of any contract, between the applicant and any public utility providing for the use of facilities of such public utility, such as poles, lines and conduits; 
G.  A statement setting forth all agreements and understandings, whether written, oral or implied, existing between the applicant and any person, firm or corporation with respect to the proposed franchise or the proposed CATV operation. If a franchise is granted to a person, firm or corporation posing as a front or as the representative of another person, firm or corporation and such information is not disclosed in the original application, such franchise shall be deemed void and of no force or effect whatsoever; 
H.  A financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant, or person otherwise satisfactory to the council, showing applicant's financial status and his financial ability to complete the construction and installation of the proposed CATV system; 
I.  The council may at any time demand, and applicant shall provide, such supplementary, additional or other information as the council may deem reasonably necessary to determine whether the requested franchise should be granted. 
(Prior code § 7419 (a))  
5.28.060 - Franchise—Application—Determination. 
Upon consideration of any such application, the council shall refuse to grant the requested franchise if it determines that the public interest so requires; or where it determines the public interest so requires, it may grant a franchise for a CATV system to any applicant as may appear from the application to be in its opinion best qualified to render proper and efficient CATV service to television viewers and subscribers in that portion of the city. The council's decision in such matters shall be final. 
(Prior code § 7419 (b))  
5.28.070 - Reimbursement of publication expense. 
The grantee shall pay to the city a sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for all publication expenses incurred by it in connection with the granting of a franchise pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Such payment shall be made within thirty days after the city furnishes the grantee with a written statement of such expenses. 
(Prior code § 7417 (b)  
5.28.080 - Franchise—Effective date. 
No franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall become effective unless and until the ordinance granting same has become effective and, in addition, unless and until all things required by this chapter are done and completed, all of such things being declared to be conditions precedent to the effectiveness of any such franchise granted hereunder. In the event any of such things are not done and completed in the time and manner required, the council may declare the franchise null and void. 
(Prior code § 7420 (a))  
5.28.090 - Franchise—Acceptance. 
Within thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance awarding a franchise, or within such extended period of time as the council in its discretion may authorize, the grantee shall file with the city clerk his written acceptance, in a form satisfactory to the city attorney, of the franchise, and his agreement to be bound by and to comply with and to do all things required of him by the provisions of this chapter and the franchise. Such acceptance and agreement shall be acknowledged by the grantee before a notary public, and shall in form and content be satisfactory to and approved by the city attorney. 
(Prior code § 7420 (b))  
5.28.100 - Rates. 
A.  The city clerk shall maintain a schedule setting forth all rates and charges to be made to subscribers by each grantee, for CATV services, including, but not limited to, installation, connection and fixed monthly charges. All such rates and charges shall be subject to approval by the council from time to time. The city council, upon receipt of an application for a rate increase, shall act upon such matter expeditiously and in good faith. 
B.  A grantee may, without city approval, automatically pass along to subscribers the following additional costs, if the same are imposed on it: 
1.  Direct taxes, other than income and property taxes; 
2.  Copyright fees; and 
3.  Permit fees. 
C.  The grantee shall not, as to the reduction of rates and/or charges, grant any preference advantage to any person nor subject any person to any prejudice or disadvantage; provided, that nothing in a franchise shall be deemed to prohibit the waiving or reducing of connection and/or service charges during promotional campaigns of grantee. 
(Prior code § 7403)  
5.28.110 - Franchise—Payments. 
A.  Any grantee granted a franchise under this chapter shall pay to the city, during the life of such franchise, a sum equal to three percent or up to five percent in special circumstances, as provided in the Federal Communications Commission's regulations, of the gross annual receipts of the grantee. The city expressly reserves the right to increase the amount of the annual franchise payments, during the term of any franchise granted hereunder. If the Federal Communication Commission, during the term of any franchise granted hereunder, increases the maximum amount which may be charged for such franchise payments, the city council may increase such fees; provided, that it finds that the grantee's rate of return is reasonable, taking into account such increased fee. Such payment by the grantee to the city shall be made annually, or as is otherwise provided in the grantee's franchise, by delivery of the same to the director of finance of the city. 
B.  Each grantee shall file with the city, within ninety days after expiration of any calendar year, or portion thereof, during which such franchise is in force, a financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant, or other person otherwise satisfactory to the council, showing in detail the gross annual receipts, as defined herein, of grantee during the preceding calendar year of portion thereof. It shall be the duty of the grantee to pay the to city the sums hereinbefore described when due. 
C.  In any year, or portion thereof, following the first full year in which service has been provided and during which payments under this section amount to less than two thousand dollars per year, grantee shall pay the city as a minimum an amount equal to two thousand dollars per year. 
D.  The city shall have the right to inspect each of the grantee's books and records showing the gross receipts from which its franchise payments are computed and the right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts due hereunder. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for further or additional sums payable hereunder, or for the performance of any other obligation hereunder. 
(Prior code § 7405)  
5.28.120 - Performance bond. 
Upon being granted a franchise, and upon filing of the acceptance required, the grantee shall take out, file with the city clerk and shall thereafter maintain during the entire term of such franchise, a corporate surety bond or other adequate surety agreement in such amount and form as shall have been approved by the city manager. 
(Prior code § 7414 (a))  
5.28.130 - Hold harmless agreement. 
By accepting a franchise, each grantee shall be deemed to have agreed to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and/or employees against and from any and all claims, demands, causes of action, actions, suits, proceedings, damages including, but not limited to, damages to city property and damages arising out of copyright infringements, and damages arising out of any failure by grantee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors or licensees of programs to be delivered by grantee's cable television system, costs or liabilities (including costs or liabilities of the city with respect to its employees), of every kind and nature whatsoever, including, but not limited to, damages for injury or death or damage to person or property, and regardless of the merit of any of the same, and against all liability to others, and against any loss, cost, and expense resulting or arising out of any of the same, including any attorney fees, accountant fees, expert witness or consultant fees, court costs, per diem expense, traveling and transportation expense, or other costs or expense arising out of or pertaining to the exercise or the enjoyment of any franchise hereunder by grantee, or the granting thereof by the city. 
(Prior code § 7414 (b))  
5.28.140 - Litigation—Defense—Indemnity of city. 
A.  Grantee shall at the sole risk and expense of grantee, upon demand of the city, made by and through the city attorney, appear in and defend any and all suits, actions, or other legal proceedings, whether judicial, quasi-judicial, administrative, legislative, or otherwise brought or instituted or had by third persons or duly constituted authorities, against or affecting the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees, and arising out of or pertaining to the exercise or the enjoyment of such franchise, or the granting thereof by the city. 
B.  Alternatively, in the discretion of the city, city may, on behalf of itself, and/or any of its officers, agents or employees, elect to employ, at grantee's expense, attorneys to appear and defend such actions. 
C.  Grantee shall pay and satisfy and shall cause to be paid and satisfied any judgment, decree, order, directive, or demand rendered, made or issued against grantee, the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees in any of these premises; and such indemnity shall exist and continue without reference to or limitation by the amount of any bond, policy of insurance, deposit, undertaking or other assurance required hereunder, or otherwise; provided, that neither grantee nor city shall make or enter into any compromise or settlement of any claim, demand, cause of action, suit or other proceeding, without first obtaining the written consent of the other. 
(Prior code § 7414 (c))  
5.28.150 - Insurance. 
A.  Upon being granted a franchise, and upon the filing of the acceptance required hereunder, the grantee shall file with the city clerk and shall thereafter, during the entire term of such franchise, maintain in full force and effect each of the following policies of insurance: 
1.  a.  General comprehensive liability insurance in a form satisfactory to and an amount approved by the city manager. Such coverage shall not be subject to cancellation or termination except upon thirty days' prior written notice to the city. 
b.  The city shall be named as an additional insured in any of the insurance policies. 
c.  Where such insurance is provided by a policy which also covers grantee or any other entity or person, it shall contain the standard cross-liability endorsement; 
2.  Workers' compensation insurance coverage in minimum amounts required by law. 
B.  If a grantee fails to obtain or maintain such required insurance coverage, city may without notice to grantee, obtain, at grantee's sole expense, such coverage, or forthwith terminate, without prior notice, the franchise as granted. 
(Prior code § 7414 (d))  
5.28.160 - Franchise—Term. 
No franchise granted by the council under this chapter shall be for a term longer than fifteen years following the date of acceptance of such franchise by the grantee. 
(Prior code § 7404 (part))  
5.28.170 - Authority granted by franchise. 
Any franchise granted hereunder shall authorize and permit the grantee to engage in the business of operating and providing a CATV system in the city, and for that purpose, to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, over, on, under, upon, across and along any public street, such poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduit, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the CATV system; and in addition, so to use, operate, and provide similar facilities or properties rented or leased from other persons, firms or corporations, including, but not limited to, any public utility or other grantee franchised or permitted to do business in the city. 
(Prior code § 7402)  
5.28.180 - Franchise—Limitations. 
A.  Franchise granted hereunder shall be nonexclusive. 
B.  No privilege or exemption shall be granted or conferred by any franchise granted hereunder except those specifically prescribed herein. 
C.  Any privilege claimed under any such franchise by the grantee in any street or other public property shall be subordinate to any prior lawful use or occupancy of the streets or other public property. 
D.  Any such franchise shall be a privilege to be held in personal trust by the original grantee. It cannot in any event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by force or involuntary sale, or by voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, without the prior consent of the council expressed by resolution, and then only under such conditions as may therein be prescribed. Any such transfer or assignment shall be made only by an instrument in writing, a duly executed copy of which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk within thirty days after any such transfer or assignment. The consent of the council may not be unreasonably withheld; provided, however, the proposed assignee must show financial responsibility and must agree to comply with all provisions of this chapter; and provided further, that no such consent shall be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage or other hypothecation as a whole, to secure an indebtedness. 
E.  Time shall be of the essence of any franchise granted hereunder. A grantee shall not be relieved of any obligation to comply promptly with any of the provisions of this chapter by any failure of the city to enforce a prompt compliance. 
F.  Any right or power in, or duty impressed upon, any officer, employee, department or board of the city shall be subject to transfer by the city to any other officer, employee, department or board of the city. 
G.  The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provisions or requirement of this chapter or of any franchise issued hereunder or because of its enforcement. 
H.  The grantee shall be subject to all requirements of this chapter, and other applicable laws, rules, regulations and specifications heretofore or hereafter enacted or established. 
I.  Any such franchise granted shall not relieve the grantee of any obligation involved in obtaining pole space from any department of the city, utility company, or from others maintaining poles in streets. 
J.  Any franchise granted hereunder shall be in lieu of any and all other rights, privileges, powers, immunities, and authorities owned, possessed, controlled, or exercisable by grantee, or any successor to any interest of grantee, or pertaining to the construction, operation, or maintenance of any CATV system in the city; and the acceptance of any franchise hereunder shall operate, as between grantee and the city, as an abandonment of any and all of such rights, privileges, powers, immunities, and authorities within the city, to the effect that, as between grantee and the city, any and all construction, operation and maintenance by any grantee of any CATV in the city shall be, and shall be deemed and construed in all instances and respects to be, under and pursuant to the franchise, and not under or pursuant to any other right, privilege, power, immunity or authority whatsoever. 
(Prior code § 7406)  
5.28.190 - Rights reserved to city. 
A.  Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect, in any way, to any extent, the right of the city to acquire the property of the grantee, either by purchase or through the exercise of eminent domain which shall not include any amount for the franchise itself or for any rights or privileges granted, and nothing herein contained shall be construed to contract away or to modify or abridge, either for a term of perpetuity the city's right to exercise its power of eminent domain. 
B.  There is reserved to the city every right and power which is required to be herein reserved or provided by any law of the city, and each grantee, by its acceptance of franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the city in its exercise of such rights or power heretofore or hereafter mentioned. 
C.  Neither the granting of any franchise hereunder nor any of the provisions contained herein shall be construed to prevent the city from granting any identical, or similar, franchise to any other person, firm or corporation, within all or any portion of the city. 
D.  1.  The city council shall, at any time during the term of a franchise granted hereunder, have the power and authority to review, at five-year intervals, the following items: 
a.  Channel capacity; 
b.  Two-way capability; 
c.  Availability of access channels; 
d.  Access to programming facilities; 
e.  Interconnection with other CATV systems; 
f.  Rights of individuals (privacy). 
2.  After consultation with the grantee, the city council may order such grantee to make such changes in any of its facilities so as to accommodate an increased capability or capacity in any of the items set forth above in subsection (D)(1) of this section provided, that if the city council requires action to be taken, in the context, by a grantee, it shall allow, by way of an increase in rates and/or charges, such amount as may be required to permit such grantee to recover, as to such additional equity investment, which includes operating costs, a reasonable rate of return thereon which shall be deemed to be between eighteen percent and twenty percent per annum based upon the life expectancy of the equipment, and the then remaining term of the franchise. 
E.  Neither the granting of any franchise nor any provisions hereof shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the city. 
F.  Should any grantee abandon its operations to a franchise for a period of ten consecutive days or more, or if any such grantee should be adjudicated a bankrupt, the city council may forthwith terminate the franchise as granted. The action of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
G.  The council may do all things which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this chapter and may determine any question of fact which may arise during the existence of any franchise granted hereunder. The city manager is authorized and empowered to adjust, settle or compromise any controversy or change arising from the operations of any grantee under this chapter, either on behalf of the city, a grantee, or any subscriber, in the best interest of the public. No grantee will beheld responsible for any damages or refunds, which were beyond grantee's control or which were caused by an act of God. 
(Prior code § 7407)  
5.28.200 - Franchise—Time limits for required actions relating to startup of service. 
A.  Within thirty days after acceptance of a franchise each grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including, but not limited to, any utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses, and any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of CATV systems, or their associated microwave transmission facilities. 
B.  Within ninety days after obtaining all necessary permits, licenses and authorizations, each grantee shall commence construction and installation of the CATV system. 
C.  Within ninety days after the commencement of construction and installation of the system, each grantee shall proceed to render service to subscribers, and the completion of the construction and installation shall be pursued with reasonable with reasonable diligence thereafter, so that service to all areas designated on the map accompanying the application for franchise, as provided herein, shall be provided within one year from the date that service was first provided. 
D.  Failure on the part of any grantee to commence and diligently pursue each of the foregoing requirements and to complete each of the matters set forth herein, shall be the grounds for termination of such franchise; provided, however, that the council in its discretion may extend the time for the commencement and completion of construction and installation for additional periods for good cause shown by the grantee. 
(Prior code § 7408)  
5.28.210 - Facilities and apparatus—Location. 
A.  Any poles, wires, cable lines, conduits or other properties of the grantee to be constructed or installed in streets, shall be so constructed or installed only at such locations and in such manner as shall be approved by the superintendent of streets acting in the exercise of his reasonable discretion. 
B.  No grantee shall install or erect any facilities or apparatus in or on other public property, places or rights-of-way, or within any privately-owned area within the city which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the city, except those installed or erected upon public utility facilities now existing, without obtaining the prior written approval of the superintendent of streets. 
C.  In those areas and portions of the city where the transmission or distribution facilities of both the public utility providing telephone service and those of the utility providing electric service hereafter are placed underground, the grantee, at such time, shall likewise construct, operate and maintain all its transmission and distribution facilities underground. For the purposes of this subsection "underground" includes a partial underground system, (e.g., streamlining). Amplifiers in grantee's transmission and distribution lines may be in appropriate housings upon the surface of the ground as approved by the superintendent of streets. 
(Prior code § 7409)  
5.28.220 - Facilities and apparatus—Removal and abandonment. 
A.  In the event that the use of any part of the CATV system is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of twelve months, or in the event such system or property has been installed in any street or public place without complying with the requirements of grantee's franchise or this chapter, or the franchise has been terminated, canceled or has expired, such grantee shall promptly, upon being given thirty days' notice, remove from the streets or public places all such property and poles of such system other than any which the superintendent of streets may permit to be abandoned in place. In the event of such removal, the grantee shall promptly restore the street or other area from which such property has been removed to a condition satisfactory to the superintendent of streets. 
B.  Any property of the grantee remaining in place one hundred twenty days after the termination or expiration of the franchise shall be considered permanently abandoned. The superintendent of streets may extend such time, not to exceed an additional thirty days, for good cause. 
C.  Any property of the grantee to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such manner as the superintendent of streets shall prescribe. Upon the permanent abandonment of the property of the grantee in place, the property shall become that of the city, and the grantee shall submit to the superintendent of streets an instrument in writing, to be approved by the city attorney, transferring to the city the ownership of such property. 
(Prior code § 7410)  
5.28.230 - Facilities and apparatus—Required changes resulting from public improvements. 
Each grantee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public place, or remove from the street or other public place, any property of the grantee when required by the superintendent of streets by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, powerlines, signal lines, and tracks or any other type of structure or improvements by public agencies, including street widening projects; provided, however, that the grantee shall in all such cases have the privileges and be subject to the obligations to abandon any property of the grantee in place, as provided in Section 5.28.220. 
(Prior code § 7411)  
5.28.240 - Work required in streets or public places—Failure to perform. 
Upon failure of the grantee to commence, pursue, or complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this chapter or by its franchise, to be done in any street or other public place, within the time prescribed, and to the satisfaction of the superintendent of streets, he may, at his option, cause such work to be done and the grantee shall pay to the city the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by him to the grantee within thirty days after receipt of such itemized report. 
(Prior code § 7412)  
5.28.250 - New construction requiring underground facilities. 
A.  For all new residential structures where underground utilities are required, a grantee shall place its cable service underground. The developer shall perform all trenching and backfilling necessary for the provision of such cable television service, including furnishing of any imported backfill material required and will furnish and install for the grantee any necessary distribution conduit and substructures, including pedestals required, in accordance with the grantee's plans and specifications. 
B.  The grantee shall provide plans and specifications to each subdivider and shall inspect the facilities required hereunder and certify to the city prior to final approval of the subdivision, multiple dwelling or development to insure that facilities required hereunder are properly installed. The city shall have the right to review and require its approval of maps and specifications provided by the grantee. 
(Prior code § 7417 (f))  
5.28.260 - Service for newly annexed territory. 
In the event territory adjacent to a franchise area is incorporated with the city's limits, by annexation or otherwise, a grantee's rights and duties under this chapter shall be deemed to include such additional territory if the council orders the grantee to supply such service. 
(Prior code § 7417 (g))  
5.28.270 - Use of utility poles and facilities. 
When any portion of a CATV system is to be installed on public utility poles and facilities, certified copies of the agreements for such joint use of poles and facilities shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Prior code § 7418)  
5.28.280 - Installation and maintenance of facilities within public ways—Franchise required. 
From and after the effective date of this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain within any public street in the city, or within any privately-owned area within the city which has not yet become a public street, but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the city, any equipment or facilities for distributing any television signals or radio signals through a CATV system, unless a franchise authorizing such use of such street or property or area has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. 
(Prior code § 7421 (b))  
5.28.290 - Operational standards. 
The CATV system shall be maintained in accordance with the practices of the industry and applicable rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission as such practices and rules now exist, or as the may hereafter be altered or modified, so that the subscribers shall receive the highest possible service. 
(Prior code § 7416)  
5.28.300 - Franchise—Operation in compliance with the laws of city. 
Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, shall include the following conditions: 
 The CATV system herein franchised shall be used and operated solely and expressly for the purpose expressly authorized by the laws of this city, and no other purpose whatsoever. 
Inclusion of the foregoing statement in any such franchise shall not be deemed to limit the authority of the city to include any other reasonable condition, limitation or restriction which it may deem necessary to impose in connection with such franchise subsequent to the grant of franchise. 
(Prior code § 7419 (c))  
5.28.310 - Phone service—Procedures for reporting and resolving complaints. 
Each grantee shall maintain local phone services so that subscribers may call grantee without incurring added message or toll charges in order that CATV maintenance service shall be promptly available to subscribers. Procedures shall be adopted by each grantee for the investigation and resolution of all complaints regarding cable television operations. Notice of procedures for reporting and resolving complaints will be given to each subscriber at the time of initial subscription to the cable television system. 
(Prior code § 7417 (c))  
5.28.320 - Arbitrary refusal of service prohibited. 
No person in the service area of a grantee shall be arbitrarily refused service; provided, however, that a grantee shall not be required to provide service to any subscriber who does not pay the applicable connection fee or monthly service charge. Where a subscriber requests CATV service, but the distribution cable is over one hundred and fifty feet from the requested point of service, a grantee shall provide such service, if the prospective subscriber pays for the cost of material, labor and right-of-way if any, reasonably required to provide such service. 
(Prior code § 7417 (d))  
5.28.330 - Discrimination. 
Grantee shall not discriminate in any way on the grounds of race, creed, color, national origin, or sex in the selection of its employees or in the retention of subcontractors, including procurement of materials and leases of equipment. 
(Prior code § 7417 (e))  
5.28.340 - Franchise—Renewal. 
A.  The provisions of this section shall control the granting of renewals of franchises. Any franchise may be renewed for a term not to exceed fifteen years, at any time prior to the expiration of the same. An application therefore shall be submitted to the city manager containing the following information: 
1.  The information required pursuant to Section 5.28.050; 
2.  A map of the area proposed to be included in the franchise service area; 
3.  A schedule of rates and charges proposed; 
4.  A narrative and/or pictorial description of the facilities in place, and a narrative description of additions and/or replacements thereto, if any. 
B.  Upon receipt of such an application the city shall review the same and forward to the city council a report containing the recommendation as to whether the renewal franchise should be granted or not. Upon receipt of such a report, the city council shall conduct a public hearing, noticed as is provided herein. At the time of such hearing, or continuance thereof, the city council shall, based upon the application, report, and relevant evidence received, determine whether the public interest, convenience and necessity require the issuance of such franchise. If the city council determines to deny the application for renewal, it shall do so by resolution. If it determines that the franchise should be granted, it shall do so in the manner provided herein. 
(Prior code § 7413)  
5.28.350 - Franchise—Termination prior to expiration. 
Any such franchise granted hereunder may be terminated prior to its date of termination by the council in the event that the council shall, after a hearing, held ten days after notice thereof, finds that: 
A.  The grantee has failed to act, or omission, to comply with any provision of this chapter, or other law, or has violated any term or condition of any franchise issued hereunder; or 
B.  The city acquires the CATV system property of the grantee. 
(Prior code § 7404 (part))  
5.28.360 - Theft of services. 
It is unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, to any part of a franchised CATV system within this city for the purpose of enabling himself or others to receive any television signal, radio signal, picture, program, or sound, without payment to the owner of the system. 
(Prior code § 7421 (c))  
5.28.370 - Tampering with, removal or injuring without owner's consent. 
It is unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner, to wilfully tamper with, remove or injure any part of a CATV system. 
(Prior code § 7421 (d))  
5.28.380 - Multiple dwelling units—Preventing entry of authorized personnel. 
It is unlawful for a landlord, manager, or owner of a multiple dwelling unit or a condominium unit, to prevent authorized personnel of a grantee from entering premises to install, service or disconnect cable TV service during normal business hours. 
(Prior code § 7421 (e))  
5.28.390 - Reports. 
The grantee shall prepare and furnish the city manager at the times and in the form prescribed by him, such reports with respect to its operations, affairs, transactions or property, as may be reasonably necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of the rights, functions or duties of the city or any of its officers in connection with the franchise. 
(Prior code § 7415 (b))  
5.28.400 - Inspection of property and records. 
A.  At all reasonable times, each grantee shall permit any duly authorized representative of the city to examine all property of the grantee, together with any appurtenant property of the grantee situated within or without the city, and to examine and transcribe any and all maps and other records kept or maintained by the grantee or under its control which deal with the operations, affairs, transactions or property of the grantee with respect to its franchise. If any such maps or records are not kept in the city, or upon reasonable request made available in the city, and if the council shall determine that an examination thereof is necessary or appropriate, then all travel and maintenance expense necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be paid by the grantee. 
B.  The grantee shall at reasonable times make and keep in its possession full and complete plans and records showing the exact location of all CATV system equipment installed or in use in streets and other public places in the city. 
(Prior code § 7415 (a) and (b))  
5.28.410 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. The council declares that it would have adopted the provisions hereof, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, and phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared illegal, invalid or unconstitutional. The invalidity of any portion of this chapter shall not abate, reduce or otherwise affect any consideration or other obligation required of the grantee of any franchise granted hereunder. Any modifications of the provisions and of the rules and regulations of the Federal Communication Commission regarding franchise standards resulting from amendments by Federal Communication Commission shall be incorporated herein within one year of adoption thereof, or at the time of franchise renewal, whichever occurs first. 
(Prior code § 7422)  
Chapter 5.32 - DANCES 
Sections: 
 
5.32.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter certain words and phrases shall be construed as herein set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
"Cabaret dance" means any dance held or engaged in at any place or premises licensed by the state of California to sell, serve or dispense intoxicating liquor for consumption in or at such place or premises. 
"Club dance" means any dance held by a dancing club. 
"Dance" means a gathering of persons in or upon any premises where dancing is participated in as the main purpose for such a gathering, or as an incident to some other purpose. 
"Dance permit" means a permit required by this chapter, issued by the license collector, upon order of the city manager for the holding of a public dance, public dancehall, club dance, cabaret dance or dancing club. 
"Dancing club" means any club or association of persons conducting dances, other than public dances, for its members or bona fide guests more often than once per month, at which a fee is charged either for admission or participation therein, or at which any collection or donation of money is made, solicited or received, or at which the amount of dues to be paid by each member is dependent upon attendance at such dances. 
"License collector" means the license collector and inspector of the city of Montebello. 
"Private dance" means any dance: 
A.  Which is not advertised publicly; 
B.  To which members of the general public are not invited; and 
C.  Which is limited to members of the sponsoring group and its invited guests. 
"Public dance" means a dance conducted by any person, whether or not for profit, to which members of the public are admitted or allowed to participate in such dancing, with or without charge. 
"Public dancehall" means a place or location where a public dance is held or conducted. 
"School dance" means any dance conducted as a part of the curriculum of any public or parochial school, or any dance officially sanctioned by such school when conducted at school buildings or grounds, or other place when properly supervised by school officials. 
"Teenage dance" means any nonprofit public dance or club dance sponsored by a service group, school group, parents group, or other similar organization, for minors between the ages of thirteen and nineteen years of age to which no person over nineteen years of age or under thirteen years of age is admitted as a participant. 
(Prior code § 4400)  
5.32.020 - Permit required—Application—Fee. 
A.  No person shall conduct or assist in conducting any public dance, public dancehall, dancing club, club dance or cabaret dance within the city, without first obtaining a permit therefor, in the manner prescribed in this chapter. 
B.  Applications for such permits shall be filed with the license collector of the city along with the nonrefundable user fee set by the city council resolution and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name and address of the applicant (if a corporation or partnership, the names and residence addresses of all officers, directors or partners; if an unincorporated association, the names and addresses of all principals); and 
2.  The location and description of the facilities proposed to be used; and 
3.  The dates, hours and estimated maximum attendance at the proposed dance, and the type of dance. 
C.  A one hundred eighty dollar filing and processing fee shall be required with each such application; provided, that the city council may waive such fee if the applicant is an organization described in Section 5.04.060. 
(Ord. 2031 § 2, 1990: prior code § 4401)  
5.32.030 - Permit—Application—Investigation—Report—Recommendation. 
The license collector, upon receipt of a written application for a dance permit, shall refer the same to the appropriate city departments for investigation, report and recommendation. Each such department shall submit, in writing, a report together with such recommendation as may be appropriate to the license collector, for transmittal to the city manager as soon as possible after such referral. 
(Prior code § 4402)  
5.32.040 - Location—Fire inspection required. 
The fire department shall inspect the location of any such dance prior to the issuance of any dance permit to determine needs for reasonable fire safety requirements, and make their recommendations to the city manager for the imposition of any additional conditions that may be required. 
(Prior code § 4403 (c))  
5.32.050 - Permit—Issuance—Authority to impose conditions. 
Upon receipt of an application and reports relating thereto, the city manager, before ordering the issuance of a dance permit, shall be satisfied that the public peace, safety, health and general welfare will not be endangered or jeopardized by the issuance of such dance permit. The city manager may impose conditions upon the issuance of dance permits to insure that dances and dancing conducted under and by virtue of such permits will be compatible with the preservation of the public peace, safety, health and general welfare. The city manager may consider any relevant factual material, including, but not limited to, the proposed place or location of such dance and the character and reputation of applicant and other persons who will be involved in the conduct and operation of the dances under the permit if issued. 
(Prior code § 4403 (a))  
5.32.060 - Permit—Denial—Reasons. 
If the city manager finds that the issuance of a dance permit will endanger or jeopardize the public peace, safety, health and general welfare, he shall decline to issue such permit. 
(Prior code § 4403 (d))  
5.32.070 - Permit—Notice of decision. 
Within ten days after reaching a determination with reference to a permit application, or suspension of a permit, the city shall give written notice of his decision to the applicant and to any other person requesting such notice. 
(Prior code § 4404)  
5.32.080 - Appeal. 
A.  Any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the city, with reference to the issuance, conditional issuance or denial of a permit, shall have the right of appeal, within ten consecutive calendar days after the service of written notice of the city's action. Such appeal shall be in writing, briefly stating therein the basis for such appeal, and shall be filed with the city clerk. A filing and processing fee as set by resolution of the city council shall be paid at the time of filing. Upon receipt of such letter of appeal and fee, the city clerk shall immediately set the matter for consideration by the council at its next most convenient meeting, and give the appealing party, and any other person requesting the same, at least five consecutive calendar days written notice of the time and place of such hearing. 
B.  At the time and place set for the hearing upon the appeal, the city council shall give the appealing party, and any other interested party, a reasonable opportunity to be heard. In all such cases, the burden of proof to show that the action of the city was arbitrary, capricious or in excess of his authority, shall be upon the appealing party. The determination of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 4405)  
5.32.090 - Permit—Posting or exhibiting. 
A.  Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be posted on the premises where the business or enterprise for which the permit is issued is conducted and shall remain so posted during the period the permit shall be in force. 
B.  Any permit issued to a person who goes from place to place within the city for the purpose of carrying on the business or activity as so permitted, shall be carried by him at all times, and he shall exhibit the same upon request therefor. 
(Prior code § 4407)  
5.32.100 - Permit—Duration. 
Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid until revoked, except as is otherwise expressly provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 4408)  
5.32.110 - Permit—Transfer. 
No permit issued hereunder shall be transferable, except as otherwise provided, expressly, in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 4409)  
5.32.120 - Uniformed private patrol requirements. 
A.  In addition to other conditions that may be imposed for the issuance of a dance permit, the use of uniformed private patrol personnel, who are regularly employed by a private patrol, qualified under Chapter 5.04 of this code, and licensed to do business in the city, shall be required in accordance with the following schedule: 
Number of Persons In Attendance 	Number of Patrolmen Required 
0—100 	2 
100—200 	4 
Over 200 	4 plus 2 for each additional 100 persons. 
 
B.  The private patrol officers must be licensed, must be in an easily recognizable complete private patrol officer's uniform which is in contrast to the uniform of the officers of the Montebello police department. 
C.  The city manager may, upon consideration of an application for such permits, require a greater number of private patrol officers or such patrol officers may be waived, if the city manager finds that such patrol officers are not required to preserve the public peace, health and safety. 
(Ord. 2081 § 1, 1993; prior code § 4403 (b))  
5.32.130 - Hours. 
A.  No cabaret dance or cabaret dancing shall be held or engaged in between the hours of one forty-five a.m. and six a.m. of any day. 
B.  No public dance or club dance shall be held or conducted between the hours of one a.m. and six a.m. of any day. 
(Prior code § 4412)  
5.32.140 - Possession of liquor. 
No person, other than the owner or operator of the dancehall, dancing club, club dance, cabaret dance, or public dance, and his bona fide employees acting in the course of their employment, shall possess any intoxicating liquor at any public dance unless the same has been lawfully sold, served or dispensed thereat. 
(Prior code § 4414)  
5.32.150 - Employee participation prohibited. 
No employee of any person conducting, or in charge of, any public dance, public dance hall, or cabaret, shall engage in dancing with any other person at his or her place of employment. 
(Prior code § 4415)  
5.32.160 - Disorderly conduct. 
No person in charge of or assisting in the conduct of any public dancehall, dancing club, club dance, teenage dance, school dance, cabaret dance or public dance shall permit any person to enter into, to be in or to remain in any place where such public dancehall, dancing club, club dance, teenage dance, school dance, cabaret dance or public dance is being conducted who is intoxicated, boisterous or disorderly. No person in an intoxicated condition shall enter, be in or remain in any public dancehall, dancing club, club dance, teenage dance, school dance, cabaret dance or public dance. No person shall conduct himself in a boisterous or disorderly manner in or at a public dancehall, dancing club, club dance, school dance, teenage dance, cabaret dance or public dance. 
(Prior code § 4417)  
5.32.170 - Posting of dancing regulations. 
A copy of this section and Sections 5.32.130 through 5.32.170, 5.32.180(B) and 5.32.190, together with a copy of all additional regulations imposed upon the granting of a dance permit, shall be posted at each of the following locations of the premises for which the dance permit was issued: 
A.  At the inside of and within three feet of each entrance and exit of the room or hall where a public dancehall, dancing club, club dance, teenage dance, cabaret dance, or public dance is operated or held; 
B.  On the outside of and within three feet of each entrance and exit of the room or hall where a public dancehall, dancing club, club dance, teenage dance, cabaret dance, or public dance is operated or held. 
(Prior code § 4418)  
5.32.180 - Cabaret dances—Conditions. 
A.  No cabaret dance or cabaret dancing shall be held or engaged in unless all of the following conditions are at all times complied with: 
1.  The dance floor shall be a minimum size of two hundred square feet. 
2.  The dance floor area specified in each permit issued under this chapter shall be plainly marked and designated as a dancing area. No dancing shall be permitted in the premises except upon the dancing area thus marked and designated. 
3.  During all hours during which dancing is permitted by the permit issued hereunder for the premises, no portion of the dancing area shall be used for any purpose other than dancing and entertainment. 
4.  No portion of any dance floor shall be located within eight feet of any bar or other facility for the dispensing of intoxicating beverages. 
5.  The maximum number of persons occupying a building, or portion thereof, used for dining, drinking and dancing shall not exceed the maximum posted by the fire department. Occupant load in a cabaret shall be computed by dividing the useable floor area of the premises by a factor or fifteen square feet per occupant, but may be limited to a lesser number based on exit facilities. 
B.  No premises at which cabaret dances or cabaret dancing are conducted or engaged in shall be used or operated as a private club between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. of any day. 
(Prior code §§ 4410 and 4411)  
5.32.190 - Cabaret dance permits—Exclusivity. 
Cabaret Dance permits shall be for the exclusive use of the applicant in conducting his business on licensed premises. 
A.  Any other person, group or organization renting or leasing all or a portion of the premises for any special event or dance which solicits public participation, must obtain city permits as required hereby. 
B.  Subsection A of this section shall not apply if: 
1.  The organization is a tax-exempt charitable organization registered with the state; or 
2.  Admission to the event or dance is open only to persons who are provided with full meal service by the holder of a cabaret dance permit on the premises. 
(Prior code § 4413)  
5.32.200 - Permit—Suspension. 
A.  The city shall suspend any permit issued hereunder, if he finds that the permittee or such permittee's agents and/or employees, have been, or: 
1.  Are violating any condition of approval imposed upon such permit; or 
2.  Are violating any provision of this code or other applicable law; or 
3.  That the continued operations under the permit would endanger, jeopardize or disrupt the public peace, safety, health or general welfare; or 
4.  Any other cause, as set forth in this chapter. 
B.  The determination of the city with regard to matters of suspension shall be appealable to the city council in the time and manner set forth in Section 5.32.080. 
C.  The city, in the case of such suspension, shall serve the permittee with a written order of suspension, which shall state the reasons for such suspension. The order shall be effective immediately upon the same having been personally served, or forty-eight hours after the same has been deposited in the course of transmission in the United States Postal Service. 
D.  Immediately upon such an order becoming effective, the permittee shall cease all operations authorized under such permit. Where an appeal is timely filed, no further operations shall be deemed authorized pursuant to such permit, until such appeal is finally determined. 
E.  The order of suspension shall be deemed a revocation of a permit unless the permittee within ten consecutive calendar days after the order is deposited in the course of transmission in the United States Postal Service, files an appeal from the order, in the manner hereinbefore prescribed. 
F.  Where an appeal is taken, the city council shall act upon the same in the time and manner set forth in Section 5.32.080. The action of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 4406)  
Chapter 5.36 - FIRE AND CLOSE-OUT SALES 
Sections: 
 
5.36.010 - Definitions. 
For purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined and certain provisions shall be construed as herein set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended. 
"Advertise," "Advertisement," "Publish" and "Publication" means any and all means, whether oral, written, lettered or printed, used for conveying to the public notice of the conduct of a sale as defined herein or notice of intention to conduct such sale, including, but not limited to, oral or written announcements by proclamation or outcry, newspaper advertisement, magazine advertisement, handbill, written or printed notice, printed display, billboard display, poster, radio and television announcement. 
"Permit" means a permit to conduct such sale or sales as contemplated by this chapter. 
"Permittee" means any person, within the meaning of Section 1.04.260, who shall be granted a permit to conduct such sale or sales as contemplated by this chapter. 
"Sale" means: 
A.  Any sale of or any offer to sell, to the public, or any group thereof, goods, wares or merchandise on order, in transit or in stock, in connection with a declared purpose as set forth by advertising that such sale is anticipatory to or to avoid the termination, liquidation, revision, windup, discontinuance, removal, dissolution or abandonment of the business or that portion of the business conducted at any location; and 
B.  All sales advertised in any manner calculated to convey to the public the belief that upon the disposal of the goods to be placed on sale, the business or that portion thereof being conducted at any location will cease, be removed, be interrupted, discontinued or changed; and 
C.  All sales advertised to be adjuster's sale, adjustment sale, assignee's sale, bankrupt sale, benefit contractor's sale, benefit creditor's sale, benefit of trustee's sale, building coming down sale, closing sale, closing out sale, creditors' committee sale, creditor's sale damaged goods sale, end sale, executors' sale, final days' sale, forced out sale, forced out of business sale, insolvent sale, insurance salvage sale, last days' sale, lease expires sale, lease expiring sale, liquidation sale, loss of lease sale, mortgage sale, outselling sale, receiver's sale, removal sale, reorganization sale, salvage sale, selling out sale, smoke sale, smoke and water sale, wholesale closing out sale, we quit sale, we give up sale, fixtures for sale, or advertised by any other expression or characterization closely similar to any of the foregoing and calculated to convey the same meaning; and 
D.  All sales advertised in a manner calculated to indicate that the goods, wares or merchandise to be sold, or any part thereof, have been involved in any business failure or have been derived from a business which has failed, been closed, discontinued or liquidated; and 
E.  All sales accompanied by notice of advertising indicating that the premises are available for purchase or lease or are otherwise to be vacated; and 
F.  All sales accompanied by advertising indicating a business emergency or failure affecting the seller or any previous holder of the goods to be disposed of. 
(Prior code §§ 6409 and 6409.1—6409.4)  
5.36.020 - Permit—Required. 
No person shall hereafter publish or conduct any sale of any type herein defined without first obtaining a permit therefor from the license collector and inspector of the city in the manner hereinafter provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6409.5)  
5.36.030 - Permit—Application—Content—Investigation. 
A.  No permit to conduct a sale as defined herein shall be granted except upon written application to the license collector and inspector of the city at least thirty days before the sale is to commence, signed and verified before a person authorized to administer oaths, by the person who intends to conduct sale, or, in the case of a corporation, by an officer and the manager of the store, and each application shall set forth and contain the following: 
1.  Street address and type of building where such sale is to be held; 
2.  The nature of the occupancy, whether by ownership, lease or sublease, and if by lease or sublease, the effective date of the termination of such tenancy and the name of the owner, and sublessor, if any; 
3.  A copy of all advertisements proposed to be used in connection with such sale, and a statement of the means or methods of advertising to be used in advertising such sale; 
4.  The facts in regard to the insurance, bankruptcy, insolvency, assignment, mortgage foreclosure, administration, receivership, trusteeship, removal, executorship removal, or other cause advertised to be the reason for the proposed sale; 
5.  An inventory or statement, in such form and in such detail as the license collector and inspector of the city may require, setting forth the amount and description of goods, wares and merchandise to be sold at such sale, and, when required by the license collector and inspector of the city, the date of acquisition of such goods, wares or merchandise, and the persons from whom obtained and the place from which the goods were last taken. 
6.  If the sale implies that the business is closing, a statement that the applicant intends to close and remove from the premises and the time when he intends to close and remove from the premises and the time he intends to do so. 
B.  The license collector and inspector of the city may require that all goods, wares and merchandise listed upon the inventory or statement shall be so described in detail by the manufacturer's name and lot number, the individual number of articles so numbered, colors, sizes and otherwise, that the quantity of such goods with goods listed on such inventory can be readily determined. The license collector and inspector of the city may require that each item listed on the inventory shall be tagged with a label or tag securely attached thereto, on which there is written or printed a number corresponding with the item on the inventory. 
C.  Upon filing of the application, the license collector and inspector of the city may make or cause to be made an examination, audit or investigation of the applicant and his affairs, in relation to the proposed sale. 
(Prior code § 6409.6)  
5.36.040 - Permit—Application—Filing fee—Use. 
No application for any such permit shall be accepted by the license collector and inspector of the city for filing unless accompanied by a filing fee in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars. The applicant shall be charged for the investigation of the application, and any investigation during the sale at the actual cost of such investigation. Such costs shall be deducted from the filing fee of the applicant and any amount remaining shall be refunded to the applicant. If the filing fee is insufficient to pay the costs, the license collector and inspector of the city shall notify the applicant in writing of that fact and shall set forth the estimated additional expense, and the applicant shall then deposit with the license collector and inspector of the city such additional amount. If such additional amount is not deposited within five days, the application shall lapse and any further proceedings for a permit must be pursuant to a new application. 
(Prior code § 6409.7)  
5.36.050 - Permit—Denial—Reasons. 
A.  No permit shall be issued if any one or more of the following facts or circumstances are found to exist: 
1.  That applicant was granted a license hereunder for a close-out type of sale within two years preceding the date of filing of the application; 
2.  That the inventory includes goods, wares and merchandise purchased by the applicant or added to his stock in contemplation of such sale and for the purpose of selling the same at such sale. For the purpose of this subdivision, any unusual addition to the stock of such goods, wares and merchandise made within sixty days prior to the filing of such application shall be prima facie evidence that such addition was made in contemplation of such sale and for the purpose of selling the same at such sale; 
3.  The acquisition by applicant of a bankrupt stock of goods or similar merchandise lot from another area within six months of application; 
4.  That any representation made in the application is false; 
5.  That the applicant has not operated as a retail merchant at that location for at least one year prior to the date of sale; 
6.  That the inventory is incomplete; 
7.  That the advertising set forth is false, fraudulent, deceptive or misleading in any respect; 
8.  That the methods to be used by the applicant in conducting the sale are such as, in the opinion of the license collector and inspector of the city, will work a fraud upon the purchaser; 
9.  The applicant or other persons connected with the sale are morally unfit or have been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude. 
B.  The license collector and inspector of the city may refuse a permit because of insufficiency of the information set forth in the application, but in such event the license collector and inspector of the city shall grant the applicant permission to file an amended application. 
C.  No application, however, shall be denied unless an opportunity for a hearing has been given the applicant. Notice of the hearing shall be effected by personal delivery of the notice to the applicant or by depositing in the United States mail such notice, addressed to the applicant at his address given in the application. 
(Prior code § 6409.8)  
5.36.060 - Permit—Issuance. 
A.  Each permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall have printed, written or stamped on the face thereof the following: 
 This permit is granted by the License Collector and Inspector of the City of Montebello and accepted by the permittee, its officers, agents, and employees, upon the condition that such permittee comply with and abide by all the provisions of Chapter 5.36 of the Montebello Municipal Code 
With a line thereunder for signature by the permittee and a witness. 
B.  At the time of delivery of the permit, such statement must be signed by the permittee, or his authorized agent, in the presence of the license collector and inspector, or authorized deputy. 
(Prior code § 6409.9)  
5.36.070 - Permit—Conditions. 
Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall authorize the one type of sale named in the application, at the place named therein, for a period of not more than thirty calendar days, and shall permit the sale of goods only which are set out in the application, all of which goods throughout the duration of the sale must be definitely separated from any other goods displayed at, or within the store or place of business, and all advertising, signs or notices referring to, or calling attention to the sale, must be confined to the display, or displays, or goods involved in the sale. 
(Prior code § 6409.10)  
5.36.080 - Permit—Renewal. 
The license collector and inspector of the city, upon a verified application therefor, may renew the permit for a period of not to exceed thirty days upon the payment of a renewal fee in the sum of two hundred fifty dollars, which sum shall be used in the same manner as heretofore prescribed for the filing fee. Such verified petition for renewal shall set forth a complete list of goods, listed in the original application and remaining unsold, and shall not contain any goods, wares or merchandise not named in such original application. Upon receipt of such application for renewal the license collector and inspector of the city shall cause an investigation to be made at once, and if satisfied of the truth of the statements therein contained, the license collector and inspector of the city shall grant such renewal, which shall be endorsed and signed as provided for the original permit. 
(Prior code § 6409.11)  
5.36.090 - Permit—Revocation. 
A.  The license collector and inspector of the city shall have the power to revoke at any time any permit granted in accordance with this chapter whenever any such sale or special sale is being conducted in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter in such manner as to deceive or defraud the public, or if the holder of any such permit: 
1.  Has made any material misstatement in the application for such permit; 
2.  Has been guilty of any fraudulent practice, or practices, in the conduct of the sale authorized by such permit; 
3.  Has failed to include in the inventory required by the provisions of this chapter the goods, wares or merchandise required to be contained in such inventory; 
4.  Has added, caused to be added, or permitted to be added any goods, wares or merchandise not described in the original inventory; 
5.  Has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or of the laws pertaining to advertising. 
B.  No permit shall be revoked for any cause previously enumerated, until a written complaint has first been filed with the license collector and inspector of the city setting forth in ordinary, concise language the charge made against the permittee. Such complaint shall be verified by the oath of the person making the charge, such verification to be in the form prescribed by the Code of Civil Procedure for verified pleadings in civil actions. Service of such complaint and notice of hearings shall be done by depositing the same in the United States mail, addressed to the applicant at his address given in the application. Such notice and copy of the complaint shall be served or given to the permittee at least five days and not more than ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. At any such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to be heard and defend himself, and he may call witnesses in his behalf. After conducting such hearing the license collector and inspector of the city may suspend or revoke the permit. If the violations which form the basis of such complaint continue after notification to the permittee, the license collector and inspector of the city may suspend the permit until the hearing to consider the revocation of the permit. Such suspension shall be effective immediately upon giving notice thereof to the person in charge at the location of the sale. During such suspension, no person shall conduct any sale of the type herein defined. 
(Prior code § 6409.13)  
5.36.100 - Rules and regulations. 
A.  A permit shall be valid only for the advertising, representation and sale of the particular goods, wares or merchandise described in the original application therefor, and at the particular time, and particular place stated therein, and by the particular applicant, and any renewal, replenishment or substitution of such goods, wares or merchandise, or change of such time or place for such sale, or change of person conducting the sale, shall be unlawful and shall render such permit void. No person in contemplation of conducting any such sale or special sale, or during the continuance of such a sale, shall order any goods, wares or merchandise for the purpose of selling them at such sale. 
B.  Each sale of goods, wares or merchandise as were not inventoried and described in the original application shall constitute a separate offense under this chapter. 
C.  The license collector and inspector of the city further is empowered to make such rules and regulations for the conduct and advertisement of such sale or special sale as in his opinion will serve to prevent deception and to protect the public. 
(Prior code § 6409.12)  
5.36.110 - Display of permit—Availability of stock list. 
Upon commencement and throughout the duration of any sale, as herein defined, the permit issued by the license collector and inspector of the city shall be prominently displayed near the entrance to the premises. A duplicate original of the application and stock list pursuant to which such permit was issued, shall at all times be available to the license collector and inspector of the city or to his inspector and investigators to examine all merchandise in the premises for comparison with such stock list. 
(Prior code § 6409.15)  
5.36.120 - Inventoried goods—Loss of identity. 
Any removal of any goods, wares or merchandise inventoried and described in the original application from the place of sale mentioned in such application shall cause such goods to lose their identity as the stock of any of the sale defined herein, and no permit thereafter will be issued for the conducting of a sale of any such goods, wares or merchandise in such manner as to identify them with the store, store name, store owner, or location referred to in the original application. 
(Prior code § 6409.14)  
5.36.130 - Records. 
Suitable books and records shall be kept by the permittee and shall at all times be available to the inspector and investigators. At the close of business each day the stock list attached to the application shall be revised and those items disposed of during such day shall be so marked thereon. 
(Prior code § 6409.16)  
5.36.140 - Business with multiple locations. 
If the applicant operates a similar business at more than one location, any sale, as defined herein, shall include only such goods, wares and merchandise as are usually carried in stock at the location of the sale. 
(Prior code § 6409.18)  
5.36.150 - Jewelry sales. 
No sale, as defined herein, of jewelry shall be conducted unless there is present at the location of the sale an inspector appointed by the license collector of the city. The applicant shall pay the actual cost of keeping an inspector present at such sale. In addition to the filing fee, the applicant for a permit which includes the sale of jewelry shall deposit with the license collector and inspector of the city, before the sale begins, a sum equal to the estimated cost of the inspector during the course of the sale. 
(Prior code § 6409.19)  
5.36.160 - Taking orders. 
During the course of any type of closing out sale, no orders shall be taken for purchase of times not listed in the inventory submitted with the application. 
(Prior code § 6409.20)  
5.36.170 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication, who publishes any such advertisement in good faith, without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character, or without knowledge that the provisions hereof have not been complied with. 
(Prior code § 6409.17)  
Chapter 5.40 - FOOT AND PUSHCART VENDORS 
Sections: 
 
5.40.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be defined as set forth in this section, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
"Food items" means all food and drink which is intended for human consumption. 
"Foot vendor" means any person selling or intending to sell food items which are carried on his or her person in a basket, backpack, sack, box or other device used to carry goods. 
"Pushcart" means any humanly-propelled, wheeled vehicle which contains food items offered for sale. 
"Pushcart vendor" means any person selling or intending to sell food items from a pushcart. 
(Ord. 2010 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 3560)  
5.40.020 - Foot vendors—Sale of food items on public streets or sidewalks prohibited. 
No foot vendor shall sell food items on any public street or sidewalk. 
(Ord. 2010 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 3561)  
5.40.030 - Pushcart vendors—Sale of food items on public streets or sidewalks prohibited. 
No person shall sell food items from a pushcart on any public street or sidewalk. 
(Ord. 2010 § 1 (part): prior code § 3562)  
5.40.040 - Pushcarts—Impoundment—Method—Receipts. 
The police department may impound a pushcart for violation of this chapter. The towing service used by the police department for automobile impoundment may be used to impound a pushcart. The impounding officer shall prepare three copies of a receipt for the impounded pushcart. One shall be given to the vendor at the time of impoundment. The second copy of the receipt shall be attached to the impounded pushcart and the third copy shall be retained by the police department for its records. Additional copies of the receipt can be made to send with the notice letter to the owner of the pushcart. 
(Ord. 2010 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 3563)  
5.40.050 - Pushcarts—Impoundment—Removal of contents. 
When a pushcart is impounded for a violation of this chapter, the vendor shall be required to empty the contents of the pushcart into a plastic bag provided by the police department. The contents so placed in the plastic bag shall then be released into the custody of the vendor. 
(Ord. 2010 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 3564)  
5.40.060 - Pushcarts—Impoundment—Notice to owners. 
Within five days of impoundment, the police department shall deliver or mail a notice of impoundment to the owner of a pushcart if the address is known to the police department. The notice to the owner shall be substantially in the following form, but may include other information: 
A pushcart owned by you was impounded by the City of Montebello Police Department on _______ for violation of Chapter 5.40 of the Montebello Municipal Code entitled "Foot and Pushcart Vendors." In order to have the pushcart(s) released to your possession you or your agent must pay all towing and storage fees incurred by the City related to the impoundment of the pushcart(s). This amount is $_______. 
(Ord. 2010 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 3566)  
5.40.070 - Pushcarts—Impoundment—Redemption and/or disposal. 
The police department shall set and charge a standard fee for the towing and storage of a pushcart impounded pursuant to this chapter. The owner of an impounded pushcart or his or her lawful agent must pay all towing and storage fees incurred by such impoundment before the pushcart will be released to his or her possession. If the impounded pushcart is not claimed within four months, the towing agent may, upon authorization by the records supervisor of the police department, dispose of it through a lien sale pursuant to Section 3052 of the California Civil Code. 
(Ord. 2010 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 3565)  
Chapter 5.44 - FORTUNE TELLING 
Sections: 
 
5.44.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words or phrases shall be defined as follows, unless it is apparent from the context that another meaning is intended: 
"City council" means the city council of the city of Montebello. 
"For pay" means any fee, reward, gift, donation, loan or receipt of anything of value. 
"Fortunetelling" means the telling of fortunes, forecasting the future or furnishing any information by means of astrology, phrenology, cartomancy, crystal gazing, divination, prophecy, augury, occult or psychic powers, telepathy, clairvoyance, numerology, psychometry, spirits mediumship, seership, palmistry, necromancy, biochart, or any similar business, craft, art or science through the use of cards, talismans, charms, potions, magnetized articles or substances, mysteries or magic of any kind or nature. 
(Prior code § 4270)  
5.44.020 - Permit—Required. 
A.  No person shall conduct, engage in, carry on or practice fortunetelling for pay, or operate a business establishment where the same is conducted, carried on, engaged in or practiced for pay, without first obtaining a permit from the city in the manner set forth in this chapter. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly allow any person to conduct, engage in, carry on or practice fortunetelling for pay as herein defined without first obtaining a permit from the city. 
(Prior code § 4271 (A) and (B))  
5.44.030 - Permit—Applications—Contents—Fee. 
Every person who conducts, engages in, carries on, or practices fortunetelling for pay, or operates a business establishment where the same is conducted, carried on, engaged in or practiced for pay, shall file a separate verified application for a permit with the chief of police. The application shall include or be accompanied by the following: 
A.  The name, home and business address, home and business phone number, social security number, driver's license number, and physical description of the applicant, including date of birth; 
B.  A list of criminal violations of the law of which the applicant has been convicted, excluding minor traffic violations; 
C.  A recent passport-size photograph of the applicant; 
D.  A list which contains the address and dates of when and where the applicant conducted a similar business either alone or in conjunction with others; 
E.  A description of the type of fortunetelling activity which the applicant proposes to conduct, engage in, carry on or practice, together with references to available literature on that type of activity; 
F.  Any other information required by the chief of police; 
G.  A permit fee in the amount of five hundred dollars in the case of an applicant who proposes to operate a fortunetelling business, or two hundred dollars in the case of an applicant who proposes to engage in or practice fortunetelling as an employee of another. 
(Prior code § 4272)  
5.44.040 - Permit—Application—Investigation—Report and recommendation. 
Upon receipt of the completed written application, the chief of police and such other city departments as he deems necessary, shall conduct an investigation to determine whether the permit should be issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The applicant shall submit a set of fingerprints if required by the chief of police. The investigation shall be conducted to verify the information contained in the application and all other relevant supporting data. After completion of the investigation the chief of police shall compile a report and submit a written recommendation to the city manager within fifteen working days after the completed permit application was filed, unless the applicant requests or consents to an extension of the time period. If the report recommends denial of a permit, the grounds for denial shall be set forth in writing. A copy of the report and the recommendation shall be sent by first-class mail or otherwise made available to the applicant. 
(Prior code § 4273)  
5.44.050 - Permit—Application—Decision by city manager. 
The city manager shall consider the application, report and recommendation of the chief of police after the filing of the report and recommendation of the chief of police. 
A.  The decision of the city manager granting or denying the permit shall be in writing. If adverse to the applicant, it shall contain findings of fact and a determination of the issues presented. 
B.  The city manager shall make the order denying or granting the application within thirty days after completion of the application for a permit and shall notify the applicant by personal service or certified mail, unless the applicant agrees in writing to an extension of time. 
(Prior code § 4274)  
5.44.060 - Permit—Approval—Findings. 
The city manager shall approve the issuance of the permit if he finds: 
A.  All the information contained in the application and supporting data is true, and the applicant made no false, misleading, or fraudulent statements of fact on the application or any other documents required by the city; 
B.  The applicant and any other person with a financial interest, or who will be directly engaged in the management and operation of the fortunetelling establishment has not been convicted of any violation of this chapter or any law relating to: 
1.  Fraud, theft, or any offense involving moral turpitude; 
2.  An offense involving the use of force or violence upon the person of another; 
3.  An offense involving the use or possession of dangerous drugs or narcotics; 
4.  An offense requiring registration under Section 290 of the California Penal Code; or 
5.  A violation of Section 647 (b) of the California Penal Code (Prostitution); 
C.  The operation as proposed by the applicant complies with all applicable laws including, but not limited to, the city's building, zoning, health and sign regulations; 
D.  The applicant agrees to abide by and comply with all conditions of the permit and this chapter. 
(Prior code § 4275 (A))  
5.44.070 - Permit—Denial—Finding. 
The city manager shall deny the permit application if any of the conditions set forth in Section 5.44.060 are found against the applicant. 
(Prior code § 4275 (B))  
5.44.080 - Permit—Issuance. 
If the city manager approves the permit the chief of police shall issue the permit; provided, that: 
A.  The fee required by Section 5.08.010(A)(19) has been paid; 
B.  The applicant has posted a surety bond with the city clerk in the principal sum of five thousand dollars executed as surety by a good and sufficient corporate surety authorized to do surety business in the state. The form of the bond shall have been approved by the city attorney and shall have been given to ensure good faith and fair dealing on behalf of the applicant and as a guarantee of indemnity for any and all loss, damage, theft, or other unfair dealings suffered by any patron of the applicant within the city during the term of the permit. 
(Prior code § 4275 (C))  
5.44.090 - Permit—Term. 
The term of the permit shall not exceed one year. The city manager, in his discretion, may grant a permit for a period of not less than one year and may impose reasonable conditions on the granting of this permit as the city manager deems necessary for the protection of public health, safety and welfare. 
(Prior code § 4275 (D))  
5.44.100 - Permit—Posting. 
A copy of the permit issued to the permittee shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises described in the permit. 
(Prior code § 4278)  
5.44.110 - Renewal of permits and relocation. 
A.  Any person desiring to renew a permit issued under this chapter shall file an application with the city manager not earlier than thirty days prior to expiration. The application shall be accompanied by a fee of three hundred dollars in the case of an operator of a fortunetelling establishment, and one hundred dollars in the case of an employee. 
B.  A permit issued under this chapter shall only be valid at the business address stated therein. No permit holder shall conduct, engage in, carry on or practice fortunetelling at another location unless written approval is first obtained from the city manager. Application for such approval shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred dollars in the case of an operator of a fortunetelling establishment, and fifty dollars in the case of an employee. 
C.  Applications submitted under this section shall be reviewed by the chief of police, who shall then make a report and recommendation to the city manager. The city manager shall approve or disapprove the application pursuant to the provisions of Sections 5.44.060 through 5.44.090. 
(Prior code § 4277)  
5.44.120 - Termination of employment—Surrender of permit required. 
Every fortuneteller issued a permit must surrender such permit to the city manager upon termination of their employment as a fortuneteller at the place or places owned and operated by the employer who employed them in the first instance. 
(Prior code § 4276 (D))  
5.44.130 - Permit—Suspension and revocation. 
A.  After notice and hearing, the city manager shall suspend or revoke any permit if it is found that: 
1.  The applicant has made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact in the permit application or any other document required in conjunction therewith; 
2.  The operation, as conducted by the applicant, does not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the city's building, zoning, health regulations, and any other conditions imposed in the permit; 
3.  The applicant or any other person directly engaged in the management or operation of a fortunetelling business has been convicted of any of the offenses listed in Section 5.44.060. 
B.  1.  Prior to the suspension or revocation of the permit, the city manager shall hold a hearing to consider the action to be taken. Such hearing shall be held before the city manager not less than ten days after service of the notice of suspension or revocation upon the manager of the fortunetelling establishment, with a copy thereof mailed to the permittee. The notice shall set forth the time, date, and place of hearing. At such hearing, the permittee or his/her representative may present evidence. 
C.  Within five working days after the conclusion of the hearing, the city manager shall render a decision. If the decision calls for suspension or revocation of the permit, such decision shall be effective immediately upon personal service on the manager or permittee, or forty-eight hours after the same has been deposited with the United States Postal Service. 
D.  If the permittee is dissatisfied with the action taken by the city manager, such person may appeal to the city council. 
(Prior code § 4276 (A), (B) and (C))  
5.44.140 - Exceptions. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any person solely by reason of the fact that he or she is engaged in the business of entertaining the public by demonstrations of mind reading, mental telepathy, thought conveyance, or the giving of horoscopic readings, at public places in the presence of and within the hearing of other persons. 
B.  No person shall be required to pay any fee or take out any permit for conducting or participating in a religious ceremony or service when such person holds a certificate of ordination as a minister, missionary, medium, healer, or clairvoyant, hereinafter collectively referred to as a minister, from any bona fide church or religious association maintaining the church, holding regular services and having a creed or set of religious principals that is recognized by all churches of like faith; provided, that: 
1.  Except as provided in subdivision 3 of this subsection, the fees, gratuities, emoluments, and profits thereof shall be regularly accounted for and paid solely to or for the benefit of the bona fide church or religious association, as defined in this section; 
2.  The minister holding the certificate of ordination from such bona fide church or religious association, as defined in this section, shall file with the finance director of the city a copy of the minister's certificate of ordination with the minister's name, age, street address and phone number in this city where the activity set forth in this section is to be conducted; 
3.  Such bona fide church or religious association, as defined in this section, may pay to its ministers a salary or compensation based upon a percentage basis, pursuant to an agreement between the church and the minister which is embodied in a resolution and transcribed in the minutes of such church or religious association. 
C.  This chapter does not apply to any activity or professional duly certified or licensed by the state or other competent licensing authority. 
(Prior code § 4279)  
5.44.150 - Violations. 
No person shall violate any of the terms, conditions, regulations or provisions of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. Each day any such violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior code § 4271 (c))  
Chapter 5.48 - MASSAGE PARLORS 
Sections: 
 
5.48.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases hereinafter set forth, shall be defined as follows: 
"Chief" means the chief of police of the city. 
"City manager" means the duly appointed, acting and qualified city manager of the city. 
"Council" means the city council of the city. 
"Massage" means any method of treating the superficial soft parts of the human body, for remedial, hygienic or other purposes, consisting of rubbing, stroking, kneading, or any similar treatment, accompanied by hand and or the use of any instrument. 
"Massage parlor" means any building or structure, or portion thereof, located within the city, which is open to members of the general public, with or without the payment of a fee, at which massage services are offered. 
"Notice" means any notice given by United States mail, postage prepaid, property addressed. Such notice shall be deemed given when the same is deposited with the postal service. 
"Permit" means a permit required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, to operate a massage parlor. 
(Prior code § 4250)  
5.48.020 - Permit—Required. 
No person shall operate any massage parlor within the city without first obtaining a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and securing the necessary business license as required by Chapter 5.04 of this code. 
(Prior code § 4251)  
5.48.030 - Permit—Application—Form—Additional information required. 
A.  Written applications for massage parlor permits shall be made upon forms provided for this purpose by the chief of police. Such completed applications shall be submitted to the chief, together with the following: 
1.  An accurate statement of the business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of application; and 
2.  A certificate from a medical doctor stating that the applicant has, within thirty days immediately prior thereto, been examined and found to be free of any contagious or communicable disease; and 
3.  Either of the following: 
a.  A certified copy of a certificate of graduation from a recognized school or other institution of learning wherein the method, profession and work of massage technicians is taught. The term "recognized school" means and includes any school or institution of learning which has as its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession, or work of massage technicians, which school requires a resident course of study of not less than two hundred hours to be given in not less than three calendar months before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school or institution of learning showing the successful completion of such course of study or learning, or 
b.  A statement of work experience containing sufficient information to establish that the applicant is qualified to conduct a massage parlor; and 
4.  Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application; and 
5.  Proof of payment of a processing and filing fee to the city treasurer of one hundred dollars. 
B.  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to deny the police department of the city the right to take the fingerprints and additional photographs of the applicant, nor shall anything contained herein be construed to deny the right of the department to confirm the height and weight of the applicant. 
(Prior code § 4252)  
5.48.040 - Permit—Application—Investigation—Issuance—Determination—Findings. 
A.  Upon receipt of a written application for a permit, the chief shall conduct an investigation, in such manner as he deems appropriate, in order to ascertain whether such permit should be issued as requested. 
B.  The chief shall issue such permits as requested, unless, as a result of such investigation, he finds any of the following facts to be present: 
1.  That the applicant or any person, including, but not limited to, any employee, who will be directly engaged or employed in the massage parlor operation, has been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude; or 
2.  That any such person has a bad moral character; or 
3.  That the operation of the massage parlor would, if allowed, constitute a public nuisance. 
C.  The chief shall be authorized to condition the issuance of any permit for a massage parlor to insure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable laws. 
D.  When the chief finds from his investigation that any of the previously mentioned facts are present, he shall decline to issue the permit as requested within thirty calendar days from receipt of application for permit. Any decision of the chief with respect to the denial or conditional approval of any such permit shall be subject to an appeal by the aggrieved applicant; provided, that the appeal is taken within the time and manner hereinafter described. 
(Prior code § 4253)  
5.48.050 - Permit—Application—Issuance—Determination—Notice. 
After making his determination as to any such permit, the chief shall, within five calendar days, give written notice of his decision, approving, conditionally approving or declining the issuance of a permit to the applicant and to any person requesting notice of the same. 
(Prior code § 4254 (part))  
5.48.060 - Permit—Application—Issuance—Determination—Appeal to city manager. 
A.  Within ten days after the chief gives written notice of his decision denying or conditionally approving an application, any applicant who is aggrieved by the decision declining to issue such permit, or by any of the conditions imposed upon such issuance, may file a written letter of appeal with the city manager, appealing the decision of the chief to the city manager. The letter of appeal shall briefly outline the basis for such appeal. The city manager upon receipt of such written letter of appeal, shall obtain from the chief all of the files applicable to the application. 
B.  The city manager shall hereafter conduct an informal hearing for the purpose of determining whether the decision, as rendered by the chief, was within the authority granted to him pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The city manager shall give written notice of the time and place of such hearing to the applicant, to the chief and to any other person requesting such notice. At the time and place set for such hearing, the city manager shall act as the hearing officer and shall accept all relevant evidence pertaining to the application, including, but not limited to, the files and records in custody of the chief relating thereto. The city manager shall give the applicant, and any other interested person, a reasonable opportunity to be heard with respect to the merits of such appeal. The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to show that the action of the chief was arbitrary, capricious or in excess of the authority granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The city manager shall affirm, reverse or modify, in whole or in part, the decision as rendered by the chief of police. The city manager shall, promptly, give written notice, to the applicant and any other person requesting the same, of his decision, together with the reasons therefor. The decision of the city manager shall be final and conclusive in the absence of an appeal to the city council as hereinafter provided. 
(Prior code § 4254 (part))  
5.48.070 - Appeals to city council. 
Any applicant who is aggrieved by a decision of the city manager, as hereinbefore provided, shall have the right to appeal such decision to the city council. Such an appeal shall be perfected by the filing of a written letter of appeal, briefly stating the grounds therefor, with the city clerk, within ten days after the giving of notice of the city manager's decision. Upon receipt of a letter of appeal, the city clerk shall place the same on the city council's agenda at its next most convenient meeting. The city clerk shall give the applicant, and any other person requesting the same, ten days' written notice of the time and place of such hearing before the council. At such time and place, the city council shall hear the matter, and shall, thereafter, issue, conditionally issue, or decline to issue, the permit as requested. The city council shall give the applicant and any other interested person the right to present any relevant evidence bearing upon such appeal. The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to show that the action of the city manager was arbitrary, capricious or outside the scope of authority granted to him by the provisions of the chapter. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 4255)  
5.48.080 - Permit—Transfer—Duration. 
No permit issued hereunder shall be transferable. Permits issued hereunder shall be valid until revoked. 
(Prior code § 4259)  
5.48.090 - Permit—Suspension and revocation. 
The chief shall suspend any permit issued pursuant to this chapter if he finds that the permittee, or any agent or employee of the permittee, has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, any other applicable law, or any part of the conditions imposed upon the issuance of permit, with regard to the operation pursuant to such permit. He shall effectuate such suspension by issuing an order of suspension, notice of which shall be given in the manner prescribed herein. The order shall contain a statement of the reason or reasons for such suspension. The order of suspension shall be deemed an order of revocation, and shall be final and conclusive, within ten days after the giving of notice thereof to such permittee, in the absence of an appeal taken in the time and manner set forth in Sections 5.48.060 and 5.48.070. The filing of an appeal shall have the effect of staying the effective date of the order, pending the determination of such appeal. 
(Ord. 2070 § 25, 1992: prior code § 4256)  
5.48.100 - New employees. 
Each permittee, prior to employing any person who will be directly engaged in the massage parlor operation, after issuance of a permit, shall file with the chief, an information form relating to such proposed employee, in a form prepared for that purpose by the chief. A filing and processing fee in the sum of ten dollars shall be paid to the city treasurer. Upon receipt of such form and evidence that the processing fee has been paid, the chief shall conduct an investigation to determine whether such proposed employee is qualified pursuant to Section 5.48.040(B)(1) and (2). If the person is so qualified, the chief, by written notice to the permittee, shall add such person's name to the list of persons authorized to engage in the permitted massage parlor operation. Where, as a result of his investigation, the chief determines that the proposed employee does not qualify pursuant to the Section 5.48.040(B)(1) and (2), he shall give notice of such decision to the permittee and to the proposed employee within thirty calendar days from the receipt of application. The permittee shall have the right of appeal from such decision, in the time and manner set forth in Sections 5.48.060 and 5.48.070. 
(Prior code § 4257)  
5.48.110 - Regulations. 
Each person to whom a massage parlor permit has been issued, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall conduct such operation in accordance with the following regulations: 
A.  No person shall give or assist in giving any massage to any other person under the age of eighteen years unless the parent of such minor has consented thereto in writing. 
B.  Each permittee shall have posted, in a conspicuous location upon the premises where the massage operation is to be conducted, the permit as issued by the chief. 
C.  Each permittee shall provide, in each room, or portion of a room, where massages are given, sufficient lighting and ventilation as required by this code. 
D.  Each permittee shall provide and maintain adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing of instruments used in performing the acts of massage. 
E.  Each permittee shall provide and maintain adequate bathing, dressing, locker and toilet facilities for patrons. 
F.  Each permittee shall maintain physical facilities for the massage parlor in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and toilets utilized in the operation shall be thoroughly cleaned each day. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. 
G.  Each permittee shall provide clean and sanitary towels and linens for each patron. The common use of towels or linens shall not be permitted. 
H.  A minimum of one separate washbasin shall be provided for each permittee in each massage parlor for the use of his employees, which basin shall provide soap or detergent and hot and cold running water at all times and shall be located within or as close as practicable to the area devoted to the performing of massage services. In addition, there shall be provided at each washbasin, sanitary towels placed in permanently installed dispensers. 
I.  No person shall give, or assist in giving, of any massage to a person of the opposite sex. 
(Ord. 2070 § 20, 1992: prior code § 4258)  
5.48.120 - Exemption. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed applicable to any person who is engaged in a healing art, and is licensed as such, pursuant to Division 2, commencing with Section 500 of the Business and Professions Code of the state. 
(Prior code § 4260)  
Chapter 5.52 - OIL AND GAS DRILLING 
Sections: 
 
5.52.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the drilling, redrilling and servicing of oil and gas wells and related facilities, in order to promote orderly and compatible utilization and development of the existing and potential oil and gas resources of this city. 
(Prior code § 6406)  
5.52.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words, phrases and terms as used hereafter shall be deemed to have the following meanings: 
"Abandonment" means the restoration of the drill site as required by these regulations. 
"API" means the American Petroleum Institute. 
"Approved type" or "approved design" means and includes improvements, equipment or facilities of a type or design approved by the building inspector. 
"ASME" means the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. 
"Blowout" means the uncontrolled discharge of gas, liquid or solids or a mixture thereof, from a well into the atmosphere. 
"Blowout preventer" means a mechanical, hydraulic or pneumatic or other device or combination of such devices secured to the top of a well casing, including valves, fittings and control mechanisms connected therewith, designed and capable of preventing a blowout. 
"Building inspector" means the officer charged with the administration and enforcement of the building code, or his regularly authorized deputy. 
"Cellar" means an excavation around or above the top joint of the casing in a well. 
"City" means the city of Montebello. 
"City coordinator" means the city coordinator of the city, or his authorized agent. 
"Code" means the Montebello Municipal Code. 
"Completion of drilling": A well is completed, for the purpose of regulations, thirty days after the drilling crew has been released, unless drilling or remedial operations are resumed before the end of the thirty days, in which case completion shall be deemed to occur at the end of such remedial work. 
"Derrick" means any framework, tower, or mast together with all parts of an appurtenance to such structure, including any foundations, pumphouse, pipe racks, and each and every part thereof, which is or are required, or used, or useful for the drilling for and the production of oil, gas or other hydrocarbons from the earth except tanks used for storage purposes. 
"Desertion" means the cessation of operations at a drill site without compliance with the provisions of this chapter relating to suspended operations or abandonment. 
"Diligence" means that the drilling derrick is in its operating position over the well, properly anchored and supported and that an operating crew is on duty at the drill site at all reasonable times. 
"Division of oil and gas" means the Division of Oil and Gas of the Department of Conservation of the Resources Agency of the state of California or any other state agency that may in the future be charged with responsibilities now assumed by the division. 
"Drill site" means the premises used during the drilling and subsequent life of a well or wells, which is necessary for the safe and reasonable operation thereof. 
"Drilling" means digging a hole in earth formation with a power-driven drill bit for the purpose of exploring for, or developing of, oil or gas. Drilling includes those operations that are connected with the completion of a well. Drilling shall not include shot hole. 
"Dwelling" means any building or structure which has for its primary purpose human residence. 
"Gas" means the gaseous components or vapors occurring in, or derived from, petroleum or natural gas. 
"Maintenance" means and includes the repair and replacement of parts of a structure where same does not alter or lessen the strength or stability of the structure. 
"Natural gas plant" or "absorption plant" means a plant for the processing of natural gas from the production wells and processed into its various components. 
"Notice" means written notice given by Unites States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the recipient at his last known address. 
"O zone" means an oil production district, established in accordance with Titles 16 and 17 of this code. 
"Oil" includes gas and petroleum, and petroleum includes gas and oil. 
"Oil and/or gas production" means the exploration for, or extraction of, oil, gas or other petroleum products or byproducts thereof, from the surface or subsurface of the ground. 
"Operating unit" means an aggregation of two or more oil or gas production facilities operated together as a single working unit under the jurisdiction of a single operator. 
"Operator" means a person, as defined in this code, who is actually in charge and control of the drilling, maintenance, operation or pumping of a well. 
"Outer boundary line," where several contiguous parcels of land in the same or different ownerships are operated as an operating unit, means the exterior limits of the land included in the lease or unit. In determining the contiguity of any such parcels of land, no street, road or alley lying within the lease or unit shall be deeded to destroy contiguity if the same would otherwise exist. 
"Owner" means a person who owns a legal or equitable title or leasehold interest in and to the surface and/or subsurface of the drill site. 
"Permit" means a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, allowing for oil and/or gas production on a particular parcel of land. 
"Rat hole" means any pipe or sleeve buried in the ground used during drilling operations. 
"Redrilling" means the deepening of an existing oil well or otherwise drilling beyond the extremities of the existing well case. The provisions of this chapter relating to drilling shall be equally applicable to redrilling. 
"Seismic petroleum prospecting" means prospecting for oil by means of drilling holes into the ground, placing an explosive charge therein, and detonating such charge, thereby exciting an energy or sound wave through the earth, the results of which are recorded and read by seismograph equipment placed at various locations on the surface of the earth. 
"Shot hole" means the hole drilled in seismic petroleum prospecting. 
"Source of ignition" means any flame, arc spark, or heated object or surface capable of igniting flammable liquids, gases or vapors. 
"Storage tanks" means tanks used only for the storage of petroleum products produced on the site and only for its temporary storage prior to removal from the site. 
"Street" means a public or private vehicular right-of-way which affords a means of access to properties abutting the same. 
"Structure" means anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground or is attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. 
"Suspend operations" means the approved temporary suspension of drilling or redrilling operations pending a resumption of the operation or abandonment. 
"Tank" means a container, covered or uncovered, used in conjunction with the drilling or production of an oil well, for holding or storing liquids at or near atmospheric pressure. 
"Well" or "oil well" means a well or hole drilled into the earth for the purpose of exploring for, injecting or extracting, from the earth, oil, gas, or other hydrocarbon substances or a well or hole in the earth by means of which oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances are injected, extracted or produced or are capable of being produced from the earth, or well or hole for the purpose of secondary recovery or disposal thereof. Well does not include shot hole. 
"Well servicing" means remedial or maintenance work performed within any existing well which does not involve drilling or redrilling. 
(Prior code § 6406.1)  
5.52.030 - Permits—Required—Exception. 
A.  Oil Permit. No person, without first obtaining a permit in the manner hereinafter prescribed, shall engage in any of the following activities: 
1.  Drilling or redrilling of oil wells in connection with the exploration for, or the production of, petroleum or allied products, including secondary recovery; or 
2.  Erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, movement, improvement, removal, conversion, or demolition of any structure utilized in connection with an oil well. 
B.  Excavation Permit. A permit from the city engineer shall be obtained for all excavating and grading work as required by Chapter 15.48 of this code. 
C.  Exception. No permit shall be required for well servicing or maintenance, nor for construction of any other structure for which a building permit is not required by this code. 
(Prior code § 6406.2)  
5.52.040 - Permit—Application—Form—Content. 
An applicant shall file, with the building inspector, an application in writing for a permit to allow the construction and operation of oil or gas production facilities on a form furnished for that purpose by the building inspector. The applicant shall include the following information: 
A.  A complete legal description of the property; 
B.  A fully informative plot plan showing, among other things, the location of the well and appurtenant structures, and the relative location of the drill site to existing buildings or structures within a distance from the outer boundaries of the site as designated by the building inspector; 
C.  Plans and engineering specifications of structures, drilling derricks, drilling masts, tanks, and high-pressure systems regulated by this chapter; 
D.  Corporate surety bonds in amounts hereinunder set forth; 
E.  A verified statement signed by the applicant certifying that he is owner of the site, or his agent, and is duly authorized by the owner to make and file the application, and that he has read the application and the same is true and correct; 
F.  An acknowledged statement in writing by the owner of the drill site and by the owner of any private land over which access is to be had to the drill site granting to the city the right to enter upon the drill site and such private land for the purpose of inspection and restoring the premises in the event the applicant should fail to do so, as hereinafter provided; 
G.  A statement as to the means by which liquid spills will be removed from diked areas or catchment basins; 
H.  Such other information as may be required by the building inspector; 
I.  A filing and processing fee, in the amount specified in Section 5.51.170, shall be paid contemporaneously with the filing of the application. 
(Prior code § 6406.3 (part))  
5.52.050 - Permit—Procedures. 
The following procedures shall be observed in connection with issuance, denial or revocation of permits for the activities described in Section 5.52.030. 
(Prior code § 6406.4 (part))  
5.52.060 - Permit—O-zoned property—Application—Determination. 
A.  An application for a permit which relates to any property located in an O zone, shall be referred to the city manager, who shall issue the permit as requested if he finds that the operation as proposed: 
1.  Will conform to the provisions of this chapter, and all other applicable laws; and 
2.  Will not constitute a nuisance, nor interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of properties located in the immediate vicinity of the lot upon which the drill site will be located; and 
3.  Will not have an adverse effect upon the public peace, welfare or interest. 
B.  If the city manager determines that any one of the foregoing requirements is not met, he shall deny the application and refuse to issue such permit. 
C.  Notice of such denial shall be given to the applicant within five days after such decision. The determination of the city manager shall be final in the absence of an appeal, as hereinafter provided. The applicant shall have the right to appeal such decision to the city council within thirty days after mailing of the notice of denial. The action taken upon such an appeal shall be in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.52.110. 
(Prior code § 6406.4 (1))  
5.52.070 - Permit—Properties not included in an O zone—Application—Determination. 
A.  Where a permit application relates to property not included in an O zone, the city manager shall give notice, as hereinafter specified, if he finds that the operation as proposed: 
1.  Will conform to the provisions of this chapter, and all other applicable laws; 
2.  Will not constitute a nuisance, nor interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of properties located in the immediate vicinity of the lot upon which the drill site is to be located; and 
3.  Will not have an adverse effect upon the public peace, welfare or interest. 
B.  If he finds such conditions are met, the city manager will give written notice of intent to issue such permit to all persons owning property located within five hundred feet of the outer boundaries of the drill site. Such notice shall state that unless the city manager receives within fifteen days after the mailing of such notices, a written objection from an owner of property located within such area, the permit as required will be issued. 
C.  If, within the time set forth, one or more written objections are received, or, if the city manager finds that any one of the foregoing requirements is not met, he shall deny the application and refuse to issue the permit. 
D.  Notice of such decision shall be given as prescribed in Section 5.52.060. The determination of the city manager shall be final in the absence of an appeal to the city council in the manner described in Section 5.52.060. 
(Prior code § 6406.4 (2))  
5.52.080 - Permit—Conditions of approval. 
Where the city manager determines that conditions of approval on any permit referred to in Sections 5.52.060 and 5.52.070 are necessary to insure compliance with the purpose and intent of this code, he shall have the authority to impose such conditions. His determination relating to such conditions shall be final in the absence of an appeal to the council as hereinafter provided. 
(Prior code § 6406.4 (3))  
5.52.090 - Permit—Modification. 
Any permit may be modified after issuance where such is necessary to conform with the provisions hereof. 
(Prior code § 6406.3 (part))  
5.52.100 - Permit—Revocation. 
A.  Whenever the building inspector finds that the operation under a permit: 
1.  Violates any provision of this code, or any other law; or 
2.  Constitutes a nuisance to, or is an unreasonable interference with the use and enjoyment of, properties located in the vicinity of the lot on which the drill site is located; or 
3.  Has an adverse effect upon the public peace, welfare or interest, he shall revoke such permit; provided, that the building inspector shall first give written notice of such violation to the owner/or operator of the well. If such violation is not corrected within ten days after the mailing of such notice, the building inspector shall revoke such permit; provided, that if the violation constitutes a hazard to life or property, the building inspector may cause the operator of the well to cease forthwith. Written notice of such revocation shall be given to the owner and/or operator. The permit shall be deemed revoked, and all operations thereunder shall cease within forty-eight hours after mailing of such notice. Such determination shall be final in the absence of an appeal as hereinafter described. 
B.  The owner and/or operator shall have the right to appeal the building inspector's decision to the city council; such an appeal shall be in writing, and be filed with the city clerk within thirty days from the date of mailing of the notice of revocation. 
(Prior code § 6406.4 (4))  
5.52.110 - Appeals. 
The following procedures shall govern all appeals with reference to decisions made, or actions taken, with regard to the provisions of this chapter. 
A.  Permit Denials. 
1.  Appeal hearings with reference to permit denials shall be held in the manner hereinafter described, by the city council, and the council shall determine whether the operation as proposed: 
a.  Conforms to the provisions of this chapter and all of the applicable laws; and 
b.  Will constitute a nuisance or otherwise unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of properties located in the immediate vicinity of the lot upon which the drill site is located; and 
c.  Will have an adverse affect upon the public peace, welfare or interest. 
2.  If the council determines that any one of the foregoing requirements is not met, it shall deny the application and refuse to issue the permit. 
B.  Appeals From Conditions of Permit Approval. Where an appeal has been taken from a decision imposing a condition of approval upon a permit, the city council shall determine whether such condition, or conditions, are necessary to carry out the purpose and intent of this chapter and of the zoning regulations applicable to the property involved. 
C.  Appeals From Other Determinations. Any applicant aggrieved by any action taken, or decision rendered, with respect to the provisions of this chapter, shall have the right of appeal from such action or decision to the city council. The city council, upon hearing such appeal, shall determine whether such action taken or decision rendered was in accordance with the purpose and intent of this chapter, and any other applicable law, and is consistent with the conservation of the public peace, welfare and interest. 
D.  Appeal Procedure. Appeals to the city council shall be perfected and processed as follows: 
1.  Within thirty days after the giving of notice of the action taken, or the decision rendered, any applicant aggrieved by the same, may file a written letter of appeal with the city clerk. Such written appeal shall briefly state the action or decision from, and the basis for such appeal. 
2.  Upon receipt of such appeal, the city clerk shall place the matter upon the next most convenient city council agenda for hearing by that body. The city clerk shall, in addition, give at least five days' written notice to the appealing party, and to any other person who has, in writing, requested such notice, of the time and place for such hearing. 
3.  At the time set for such hearing the city council shall give the appealing party a reasonable opportunity to be heard in connection therewith, and shall hear and consider any relevant oral and/or written evidence pertaining to such matter, including, but not limited to, staff reports submitted in connection therewith. 
4.  The burden of proof shall be upon the appealing party to show that the action taken, or the decision rendered, was arbitrary, capricious or not within the scope of the authority granted by this code. 
5.  The action of the council, at the conclusion of the hearing, shall be to sustain, overrule or modify, in whole or in part, the action taken or the decision rendered. The determination of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 6406.5)  
5.52.120 - Permit fees—Payment. 
A fee for each permit shall be paid to the city, at the time of filing the application therefor, as set forth in Section 5.52.170. 
(Prior code § 6406.6 (1) (part))  
5.52.130 - Permit fees—Penalty when work started prior to obtaining permit. 
Where drilling, redrilling construction, or other work for which a permit is required by this chapter is started prior to obtaining the permit, the fees hereunder specified shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this chapter or the execution of the work, nor from any other penalties prescribed herein. 
(Prior code § 6406.6 (1) (part))  
5.52.140 - Plan checking fees. 
A plan checking fee shall not be charged for the derrick or its appurtenances. A plan checking fee shall be charged for all other permanent buildings, production tanks, washing tanks, skim ponds and such other structures. A plan checking fee shall be charged for oil well cellars designed to accommodate more than one oil well. The plan checking fee shall be equal to one-half of the building permit fee as set forth in Section 5.52.170. 
(Prior code § 6406.6 (2))  
5.52.150 - Inspection fees. 
The building inspector shall inspect annually and at such other times as he deems necessary, each producing oil well and suspended oil well regulated by this chapter for the purpose of ascertaining whether the well is being operated or maintained in conformity with the minimum standards of this chapter. To meet the expense of such inspection, the operator shall pay to the city an annual inspection fee for each fiscal year as specified in Section 5.52.170. The fees shall be based upon the total number of wells existing (whether producing or not) on July 1 of each calendar year. Such fees shall be due prior to July 10 of the fiscal year to which they pertain. No additional fee shall be charged for additional inspections which may be required during the year. The building inspector shall keep a permanent, accurate account of all inspection fees collected and received under this chapter, the name of the operator for whose account the same were paid, the date and amount thereof, together with the well name and designation and the general location of the well. A report of the building inspector's annual inspection findings shall be furnished the operator when requested. 
(Prior code § 6406.6 (3))  
5.52.160 - Building permit fees. 
A fee shall be charged for the erection or construction or relocation of any permanent building, tank or other structure hereinabove included as required by Title 15 of this code; provided no building permit fee shall be charged for the derrick or its appurtenances. 
(Prior code § 6406.6 (4))  
5.52.170 - Fees—Designated. 
A.  Permit Fees. 
1.  The sum of five hundred dollars shall be charged for a permit for the drilling of an oil well to be located on any property not included in an O zone. Such fee shall be two hundred dollars for a well to be located on property located in an O zone. No part of such fee shall be refundable. 
2.  The sum of fifty dollars shall be charged for a permit for the redrilling of any oil well, no part of which shall be refundable. 
B.  Annual Inspection Fee. The sum of one hundred dollars per well shall be charged for the annual inspection of each existing, suspended or producing oil well. 
(Prior code § 6406.6 (5))  
5.52.180 - Permit—Expiration. 
A permit issued hereunder shall expire unless exercised within sixty days from and after the date of issuance thereof, and thereafter the work shall be diligently and progressively prosecuted to completion. If a permit expires, a new application and fees shall be required. 
(Prior code § 6406.6 (6))  
5.52.190 - Bonds—Existing wells. 
A bond in the form required by this chapter shall be filed for each existing well within thirty days following the effective date of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6406.7 (1))  
5.52.200 - Bonds—New wells. 
A bond in the form required by this chapter shall accompany every application for a drilling permit, for which the bond is not on file. 
(Prior code § 6406.7 (2))  
5.52.210 - Bonds—Form—Filing. 
Bonds shall be on a form approved by the city attorney and shall be filed with the building inspector. 
(Prior code § 6406.7 (3))  
5.52.220 - Single bonds. 
Corporate surety bonds in the penal sum of five thousand dollars shall be required for compliance with Sections 5.52.190 and 5.52.200. Such bonds shall be executed by the operator as principal and by an authorized corporate surety as surety, and shall be conditioned so as to guarantee that the principal named in the bond shall faithfully comply with all the provisions of this code, including, but not limited to, any condition imposed upon the issuance of the permit, in operating facilities as required by this chapter, until the same are abandoned in conformity with the provisions hereof. The surety shall also, as part of such bond, guarantee to repay city for all costs, charges and expenses incurred by it by reason of the failure of the principal to fully comply with such provisions. The bond shall include the correct name or number of the well and such other information as may be necessary to readily identify the oil well. 
(Prior code § 6406.7 (3) (a))  
5.52.230 - Blanket bonds. 
Any person may, in lieu of filing a single bond for each well, as herein required, file a bond in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars to cover all of his said operations conducted within the city conditioned as set forth in Section 5.32.220. A rider to the bond shall be filed with the building inspector showing the correct name or number of each well covered by the bond, and such other information as may be necessary to readily identify the same. 
(Prior code § 6406.7 (3) (b))  
5.52.240 - Default in performance of conditions—Notice—Actions to be taken. 
A.  Whenever the building inspector finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any requirement or condition imposed by this code, he shall give written notice thereof to the owner and operator of his surety. 
B.  Such notice shall specify the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof and the period of time deemed by the building inspector to be reasonably necessary for the completion thereof. 
C.  After receipt of such notice, the principal and/or surety shall, within the time therein specified, either cause such work to be performed, or failing therein, shall pay over to the city the estimated cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice, plus an additional sum equal to twenty-five percent of the estimated cost. Upon receipt of such moneys, the building inspector shall, by such mode as he deems convenient, cause the required work to be performed and completed. In the event that the well has not been properly abandoned as herein provided, such additional moneys may be demanded from the surety as is necessary to restore and the drill site in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6406.7 (4))  
5.52.250 - Bonds—Release. 
Any bond issued in compliance with these regulations shall be terminated and canceled and the surety be relieved of all obligations thereunder when the well has been properly abandoned in conformity with all regulations of this chapter and in conformity with all regulations of the Division of Oil and Gas and notice to that effect has been received by the building inspector. 
(Prior code § 6406.7 (5))  
5.52.260 - Bonds—Substitution. 
A substitute bond may be filed in lieu of any bond on file hereunder and the building inspector shall accept and file the same if it is qualified and in proper form and substance, and the bond for which it is substituted shall be exonerated, but only if the building inspector finds that all of the conditions of the last mentioned bond have been satisfied and that no default exists as to the performance upon which the bond is conditioned. 
(Prior code § 6406.7 (6))  
5.52.270 - Location of wells. 
A.  No well shall be located within a planned future street right-of-way shown on the adopted master plan of streets and highways within twenty-five feet of the outer limits of such planned right-of-way. 
B.  Except as hereinafter provided, no well shall be located within one hundred feet of any building used for human occupancy; nor shall any owner or operator erect any such building within one hundred feet of any well not abandoned, except buildings incidental to the operation of the well. No well shall be drilled within one hundred feet from the outer boundary line of the site or operating unit. 
C.  Except as hereinafter provided, no well shall be drilled within three hundred feet of any building used as a place of public assemblage, institution or school. Nor shall any such building be erected on the same site, within three hundred feet of any well, which is not abandoned. 
D.  1.  Where special circumstances warrant, modification of the distance set forth by subsection (B) and (C) of this section may be authorized by the building inspector, if such distances are rendered unnecessary or unreasonable by the then existing special features, such as topography, nature of the use and occupancy, buildings and roadways. The building inspector may impose, as conditions, additional safety requirements if necessary because of such special features or because of any modification granted pursuant to this subsection. 
2.  All modifications authorized hereunder shall be subject to the following criteria: 
a.  That the drilling and operation of the wells will be safe; 
b.  That such authorization will not result in any condition that might constitute a nuisance or interference with a reasonable use and enjoyment of properties located within the immediate vicinity of the well and will not otherwise cause an adverse effect upon the public peace, welfare or interest; 
c.  That the drilling site shall in all cases be equivalent, in area, to the minimum area of two residential lots, placed side by side, in the zone in which the drill site is located, or multiples of such minimum lot sizes if more than two; 
d.  In all cases, the minimum distance from the center of the well to each exterior boundary of the site shall be not less than the required minimum lot width of residential lots in the zone within which the site is located. 
E.  All distances herein shall be measured from the center of the well. 
F.  All existing wells are exempted form the requirements of subsections B and C of this section. 
G.  All nonconforming situations hereafter created by the subdivision or development of oil production properties designated in the O zone, may be modified as provided for in subsection D of this section. 
(Prior code § 6406.8 (1))  
5.52.280 - Private roads and drill sites—Surfacing. 
Prior to commencement of any drilling operations, all private roads used for access to the drill site, and the drill site itself, shall be surfaced by clean crushed rock, gravel or decomposed granite, or oiled so as to prevent dust or mud. Such surfacing shall be continuously maintained until such well is abandoned. 
(Prior code § 6406.8 (2))  
5.52.290 - Derricks and masts—Standards. 
All derricks and masts hereafter erected for drilling or redrilling shall be at least equivalent to the American Petroleum Institute 4A, Fourteenth Edition and 4D, Third Edition. 
(Prior code § 6406.8 (3))  
5.52.300 - Signs. 
A sign having a surface area of not less than two square feet and no more than four square feet bearing the current name and number of the well and the name and/or insignia of the operator shall be displayed at all times from the commencement of drilling operations until the well is abandoned. In the event there are more than two producing wells on one site, it shall be sufficient if the entrances there thereto are posted with a sign not less than eighteen inches by twenty-four inches bearing the name of the operator together with the name or designation of the well, together with an openly visible sign on each producing well designating the particular number thereof. 
(Prior code § 6406.8 (4))  
5.52.310 - Blowout prevention. 
A.  Drilling and Redrilling Operations. Protection shall be provided to prevent the blowout of an oil well during drilling and redrilling operations, and shall conform to the requirements of the state petroleum safety orders (Drilling and Production, Section 6692 of the Administrative Code of California). 
B.  Wells Other Than Drilling Wells. 
1.  Protection shall be provided to prevent the blowout of an oil well, conforming to the requirements of the state safety orders (Drilling and Production, Section 6691 of the Administrative Code of California in the following cases: 
a.  During perforating, shooting or cutting off a string of casing; 
b.  During well servicing operations on a well that is known to have sufficient gas pressure to cause the well to flow, or where the gas pressure is unknown. 
2.  The operator shall notify the building inspector in writing, at least one day before any of the operations described in this subsection are commenced. In the event that the day following the day on which notice is given falls on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, then such additional days notice must be given as may be required so that there shall be one day, Saturday, Sunday and holidays excepted, between the date notice is given and any of the operations commenced. 
C.  Waiver of Requirements. The blowout preventive requirements of subsections A and B of this section may be waived by the building inspector upon such conditions, and for such operations as he may determine will not endanger the public safety. Such waiver shall be by written application to the building inspector by the operator, which shall show sufficient cause therefor, based upon the depth of the hole, probable gas pressures to be encountered, the proposed drilling, completion or abandonment program and whatever further information the building inspector may require. 
(Prior code § 6406.8 (5), (6) and (7))  
5.52.320 - Waste material disposal. 
Rotary mud, drill cuttings, oil or liquid hydrocarbons and all other oil field waste derived or resulting from, or connected with the drilling of any well shall be discharged into a sump hole or steel tank. Such drill cuttings, rotary mud, and drilling waste materials shall be removed from the drill site upon completion of drilling operations. Tanks used as and for sump purposes shall be removed from the drill site and sump holes shall be drained and backfilled within thirty days from and after completion of drilling. 
(Prior code § 6406.8 (8))  
5.52.330 - Fencing. 
All sumps or sump holes and oil well production equipment having external, moving parts which the building inspector determines may be hazardous to life or limb, shall be attended twenty-four hours per day by a qualified person, or the hazardous facility shall be enclosed by a chain link type fence, not less than six feet in height, having not less than three stands of barbed wire sloping outward at approximately a forty-five degree angle, for a distance of not less than eighteen inches from the top of the fence. There shall be no aperture below such fence greater than four inches. The building inspector may permit the fencing of an entire operating unit in lieu of the individual fencing requirements of this subsection; provided, that any open sump or skim pond shall be individually fenced. Fence gates shall be placed at nonhazardous locations and shall be locked at all times when unattended. 
(Prior code § 6406.8 (9))  
5.52.340 - Cellars. 
The following regulations shall apply to cellars: 
A.  Every cellar shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of Title 15 of this code. 
B.  Such cellars shall be kept free from water, oil, drilling, fluids, or other substances which might constitute a hazard, except during drilling and servicing operations. 
C.  The depth of such cellars shall be vertical measurement between the lowest point of the floor area in the bottom of such cellar and the lowest point of ground or any surface adjacent to the top of the cellar wall. 
D.  All multiwell cellars exceeding three feet in depth and twenty-five feet in length shall have two separate means of entrance or exit. If the cellar exceeds fifty feet in length, one of the means of entrance or exit shall be a stairway. If the cellar exceeds two hundred feet in length, a third means of entrance or exit shall be provided. 
E.  Multiwell cellars shall have a steel grate covering with no unobstructed openings in excess of three inches. Materials, equipment, or other appurtenances shall not be stored or placed on the grating so as to interfere with the escape of gases and vapors. 
(Prior code § 6406.8 (10))  
5.52.350 - Removal of equipment following completion or abandonment. 
All drilling equipment and the derrick shall be removed from the site within sixty days following the completion or abandonment of any well. Once the well is a producing well, it shall be serviced thereafter only with a portable derrick. Drilling operations shall be diligently prosecuted until the well is completed or abandoned. 
(Prior code § 6406.8 (11))  
5.52.360 - Soundproofing. 
A.  When Required. Soundproofing shall be required for all drilling or other operations either when the building inspector finds the same necessary to avoid injury to the use and enjoyment of surrounding or adjacent properties, or as may be required by Section 17.56.160. 
B.  Material. Soundproofing when required shall comply with the following specifications: Soundproofing acoustical blankets for the drilling derrick and accessory structures shall be: Fibrous glass insulation one and one-half inches thick, 0.50 pounds per cubic foot, density, .063 pounds per square foot, weight, .00010 to .00015 fiber diameter (inches) with a phenolic binder having a temperature limit of four hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit sewed between layers of fire-retardant, vinyl fiber glass cloth, fifteen to seventeen ounces per square yard sewed with dacron thread D-92 with stitches not more than six to the inch. The lacing cord shall be flat vinyl coated tape composed of fibrous glass yard braided, heat set and bonded. The tape shall have a ninety-pound tensile strength. Grommets shall be number four brass. All doors and similar openings shall be kept closed during drilling operations, except for ingress and egress. 
(Prior code § 6406.8 (12) and (13))  
5.52.370 - Alternate materials and methods of construction. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this chapter, provided any such alternate has been approved. 
B.  The building inspector may approve any such alternate provided he finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of this chapter and that the material or method offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this chapter in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. 
C.  The building inspector shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claims that may be made regarding its use. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the intent of this chapter or evidence that any material or any method of construction does not conform to the requirements of this chapter or in order to substantiate claims for alternate materials or methods of construction, the building inspector may require tests as proof of compliance to be made at the expense of the owner or his agent by an approved agency. 
D.  Test methods shall be as specified by this chapter, for the material in question. If there are no appropriate test methods specified in this chapter, the building inspector shall determine the test procedure. 
E.  Copies of the results of all such tests shall be retained for a period of not less than two years after the acceptance of the materials or methods. 
(Prior code § 6406.8 (14))  
5.52.380 - Abandonment. 
It shall be the responsibility of the building inspector in cases of abandonment, to determine that the drill site and all appurtenances thereto, have been restored to their original condition as nearly as practicable, in conformity with the regulations of this chapter. The following requirements shall be observed in abandonment proceedings: 
A.  It shall be the responsibility of the operator to comply with the abandonment provisions of this chapter. He shall furnish the building inspector with (1) a copy of approval of Division of Oil and Gas confirming compliance with all abandonment proceedings under state law, and (2) a notice of intention to abandon under the provisions of this section and stating the date such work will be commenced. Abandonment may then be commenced. 
B.  Abandonment shall be approved by the building inspector after restoration of the drill site and the subsurface thereof has been accomplished in conformity with the following requirements: 
1.  The derrick and all appurtenances shall be removed form the drill site. 
2.  All tanks, towers and other surface installations shall be removed from the drill site. 
3.  All concrete, pipe, wood and other foreign materials shall be removed from the drill site except a multiwell cellar which is still being used in connection with another well for which a permit has been issued. 
4.  The oil well casings hall be cut off at a point six feet below the drill site grade at the cellar. Nothing shall be placed in the hole above the point of the cut-off until the cut-off has been inspected by the building inspector and by him found to be in compliance with all applicable provisions of law. 
5.  The top twenty-five feet of the remaining casing shall be filled with a cement plug to prevent gas fumes from escaping. 
6.  A steel cap of not less than the same thickness and the same diameter of the well casing shall be welded throughout its entire circumference to such casing. 
7.  In all other holes, such as rat holes, etc., the pipe shall be pulled and hole filled, or if pulling is not practical in the opinion of the building inspector, it shall be capped, as set forth in subdivision 6 of this section. 
8.  The space between the surface casing and the water string which is not removed from the well, in addition to being plugged, shall be filled with concrete. 
9.  Concrete plugs shall be composed of one part cement, to not more than two and one-half parts of sand and not more than three and one-half parts of gravel or crushed rock, or an equivalent approved by the building inspector. 
10.  All holes and depressions shall be filled and compacted (ninety percent compaction) with native earth. Two or more compaction tests on the compacted fill shall be taken by a soils engineer certifying to the degree of compaction. Copies of the reports of these tests shall be filed with the building inspector. All oil, waste oil, rotary mud, refuse or waste material shall be removed from the drill site. 
(Prior code § 6406.9 (part) and (1))  
5.52.390 - Conversion to water well. 
A well may be converted to a domestic or agricultural water well upon the approval of the building inspector; provided: 
a.  That a request in writing therefor is made by the owner to the building inspector; and 
b.  That an original or certified copy of the approved conversion permit from the Division of Oil and Gas has been furnished the building inspector; and, 
c.  That all the provisions of abandonment in Section 5.52.380 have been complied with, except that those appurtenances necessary for the operation of a water well may be retained. 
(Prior code § 6406.9 (2))  
5.52.400 - Inspections. 
None of the work described in this section shall be commenced until specifically so authorized by the building inspector. All of the work shall be subject to inspection by the building inspector at the stages of work, as hereinafter designated. All inspections required, as hereinafter provided, shall be requested in writing and delivered to the building inspector. Any work completed prior to inspection and approval by the building inspector will be subject to reexposure, for inspection, at the operator's expense. 
A.  Site Preparation. 
1.  The well location shall be clearly marked by a stake or other suitable means and identified as the well location. 
2.  The drill site shall be prepared as required in these regulations and hall be of such size so as to provide for safe erection of the mast or derrick and all appurtenant structures thereto as indicated on the approved plot plan. 
3.  Any private road used for ingress and egress of equipment to the drill site shall be prepared as required by these regulations. 
4.  The proposed well shall be located in conformity with these regulations as to distances from streets, outer boundaries, public buildings and dwellings. When the foregoing work has taken place, the operator shall call for the first inspection. 
B.  Commencement of Drilling. The building inspector shall be called and notified when the drilling derrick or mast has been erected in conformity with these regulations and all necessary equipment pertinent to the drilling operations thereof has been installed and is on the site. Drilling may proceed prior to inspection of the derrick or mast; provided, that its design has been previously approved by the building inspector. 
C.  Release of Drilling Crew—Completion of Drilling. When the drilling crew has been released, the building inspector shall be notified immediately in writing for the third inspection. 
D.  Abandonment. Subsequent to the approval by the building inspector of an abandonment notice, all work required by Section 5.52.380 shall be subject to inspection at the stages designated by the building inspector. 
(Prior code § 6406.10)  
5.52.410 - Notices—Designation of agent or recipient. 
Every operator of any oil well shall designate an agent, who is a resident of the state, upon whom all orders and notices provided in this chapter may be served. Every operator so designating such agent shall within ten days notify the building inspector in writing, of any change in designation of such agent or such mailing address. Service upon such agent so designated shall constitute service for all purposes of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6406.11 (1))  
5.52.420 - Transfer of operator. 
A.  Each operator shall notify the building inspector in writing of the sale, assignment, transfer, conveyance, or exchange by the operator of wells, property and equipment within ten days after such sale, assignment, transfer, conveyance or exchange. The notice shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name and address of the person to whom such well and property was sold, assigned, transferred, conveyed or exchanged; 
2.  The name and location of the well; 
3.  The date of the sale, assignment, transfer, conveyance or exchange; 
4.  The date when possession was relinquished by the former operator; 
5.  A description of the properties and equipment transferred. 
B.  Every person who acquires any well, property or equipment, whether by purchase, transfer, assignment, conveyance, exchange, or otherwise, shall within ten days after acquiring such well, property or equipment notify the building inspector, in writing, of his acceptance of ownership. The notice shall contain the following: 
1.  The name and address of the person from whom such well and property was acquired; 
2.  The name and location of the well; 
3.  The date of acquisition; 
4.  The date possession was acquired; 
5.  A description of the properties and equipment transferred; 
6.  The person designated for service of notice and his address. 
(Prior code § 6406.11 (2))  
5.52.430 - Temporary suspension of operations—Notice required. 
The operator of any well shall notify the building inspector, in writing, of any temporary suspension of operations, pending a resumption of operations or abandonment. The building inspector, for good cause, may approve temporary suspension of operations. Such notice shall be filed with the building inspector within thirty days from and after release of drilling crew. Failure of the building inspector to act within ten days shall constitute approval thereof. The operator shall notify the building inspector, in writing, upon resumption of operations, giving the date thereof. 
(Prior code § 6406.11 (3))  
5.52.440 - Change in drilling contractor—Notice required. 
The operator, before changing drilling or redrilling contractors, shall file with the building inspector a written notice of the change, giving the name of the original contractor, the name of the proposed contractor, and such information as was originally required to meet the design and structural requirements of this chapter. Such notice shall be attached to and become part of the original oil drilling or redrilling permit. 
(Prior code § 6406.11 (4))  
5.52.450 - Storage facilities. 
A.  Storage Capacity. Maximum tank capacity for each producing oil well: if oil or other liquid storage facilities are established incidental to a producing well on a drill site, such storage facilities shall not exceed a total of two thousand barrels per well. 
B.  Design and Construction of Tanks. All tanks shall be constructed in conformity with the provisions of Title 15 of this code. 
C.  Foundations and Supports. Tanks shall rest directly on the ground or on foundations, supports, or pilings of concrete, masonry, steel, crushed rock or wood. Exposed piling or steel supports shall be protected by fire resistive materials to provide a fire resistance rating of not less than two hours. Stairs, platforms and walkways which extend more than three feet above the surrounding ground level shall be of incombustible construction. 
D.  Spacing Between Tanks. 
1.  No tank for storage of any flammable liquid shall be located closer than three feet to any other such tank. 
2.  For tanks above fifty thousand gallons individual capacity for storage of any flammable liquid, except crude petroleum, the distance between such tanks shall not be less than one-half the diameter of the smaller tank. 
3.  Tanks for storage of crude petroleum having a capacity not exceeding one hundred twenty-six thousand gallons (three thousand barrels) shall not be less than three feet apart. Tanks having a capacity in excess of one hundred twenty-six thousand gallons (three thousand barrels) shall not be less than the diameter of the smaller tank apart. 
4.  The minimum separation between liquified petroleum gas containers and any other tanks for storage of any flammable liquids shall be twenty feet. Suitable means shall be taken to prevent the accumulation of flammable liquids under adjacent liquified petroleum gas containers such as by diking, diversion curbs or grading. When flammable liquid storage tanks are diked, the liquified petroleum gas containers shall be outside the diked area and at least ten feet away from the centerline of the dikes. The foregoing provision shall not apply when liquified petroleum gas containers of one hundred twenty-five gallons or less capacity are installed adjacent to class III flammable liquid storage tanks of two hundred seventy-five gallons or less capacity. 
E.  Location of Tanks. The minimum distance between any outside aboveground tank to the nearest building or line of adjoining property which may be built upon shall be as follows: 
1.  Flammable liquids other than those having boilover characteristics similar to crude petroleum: 
Capacity of Tank (gallons) 	Class of Flammable Liquid 	Minimum Distance (feet) 
0 to 275 	III 	0 
276 to 750 	III 	5 
0 to 750 	I and II 	10 
721 to 12,000 	III 	10 
751 to 12,000 	I and III 	15 
12,001 to 24,000 	I, II and III 	15 
24,001 to 30,000 	I, II and III 	20 
30,001 to 50,000 	I, II and III 	25 
 
2.  Crude petroleum and other liquids having boilover characteristics similar to crude petroleum and flammable liquid tanks with capacity in excess of fifty thousand gallons: See Exhibit 5.52.450(E)(2). 
Exhibit 5.52.450 (E) (2) 
STORAGE FACILITIES 
Crude Petroleum Tanks With Capacities in Excess of Fifty Thousand Gallons 
Tanks with capacities in excess of fifty thousand gallons and all tanks for the storage of crude petroleum shall be located in accordance with the following provisions (applicable to gastight tanks including conservation-type tanks constructed in compliance with these or equivalent standards): 
Product Stored 	Tank Protection 	Distance From Line of Adjoining Property Which May Be Built Upon Shall be Not Less Than 
Refined petroleum products or other flammable liquids not subject to boilover 	Group A tanks 	1) An approved permanently attached extinguishing system, or 
2) An approved floating roof 	Greatest dimension of diameter or height of tank, except that such distance need not exceed 120 feet 
	Group B tanks 	Not equipped with either of the above 	1-¼ times the greater dimension of diameter or height of tank, except that such distance need not exceed 175 feet 
Crude petroleum 	Group C tanks 	1) An approved permanently attached extinguishing system, or 
2) An approved floating roof 	2 times the greatest dimension or height of tank, except that such distance shall not be less than 20 feet and need not exceed 175 feet 
	Group D tanks 	Not equipped with either of the above 	3 times the greatest dimension of diameter or height of tank, except that such distance shall not be less than 20 feet and need not exceed 350 feet 
 
F.  Group A Tanks. Any gastight or conservation-type tank constructed in compliance with these or equivalent standards and equipped either with: (1) an approved permanently attached extinguishing system; or (2) an approved floating roof, which is to be used only for the storage of refined petroleum products or the flammable liquids not subject to boilover, shall be so located that the distance from the line of adjoining property which may be built upon shall be not less than the greatest dimension of diameter or height of the tank, except that such distance need not exceed one hundred twenty feet. 
G.  Group B Tanks. Any gastight or conservation-type tank constructed in compliance with these or equivalent standards but not equipped either with (1) an approved permanently attached extinguishing system; or (2) an approved floating roof, which is to be used only for storage of refined petroleum products or other flammable liquids not subject to boilover, shall be so located that the distance from the line of adjoining property which may be built upon shall be not less than one and one-half times the greatest dimension of diameter or height of the tank, except that such distance need not exceed one hundred seventy-five feet. 
H.  Group C Tanks. Any gastight or conservation-type tank constructed in compliance with these or equivalent standards and equipped either with (1) an approved permanently attached extinguishing system; or (2) an approved floating roof, which is to be used for the storage of crude petroleum, shall be so located that the distance from the line of adjoining property which may be built upon shall be not less than twice the greatest dimension of diameter or height of the tank except that such distance shall be not less than twenty feet and need not exceed one hundred seventy-five feet. 
I.  Group D Tanks. Any gastight or conservation-type tank constructed in compliance with these or equivalent standards not equipped either with (1) an approved permanently extinguishing system; or (2) an approved floating type roof, which is to be used for the storage of crude petroleum, shall be so located that the distance form the line of adjoining property which may be built upon shall not be less than three times the greatest dimension of diameter or height of the tank except that such distance shall be not less than twenty feet and need not exceed three hundred fifty feet. 
J.  Approved Attached Extinguishing System. The term "approved attached extinguishing system," as used in the foregoing description in subsection F through I of this section, may be interpreted to apply to: 
1.  A fixed foam or other recognized extinguishing system embodying a supply of the extinguishing medium; or 
2.  A system employing a pipeline for conveying foam from a point outside the dike to the tank; or 
3.  Portable overshot devices for applying foam over the rim of the tank. Where reliance is placed on a pipeline for conveying foam, the pipe shall be so installed and attached as to be an integral part of the tank. Where reliance is placed on a portable overshot device, the practicability of its use shall be demonstrated before approval. Approved foam-generating equipment of sufficient capacity should be available on the property, by response of a municipal or other public fire department, or otherwise readily available; and there should be on hand or otherwise readily available a sufficient supply of foam-producing materials as specified in HBFU Standards for Foam Extinguishing System No. 11. 
K.  Buildings Essential to the Operation of the Storage Facilities (Building Location). No building used for human occupancy, except buildings essential to the operation of the storage facilities shall be erected within the distances set out in the preceding tables, from such storage tank. 
L.  Height of Tanks. No storage tank or other tank shall exceed a maximum height of twenty-four feet zero inches measured from the average ground level of the base of the tank to the uppermost part of the tank. 
M.  Diverse Ownership. Where tank locations of diverse ownership have a common boundary, the building inspector may, with the written consent of the owners, waive the required distances from the common property line and substitute the space between tanks as provided in this section. 
N.  Dikes, Diversion Walls and Catchment Basins. 
1.  Requirement. Tanks used for the storage of crude petroleum and other flammable liquids having similar boilover characteristics shall be diked, or provided with approved diversion walls and catchment basins, or combinations thereof. 
2.  Location. No catchment basin or diked impounding area shall be located closer to the outer boundary line, or to any building designed for human occupancy than the diameter or height (whichever is greater) of the largest tank served by each basin or area, nor shall any building designed for human occupancy be erected or placed closer than such distance to any catchment basin or diked impounding area. 
3.  Capacity. The net capacity of a catchment basin, diked impounding basin, or combination thereof, shall be equal to the capacity of the largest tank, plus ten percent of the aggregate capacity of all other tanks served. In computing the required capacity of a catchment basin, diked impounding basin or combination thereof: 
a.  The volume of the largest tank up to the height of the dike shall be considered as part of the available capacity of a diked impounding basin. 
b.  No part of the volume of tanks other than the largest tank shall be considered as part of the available capacity. 
c.  The capacity of a separate catchment basin may be used to reduce the required capacity of a diked impounding basin provided drainage sufficient to prevent overflow of the dike and effective control of flow are provided. 
d.  The capacity of a single separate catchment basin may be applied to reduce the required capacity of each of the dike impounding basins draining into it. 
4.  Construction. Dikes shall be of earth, concrete or solid masonry designed to be liquidtight and shall be maintained as specified in this section. Where piping passes through dikes, provision shall be made for movement without damage to the dike and to minimize leaks under emergency conditions. Earthen dikes shall be built and maintained at a minimum height of two feet, having sloping sides consistent with the angle of repose of the material used, and be not less than two feet wide at the top. The distance between the inside toe of any dike and the shell of the tank shall be not less than five feet for tanks and not more than thirty feet in diameter and ten feet for tanks in excess of thirty feet in diameter. 
a.  Spill Dikes. Where tanks within a common diked impounding basin may cause mutual exposure from spills, spill dikes shall be provided between tanks of ten thousand barrels or greater individual capacity. Groups of tanks of less than ten thousand barrels individual capacity and not in excess of fifteen thousand barrels aggregate capacity may be enclosed with a single spill dike. The height of such spill dike shall not exceed fifty percent of the height of the main or perimeter dikes. 
b.  Drainage. Drainage shall be provided at a consistent slope of not less than one percent away from tanks and fittings, to a sump, drain box or other safe means of disposal located within the diked impounding area and at the greatest possible distance from the shell of the tank. Traps with not less than six inches of liquid seal shall be provided between the sumps, drain boxes or sewer openings within any impounding area and the sewer or drains intended for disposal of spills. A valve, operable from outside the dike, shall be provided in the dike drain system and shall normally be kept closed. 
c.  Disposal. Approved provisions shall be made for disposing of water and of oil retained by dikes, impounding or catchment basins. 
O.  Suspension of Requirements. In particular installations, some or all of the requirements of subsection D through N of this section, governing storage facilities, may be suspended in whole or in part; or less restrictive requirements may be imposed by order of the building inspector, where such requirements are rendered unnecessary or unreasonable by reason of the then existing special features such as: topography, nature of occupancy and proximity to buildings on adjoining property, the height or character of construction of such buildings, capacity and construction of the proposed tanks and the character of liquids to be stored, the degree of private fire protection to be provided and the facilities of the fire department to cope with flammable liquid fires. 
P.  Skim Ponds and Sumps. No open, accessible, surface or subsurface installation used for disposal, separation, treatment or storage of liquids shall be permitted. 
Q.  Loading by Truck From Production Tank Sites. 
1.  Location. Tank vehicle loading racks, loading platforms or moveable loading spouts or arms dispensing flammable liquids shall be separated from tanks, warehouses, other buildings, public streets and nearest line of property that may be built upon a clear distance of not less than twenty-five feet measured from the nearest position of any fill stem. Buildings for pumps or for shelter of loading personnel may be part of the loading rack or platform. No person shall load or unload, or permit the loading or unloading of a tank vehicle unless such vehicle is located outside of any public street right-of-way. 
2.  Loading and Unloading Operations. During the loading or unloading of a tank vehicle, a qualified person shall be at the loading or unloading controls. Provision shall be made for the safe disposal of the oils released by overflow and from loading spouts or lines. 
(Prior code § 6406.12)  
5.52.460 - High-pressure pipe systems. 
All piping subjected to pressures in excess of one hundred fifty psi shall be constructed and installed in accordance with Title 15 of this code. 
(Prior code § 6406.13)  
5.52.470 - Electrical equipment. 
All electrical equipment used, installed and maintained within fifty feet of a drilling well and within twenty-five feet of a producing well shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the regulations of the California Electrical Safety Order, Article 22, Hazardous Locations, Class I, Division 2. 
(Prior code § 6406.14 (1))  
5.52.480 - Internal combustion engines, storage tanks, fired equipment and open flames. 
No internal combustion engine, storage tanks, boiler, fired equipment or open flames, except welding directly and continuously supervised by the production foreman, drilling foreman, drilling engineer, drilling supervisors or safety supervisors, shall be located closer than twenty-five feet to a producing well nor closer than one hundred feet to a drilling well. Internal combustion engines, including their fuel tanks, used in the drilling production and servicing of oil wells are exempt from the preceding provisions; provided, that adequate safety precautions are observed, in accordance with good oil and gas field practices and state safety orders, if any. During drilling operations on a drill site of two acres or less, where two or more wells are located, or to be located thereon, the provisions of this section relating to distances may be altered at the discretion of the building inspector if it appears that such modifications will not present a hazard, based upon his consideration of special features such as: 
A.  The topographical conditions; 
B.  The nature of occupancy and proximity to buildings on adjoining property; and 
C.  The height and character of construction of such buildings; capacity and construction of the tanks and character of liquids to be stored; 
D.  The degree of private fire protection to be provided, and the capability of the fire department to cope with flammable liquid fires. 
(Prior code § 6406.14 (2))  
5.52.490 - Muffling exhaust. 
The engines used in connection with the drilling of any oil well or in any production equipment of any oil will shall be equipped with an exhaust muffler to prevent excessive or unusual noise. Means shall be provided on all engines used during drilling operations to prevent the escape of flames, sparks, ignited carbon and soot. 
(Prior code § 6406.14 (3))  
5.52.500 - Flammable waste gases and vapors. 
Flammable waste gases or vapors escaping from a production drill site shall be burned or controlled to prevent hazardous concentrations reaching sources of ignition or otherwise endangering the area. 
A.  Flares. Approved means of ignition shall be provided whenever hydrocarbon gases are released to the air through flares. 
B.  Venting. Gases or vapors not burned may be discharged to the atmosphere at not less than twenty feet vertically above grade and not less than twenty-five feet horizontally from any source of ignition and at locations and in quantities that do not create a hazard to the general area. 
(Prior code § 6406.14 (4))  
5.52.510 - Waste control. 
A.  No person shall permit or cause to be permitted the discharge of any liquid containing oil field waste or crude petroleum or any of its products produced on the site into or upon any public street or highway, drainage canal or ditch, storm drain or flood control channel, or upon the surface of any real property, except upon the drill site. 
B.  No person shall permit or cause to be permitted any oil, waste oil, refuse or waste material to be on the surface of the ground, under, around or near any oil well, pump, boiler, oil storage tank or building except within an oil sump, tank or catchment basin. 
C.  All land within twenty-five feet of any well, flammable liquid tank or other appurtenance to any such well shall be at all times kept free and clear of dry weeds, grass, rubbish or other combustible debris. When this distance is not sufficient to provide reasonable fire safety, a greater distance may be required by the building inspector. 
(Prior code § 6406.14 (5))  
5.52.520 - Smoking. 
No person shall smoke or cause, permit or allow another person to smoke within fifty feet of any well, tank location, or any area contaminated by oil or waste gas. 
(Prior code § 6406.14 (6))  
5.52.530 - Fire control equipment. 
A minimum of two fire extinguishers shall be maintained at all well locations where drilling, servicing or repair work is being conducted. Each such extinguisher shall have a minimum classification of 20B as set forth in NBFU No. 10, NFPA No. 10, "First Aid Fire Appliance." 
(Prior code § 6406.14 (7))  
Chapter 5.56 - POOLROOMS AND BILLIARD HALLS 
Sections: 
 
5.56.010 - Police inspection. 
Any poolroom or billiard hall and any room adjacent to the same under the same management or control, shall be subject to all times to police inspection and supervision for the purpose of ascertaining if the provisions of this chapter are being observed, and no personnel shall hinder, obstruct or delay any police officer from entering any such place. 
(Prior code § 6400)  
5.56.020 - Locking or barricading doors. 
No person shall keep any door or entrance to any poolroom or billiard hall locked, barred or barricaded in such manner as to make it difficult of access or ingress to police officers while two or more persons are present in such room, and no person shall visit or resort to any such locked, barred or barricaded room or place protected in any manner to make it difficult of access or ingress to police officers when two or more persons are present. 
(Prior code § 6400.1)  
5.56.030 - Gambling. 
No person shall permit gambling of any kind or description, or playing any games whatsoever for money or anything of value, within any poolroom or billiard hall. 
(Prior code § 6400.2)  
5.56.040 - Card tables and games. 
No card table shall be kept, or any card games played or allowed in any billiard hall or poolroom. 
(Prior code § 6400.3)  
5.56.050 - Hours. 
No billiard hall or poolroom shall be open between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. of any day. 
(Prior code § 6400.4)  
5.56.060 - Minors. 
No person, whether as owner, operator or employee of a poolroom or billiard hall, shall permit or allow any person under the age of sixteen years to be in or upon the premises of such poolroom or billiard hall unless such minor person is accompanied by his parent or guardian. 
(Prior code § 6400.5)  
Chapter 5.60 - PUBLICATION VENDING MACHINES 
Sections: 
 
5.60.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be defined as set forth in this section, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
"Publication vending machine" means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display or sale of any written or printed material, including, but not limited to, newspapers, news periodicals, magazines, books, pictures, photographs and records. 
"Parkway" means that area between the sidewalks and the curb of any street. Where there is no sidewalk, parkway means that area between the edge of the roadway and the lot line of the abutting lot. Parkway also includes any area within a roadway which is not open to vehicular traffic. 
"Roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed or customarily used for vehicular travel. 
"Street" means all that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and includes, but is not limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks. 
(Prior code § 3550)  
5.60.020 - Projection into roadways prohibited. 
No person shall install, use or maintain any publication vending machine which is located, or which projects, into any part of the roadway of any public street. 
(Prior code § 3551)  
5.60.030 - Location on or adjacent to public sidewalks—Prohibitions. 
No person shall install, use or maintain any publication vending machine which is located, or projects in, or upon any public sidewalk, when such installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property, or when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or other governmental use, or when such publication vending machine unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic including any legally marked or stopped vehicle, the ingress or egress from any residence or place of business, or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, or other objects permitted at or near the location. 
(Prior code § 3552)  
5.60.040 - Maintenance and installation standards. 
Any publication vending machine which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway, shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  No publication vending machine shall exceed five feet in height, thirty inches in width, or two feet in thickness. 
B.  Publication vending machines shall only be placed near a curb or adjacent to a wall or a building. Such machines placed near the curb shall be placed no less than eighteen inches or more than twenty-four inches from the edge of the curb. Those machines placed parallel to a wall or building shall be placed not more than six inches from the wall or building. No such machine shall be placed or maintained on the sidewalk or parkway opposite another publication vending machine or group of such machines. 
C.  No publication vending machine shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any building or structure not owned by the owner of the machine, unless the owner of the machine shall have first obtained the written permission of the owner of such building or structure. 
D.  Publication vending machines may be placed next to each other; provided, that no group of the machines shall extend more than eight feet along a curb or wall and a space of no less than three feet shall separate each such group of machines. 
E.  Such machines may be chained or otherwise attached to one another, provided no more than three such machines may be joined together in this manner and a space of no less than three feet shall separate each group of three such machines so attached. 
F.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no publication vending machine shall be placed, installed, used or maintained: 
1.  Within five feet of any marked crosswalk; 
2.  Within fifteen feet of the curb return or any unmarked crosswalk; 
3.  Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or any other emergency facility; 
4.  Within five feet of any driveway; 
5.  Within five feet ahead of or twenty-five feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop; 
6.  Within six feet of any bus bench; 
7.  In any location whereby the cross space or the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet; 
8.  Within three feet of any area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs or trees, or within three feet of any display window or any building abutting the sidewalk or parkway or in such manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window for display purposes; 
9.  Within one hundred feet of any other such machine on the same side of the street within the same block containing the same edition of the same publication. 
G.  No such machine shall be used for advertising material other than dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the publications sold therein; provided, that such permitted advertising shall comply with the provisions of Section 5.60.050 (B) 
H.  Each such machine shall be maintained in a clean, neat and attractive condition and in good repair at all times, and no issue or edition of any publication shall be allowed to remain in any such machine for a period in excess of seven days of the date of the initial issuance or publication, whichever is sooner. 
(Prior code § 3553)  
5.60.050 - Materials sold. 
A.  No publication which is prohibited by the laws of the state from sale or distribution to minors, may be offered for sale to the public in a publication vending machine located on or in any public street, unless such offer of sale is made or maintained in the presence of an attendant with the ability to prevent the purchase of such publication by a minor. 
B.  No publication may be offered for sale to the public on any public street by means of such publication vending machine in such manner as to expose to the public view any photograph or drawing contained within such publications displaying any of the following: 
1.  The genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region of any person, other than a child under the age of puberty; 
2.  Any portion of the breast, at or below the areola, of any female person, other than a child under the age of puberty; 
C.  Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who causes, permits, procures, counsels or assists in an offer of sale of any publication in violation of this section. 
D.  Any publication offered for sale in violation of this section constitutes a public nuisance. 
(Prior code § 3554)  
5.60.060 - Hold harmless agreement. 
Every person who places or maintains such a machine on a public sidewalk or parkway in the city, shall file a written statement with the city clerk, satisfactory to the city attorney, whereby he or it agrees to indemnify and hold harmless, the city, its officers and employees, from any loss or liability or damages, including expenses and costs for bodily or personal injury, and for property damage sustained by any person as a result of the installation, use or maintenance of such a machine within the city. 
(Prior code § 3555)  
5.60.070 - Insurance. 
The owner shall provide and keep in force during the time that such a machine is allowed to remain on public property, a policy of public liability insurance against liability for injuries to persons or property arising out of accidents attributable to the newspaper or magazine racks or stands or publication vending machines on city property, in the amounts determined by the city attorney, with limits of at least one hundred thousand dollars for injury or death to any one person, three hundred thousand dollars for injury or death arising from any one accident or occurrence, and ten thousand dollars for property damage. The policy of insurance so provided shall contain a contractual liability endorsement covering the liability assumed by the permittee by the terms of his permit and shall contain a provision that such policy may not be canceled except after thirty days' notice in writing given to the city clerk of the city. Copies of these policies or certificates evidencing the same shall be filed with the city clerk after approval by the city attorney. 
(Prior code § 3556)  
5.60.080 - Machines in violation. 
A.  Where the city manager finds that a publication vending machine has been installed, used or maintained in violation of any provision of this chapter, he shall issue a written order to the owner of such machine, stating therein the nature of the violation and requiring that such violation be corrected in a reasonable time, not to exceed seven consecutive calendar days. If, upon reinspection, the city manager finds that such violation has not been corrected within the time permitted therefor, as set forth in the order, he shall, forthwith, remove the machine and store the same. Forthwith upon removal of a machine, the city manager shall give the owner thereof written notice of the fact of such removal. No such machine shall be restored to the owner thereof, or other person entitled to possession, unless and until such owner, or person entitled to possession, has paid to the city a fee in an amount equal to the cost of inspection, and the cost of storage of such machine, all as determined by the city manager. 
B.  The owner, or other person entitled to possession of an impounded machine who fails, within thirty days of the giving of notice by the city manager of the fact of such impounding, to make application to the city manager and to pay the fees required pursuant to this section, shall be deemed, conclusively, to have abandoned such machine, and the same shall be disposed of in the manner established by law. 
C.  Any person who is aggrieved by a determination made by the city manager pursuant to the provisions of this section may file with the city clerk a written appeal, appealing the decision of the city manager to the city council. Such an appeal shall be deemed timely filed if the same is filed with the city clerk not later than the tenth consecutive day from and after the day of giving of notice of the decision which is the subject of such appeal. Upon receipt of such a timely filed appeal, the city clerk shall set the matter for hearing at the next most convenient meeting of the city council for determination at that time by that body. The city council shall give the appealing party and any other interested person a reasonable opportunity to be heard in conjunction with the appeal. The determination of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 3557)  
5.60.090 - Unmarked machines. 
Where the city manager finds that a publication vending machine, located in any public street area, does not have the name, address and telephone number of the owner thereof placed upon such machine, in compliance with Section 17570 et seq. the Business and Professions Code of the state, he shall impound such machine and hold the same for disposal as abandoned and unclaimed property. Immediately prior to the effective date of this chapter, the city manager shall take such steps as may reasonably be necessary to ascertain the name and address of the owners of all publication vending machines within the city which do not have thereon the name, address and telephone number of such owner. He shall advise such persons, as he is able to identify, of the requirement of Section 17570 of the Business and Professions Code and of the result of the failure to comply with the code, as set forth in this section. 
(Prior code § 3558)  
5.60.100 - Notices. 
Notices required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be given by any personal service, or by United States Postal Service, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his last known address, and deposited in the course of transmission of the United States Postal Service. The giving of notice hereunder shall be deemed to have occurred as of the date and hour of personal service, or as of the date of deposit of the written notice in the course of transmission of the United States Postal Service. 
(Prior code § 3559)  
Chapter 5.64 - RESTAURANTS 
Sections: 
 
5.64.010 - Scope. 
This chapter shall govern all restaurants which offer take-out service whether or not seating is provided and are within three hundred feet of residential uses. Restaurants which are located in shopping centers of five acres or more are exempt from these provisions. 
(Prior code § 6413.1)  
5.64.020 - Purpose. 
The intent of this chapter is to preserve the right of take-out restaurants throughout the city to establish their own business hours; provided, that while exercising that right, the peace and safety of nearby residents of other businesses is not jeopardized. 
(Prior code § 6413)  
5.64.030 - Permit—Required. 
No person shall operate or cause to be operated or participate in the operation of a restaurant which provides take-out food, between the hours of twelve a.m. and six a.m., without a permit to do so having been secured. No person having obtained a permit shall operate such a restaurant between twelve a.m. and six a.m. if the permit is suspended or revoked. 
(Prior code § 6413.2)  
5.64.040 - Permit—Application—Form—Content—Fee. 
An application for an extended hours permit must be made by the person intending to operate the restaurant in question and include a nonrefundable user fee set by resolution of the city council. The application must be signed by the restaurant operator and must be filed with the city license collector using a standardized form containing the following information: 
A.  The address of the restaurant for which the application is submitted; 
B.  The name and address of the owner(s), partners, officers or directors of the business; 
C.  The name and address of the applicant; 
D.  The intended hours of operation; 
E.  The name and address of any person in charge of the business during the hours between twelve a.m. and six a.m. 
(Ord. 2031 § 3, 1990: prior code § 6413.3)  
5.64.050 - Permit—Application—Investigation. 
Upon receipt of an application for an extended hours permit, the license collector shall forward the application to the special services officer who will initiate a request for an investigation of the applicant, the business, and the neighborhood by the police department. 
(Prior code § 6413.4)  
5.64.060 - Permit—Issuance—Required findings. 
Within thirty days from receipt of the application, the special services officer will issue the permit if it can be found that: 
A.  The application is complete and in proper form and all information provided is accurate and true; 
B.  The proposed extended hours of operation will not create a public nuisance infringing on the peace and safety of nearby businesses or residents; 
C.  That the extended hours of operation do not conflict with any state or local law, ordinance or existing permit. 
(Prior code § 6413.5)  
5.64.070 - Permit—Denial—Right to hearing. 
If the special services officer cannot make one or more of the findings stated in Section 5.64.060, he must not approve the permit request. In such case, the applicant may request a city council hearing on his application. Pending testimony at a public hearing before the city council, the council may issue the permit and may impose special conditions on the permit. 
(Prior code § 6413.6)  
5.64.080 - Assignability. 
Extended hours permits are not assignable. A new permit must be obtained if there is a change in operators. A change in night manager does not require a new permit; however, the special services officer must be supplied with the name and address of the new manager. 
(Prior code § 6413.7)  
5.64.090 - Permit—Renewal. 
Extended hours permits must be renewed on an annual basis. An application form as described in Section 5.64.040 must be completed and submitted with the annual business license. The license collector will forward the application to the special services officer to be reviewed for changes or problems which may have occurred during the previous year. Within thirty days, the special services officer will either issue the permit renewal or inform the applicant by certified mail that the permit has been denied. 
(Prior code § 6413.8)  
5.64.100 - Permit—Revocation or suspension. 
At any time that it becomes apparent to the special services officer of to the chief or police that an existing permit is in violation of one or more of the findings stated in Section 5.64.060, a hearing before the city council may be scheduled. Pending public testimony, the city council may revoke, suspend, or place special conditions on the permit in question. In no case shall the city council revoke or place permanent special conditions on a permit without a public hearing (pursuant to public hearing procedure as stated in Sections 17.78.010 and 17.78.020 of this code). However, the city council may suspend or place temporary conditions on a permit at any time. Notice of such suspension must be given to the applicant by certified mail within five days after the city council action. 
(Prior code§ 6413.9)  
Chapter 5.68 - TAXICABS* 
Sections: 
 
5.68.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be construed as herein set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended. 
"Certificate" means a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to this chapter. 
"Taxicab" means every automobile or motor propelled vehicle by means of which passengers are transported for hire upon any public street in the city, and not over a regular or defined route and irrespective of whether the operation extends beyond the boundary limits of the city or not, excepting vehicles of transportation companies as herein defined. 
"Transportation companies" means "transporting company" as defined in that certain act of the legislature of the state of California, approved May 10, 1917, providing for the supervision and regulation of the transportation of persons and property for compensation over public highways by automobiles, jitney buses, auto trucks, auto stages, and all amendments to said act. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code §§ 6405, 6405.1, 6405.2, 6405.3)  
5.68.020 - Certificate—Required. 
No person shall engage in the business of providing taxicab service or of operating a taxicab upon any public street within the city without having obtained from the director of planning, a certificate of public convenience and necessity to do so in accordance with the provisions hereof, and without complying with or having complied with all the provisions of this chapter and of such certificate. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.4)  
5.68.030 - Certificate—Application. 
A.  Any person desiring to obtain the certificate required by Section 5.68.020 shall pay a fee, in such amount as shall be set by the city council by ordinance, to the finance department and shall receive and make a verified application for the certificate to the director of planning, which such application shall set forth: 
1.  The name and address of the applicant, and if the same be a corporation, the names of its principal officers, or if the same be a partnership, association, or fictitious company, the names of the partners or persons comprising the association or company, with the address of each; 
2.  A complete schedule of the fares or rates to be charged; 
3.  A description of every motor vehicle which the applicant proposes to use, giving: 
a.  Trade name, 
b.  Legal owner, 
c.  Registered owner, 
d.  Motor and serial number, 
e.  State license number, 
f.  Seating capacity, 
g.  Body style, 
h.  Distinctive color scheme, name, monogram, or insignia, which shall be used on such taxicab; 
4.  The street number and exact location of the place where the applicant proposes to stand each such taxicab; 
5.  If any proposed stand is in the public street, the application shall be permitted only after submission of an additional application in a form acceptable to the director of planning. The additional application shall be considered by the planning commission pursuant to a public hearing conforming to the requirements of Chapter 17.78 of the Montebello Municipal Code. In evaluating such an application, the planning commission shall consider potential disruptions to traffic, the affect on neighboring properties, the need for and benefits of such a stand, and other relevant factors. Such an application can be held concurrently with an application for a certificate or after receipt of such a certificate; 
6.  Each vehicle to be used as a taxicab must pass the state's standardized smog test prior to approval of this application. Applicant must submit a copy of a smog certificate, indicating passing, for each vehicle listed herein; 
7.  Proof of current liability insurance executed by a company duly authorized under the laws of the state of California, meeting the guidelines set forth herein under Section 5.68.080; 
8.  A valid California drivers license. 
B.  The fee for filing the application is three hundred fifty dollars. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.5)  
5.68.040 - Certificate—Hearing of application. 
Upon receipt of any application referred to in Section 5.68.030, the finance department shall verify that all information required on the application is submitted and shall forward copies of the application to the planning director and police chief, who will review and determine if the applicant meets the guidelines of this code as it pertains to their respective departments, within ten working days of receipt of the application. Once all determinations are made by the respective departments, they shall forward recommendations to the director of planning. The director of planning will review recommendations made by the finance department and police department, and determine if there is public convenience and necessity for such taxicab service. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.6)  
5.68.050 - Certificate—Issuance. 
Upon receiving the application and recommendations from the finance and police departments, the director of planning will examine the application and all persons associated therewith as set forth in the application. The director of planning shall then determine whether or not the public interest, convenience and necessity require the issuance of the certificate, and whether the applicant should be granted a permit to provide such service. If it is found by the director of planning that the public interest, convenience and necessity require the issuance of the certificate and permit applied for, the director of planning shall direct the finance department to issue a certificate in accordance with the application, along with a business permit. The applicant will be required to file the appropriate insurance policies for approval, as set forth under Section 5.68.080. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.7)  
5.68.060 - Certificate—Grounds for denial. 
Any of the following reasons shall be cause for denial of the certificate and/or permit by the director of planning: 
A.  If the finance department or director of planning concludes that the application is not in the form, and does not contain the information required to be contained therein by this chapter; 
B.  If the planning department determines any of the following: 
1.  That the vehicles described therein appear inadequate and unsafe for taxicab purposes, 
2.  That the color scheme, name, monogram or insignia to be used upon such automobiles would be in conflict with or imitate any color scheme, name, monogram or insignia used by any person in such manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public, 
3.  That the location of the stand, as therein stated, is such as to congest or interfere with travel on any public street, or that the proposed stand is within three hundred feet of any other taxi stand theretofore fixed by the director of planning on the same street; 
C.  If the finance and/or police department(s) determine(s) that the applicant, at some prior time, had such a certificate revoked for any reason; 
D.  That it appears to the director of planning that there are a sufficient number of taxicabs and automobiles for hire in the city to fully serve the public, and that the granting of more certificates would unduly congest the traffic and interfere with the free use of the public streets by the public, and that the public interest, convenience and necessity do not require the issuance of such certificate. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.8)  
5.68.070 - Certificate—Grounds for revocation. 
A.  Any certificate or permit granted under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the director of planning either as a whole or as to any car described therein, or as to the right to use any distinctive color, monogram or insignia, after five working days notice to the certificate holder, requiring him/her to appear at a certain time and place to show cause why the certificate should not be revoked for the following reasons: 
1.  That the required insurance policy described in Section 5.68.080 has not been given or has been withdrawn or lapsed for nonpayment of premium, or is not in force for any reason; 
2.  For the nonpayment to the city of any license fee provided by this code; 
3.  For failure to observe any of the rules and regulations or provisions set out in this chapter or in the certificate; 
4.  For the violation of any of the laws of the state of California, or ordinance of the city by any certificate holder, operator or driver of any taxicab covered by such certificate; 
5.  For failure to maintain satisfactory service to the public by means of any of the vehicles described in the application, or for failure to keep any such car in use for an unreasonable length of time, or for failure to use the distinctive color, monogram or insignia described in the application, or for deviation from the schedule of rates and fares set forth in the application; 
6.  For any cause, which in the opinion of the director of planning makes it contrary to the public interest, convenience and necessity for the certificate or permit to be continued; 
B.  Any city department including finance, planning and police shall notify the director of planning, in writing, of any certificate holder who falls into one or more of the above-mentioned categories either before or after their application is approved. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.10)  
5.68.080 - Liability insurance required. 
A.  Before a certificate shall be issued by the finance department, the applicant must present to the finance department, together with the completed application, the original copy (of which a copy will be made by the finance department) of the policy for liability insurance. Such liability insurance shall be issued by an insurance provider duly authorized to do business under the laws of the state of California and licensed by the state of California Department of Insurance to sell commercial automobile liability insurance and be a member of the California Insurance Guarantee Fund. 
B.  The insurance provider shall commit to pay in full all claims and damages to persons or property resulting from the operation of the taxicab(s) referred to in the application. The policy shall contain policy limits of not less than three hundred fifty thousand dollars combined single limit per occurrence, or provide that the amount for which liability shall be assumed for injury to, or death of one person in any one accident shall not be less than one hundred thousand dollars, and for injury to, or death of more than one person in any one accident shall not be less than three hundred fifty thousand dollars, and the amount for which liability shall be assumed for injury to, or destruction of property in any one accident shall not be less than fifty thousand dollars. Such insurance may include a property damage deductible not greater than two thousand five hundred dollars per occurrence. The policy shall contain a condition that it cannot be modified or cancelled without at least thirty days prior written notice to the city. 
C.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, each person providing taxicab service, and each taxicab operating in the city shall have liability insurance sufficient to satisfy all liability requirements discussed herein and all applicable state laws. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.9)  
5.68.090 - Application of permission to change. 
In the event that a certificate holder desires to change his schedule of rates and charges, or the color scheme, name, monogram or insignia used on such taxicab, or to substitute any vehicle for and in place of the vehicle described in the application, or to increase or decrease the number of vehicles used by him/her as taxicabs, he/she shall first make application for permission by submitting an application to the finance department in a form acceptable to the finance department, with a fee in an amount set by the city council by ordinance. Such permission shall be granted if, in the discretion of the director of planning, it deems the public interest, necessity and convenience will be served by such change, and if the certificate holder has complied with all provisions of this chapter, and no such change shall be made without such permission. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.11)  
5.68.100 - Taxicab stands. 
The director of planning may, by resolution, specify stands at which such taxicabs may be parked pursuant to the provisions of this code, and may, by such resolution, specify the nature and extent of the use to which such stand may be devoted. The stand shall consist of a one car space, to be marked off, painted and reserved for such taxicabs only. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.12)  
5.68.110 - Refusal to pay fare. 
No person shall refuse to pay the legal fare for the hire of any taxicab, after having hired the same with the intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.13)  
5.68.120 - Rules and regulations. 
The following rules and regulations shall be observed by all persons operating taxicabs. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.14)  
5.68.130 - Insurance. 
No taxicab shall be operated in the city unless the insurance required as set forth in Section 5.68.080 of this chapter is in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.15)  
5.68.140 - Standing. 
No taxicab shall remain standing upon any public street except for loading and unloading passengers, and then not for a period of more than five minutes, excepting at such stand as may be designated by the director of planning. This section shall not apply to any taxicab while the same is engaged by and being paid for by a passenger. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.16)  
5.68.150 - Consent of passenger. 
No operator, driver or owner of any taxicab shall solicit or carry any passenger after such taxicab shall have been engaged or while in use for another passenger without the consent of the passenger first engaged in the same having been first obtained. A passenger or passengers engaging such taxicab shall have the exclusive right to full and free use of the passenger compartment and the whole thereof if he/she desires the same. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.17)  
5.68.160 - Safe, direct carriage. 
The driver of any taxicab shall carry any passengers engaging the same safely and expeditiously to their destination by the most direct and accessible route. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.18)  
5.68.170 - Prepaying license fee. 
No person shall operate any taxicab without prepaying any license fee required by the city for the transaction of such business. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.19)  
5.68.180 - Mechanical condition. 
All taxicabs shall be kept in good mechanical condition. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.20)  
5.68.190 - Unfair competition. 
No driver, owner or operator of any taxicab shall indulge in unfair competition with competitors or shall commit any fraud upon the public or other persons engaged in the same business, and the director of planning shall judge what constitutes fraud or unfair competition under the provisions of this section. Any complaints to the director of planning in violation of this section shall only be heard upon written complaint specifying the act complained of and sworn to by the complainant before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.21)  
5.68.200 - Posting necessary information. 
Every taxicab shall have posted in the passenger's compartment a schedule of rates and charges for the hire of the vehicles; also a card bearing the driver's photo, name and address of the business as hereinafter provided and another card bearing the owner's name, address and telephone number of business, the cab number and the Montebello police department telephone number; all of which must be contained in a small card holder at least five inches by seven inches in size and placed in a conspicuous place in the passenger compartment. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.22)  
5.68.210 - Driver to remain near cab. 
The driver of a taxicab shall remain within ten feet of said taxicab while parked at any stand designated by the director of planning, except while assisting passengers to load or unload or while answering his/her telephone. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.23)  
5.68.220 - Charge. 
No charge shall be made by any operator or owner of a taxicab lower than, or in excess of, the rates posted in the passenger compartment of said car and approved by the director of planning. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.24)  
5.68.230 - Clean compartment. 
No taxicab shall be operated unless the passenger compartment is kept clean and in sanitary condition. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.25)  
5.68.240 - Fire extinguisher. 
Every taxicab shall be equipped at all times with a standard type of fire extinguisher in good working condition. A current record of maintenance dates must be visibly posted on the fire extinguisher. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.26)  
5.68.250 - Permit required. 
No person shall solicit or pickup passengers for pay on the streets of the city for transportation in any cab, taxicab, automobile, station wagon or bus without carrying a permit issued by the finance department and without a valid California driver's license. Anyone not licensed or carrying a permit to do so from and by the city finance department will be in violation of this code, excepting only buses operating under authority of the public utilities commission. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.27)  
5.68.260 - Permit—In possession at all times. 
Upon obtaining such permit, the driver or operator shall have in his/her possession, at all times while operating a taxicab, the permit furnished to him/her by the finance department. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.28)  
5.68.270 - Permit—Expiration. 
All permits to provide taxicab service or to drive a taxicab shall expire one year from the date of issue. Applications for renewal shall be made within thirty days before the date of expiration of the permit, together with a renewal fee in such amount as shall be set by the city council by resolution. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.29)  
5.68.280 - Permit—Revocation. 
The director of planning may revoke or suspend any such taxicab permit so issued, or the director of finance or police chief may suggest to the director of planning to revoke or suspend any such taxicab permit so issued, for any violation of the provisions of this chapter by the holder of such permit. Such suspension or revocation may come about as a result of the existence of any facts which would have been good reason for denying such permit when first applied for, whether such facts existed at the time the application was made for such permit or came into existence thereafter. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.30)  
5.68.290 - Appeal. 
In the event of a refusal, revocation or suspension of any taxicab permit by the director of planning, the applicant permittee may appeal the decision to the city manager, which may in his/her discretion affirm, reverse or modify the rule made by the director of planning. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.31)  
5.68.300 - Taxicab number. 
Every certificate holder shall designate each of their taxicabs by number, and no two taxicabs of any certificate holder shall be designated by the same number. The name or trade name of the certificate holder and the number which the taxicab is designated shall be printed, stamped or stenciled conspicuously on the outside and on top of each taxicab, and in the passenger compartment thereof. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.32)  
5.68.310 - Permit and certificate nontransferable. 
No certificate or permit issued under the terms of this chapter shall be transferable either by contract or operation of law without the permission of the director of planning having been first obtained. Any such attempted transfer shall be sufficient cause of revocation thereof. 
(Ord. 2071 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 6405.33)  
Chapter 5.72 - TRAMPOLINE FACILITIES 
Sections: 
 
5.72.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the following words and phrases are defined as follows: 
"Approved type," or any combination thereof, refers to approval by the city building inspector. 
"Operator" means the individual in control of the management and operation of a trampoline center, or any person acting by and with the authority of the person so in control. 
"Proprietor" means the proprietor of the business of maintaining and operating a trampoline center. 
"Trampoline center" means any recreational, amusement or athletic facility open to the use of the general public within or upon which any trampoline is installed, maintained or operated for such use, and irrespective of whether or not a charge is made for the use of any trampoline within or upon such facility. 
"Trampoline supervisor" means an individual of good moral character and physical fitness trained and experienced in the use of and performance upon a trampoline. A trampoline supervisor shall at all time be the qualified holder of the standard first-aid certificate of the American Red Cross. 
(Prior code § 6408)  
5.72.020 - Operation—Compliance with provisions required. 
No person shall construct, install, maintain, use or operate any trampoline center otherwise than in accord with the regulations prescribed by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6408.1)  
5.72.030 - Regulations—Construction and installation. 
Construction and installation regulations for trampoline centers are prescribed as follows: 
A.  Measured from the outside dimensions of the frame, the minimum distance between trampolines shall be: 
1.  End-to-end (longitudinal)—10 feet; 
2.  Side-to-side (lateral)—6 feet. 
B.  All trampoline frames shall be completely and securely covered with padding of approved type construction and dimensions. 
C.  No structure or any part thereof, and no other object of any kind or description, except trampoline frame padding, shall be erected, placed or maintained on the surface of the ground and/or floor of any trampoline center within any of the following distances measured from the outside dimension of the frame of any trampoline: 
1.  Within an extension laterally of the endlines of the frame of the trampoline—6 feet; 
2.  Within an extension longitudinally of the side-lines of the frame of the trampoline—6 feet; 
3.  Upon an extension of the diagonal between opposite corners of a trampoline—2 feet. 
D.  Any ceiling, roof or other covering overlaying any trampoline shall not be less than twenty feet above the mat or net of the trampoline. 
E.  With reference to any pit-type installation of any trampoline, the pit shall be excavated, constructed and maintained to provide a shelf or ledge beneath all springs, elastic bands or other recoil or rebound mechanism attached to the mat or net and which shelf or ledge shall be positioned and dimensioned as follows: not less than twelve inches nor more than sixteen inches below such recoil or rebound mechanism and of a width sufficient to extend laterally below all of such recoil or rebound mechanism plus two inches within and below the perimeter of the mat or net. All other portions of the pit beneath the mat or net shall be excavated, constructed and maintained to a depth of thirty-six inches with a downward side and end slope of approximately one-to-one from the inner edge of such shelf or ledge. 
F.  All trampolines other than pit-type installations shall be firmly secured to the ground or floor. 
G.  Any ticket office, observation booth or other structure of similar purpose and use shall be designed with sufficient sash and/or sash-and-door combination to provide to any occupant of any such structure a clear and unobstructed view of the entire trampoline center; provided, further, that any such structure shall contain not less than twenty-four square feet of clear glass the sills of which shall be located at the above-floor height of three feet two inches on at least three sides of any such structure. 
H.  Any trampoline open to the public use between the hours of one hour after location sunset to one hour before location sunrise shall be illuminated with a light intensity of not less than seven foot-candles at the level of the trampoline mat or net. 
I.  There shall be installed and maintained upon every trampoline center a public address system of sufficient capacity, design and volume to provide at all times voice transmission clearly audible to all persons within and upon the trampoline center. Such public address system shall be operated at all times for the primary purpose of directing and controlling the activities of all persons within and upon the center. The operating sound level of such public address system shall at no time exceed twenty decibels measured at fifty feet at any point beyond the perimeter of the trampoline center. 
J.  The perimeter of all of a trampoline center, excluding that part thereof provided for off-street parking, shall be enclosed with an approved type fence. 
K.  As an integral part of every trampoline center there shall be provided an area for the off-street parking of motor vehicles, the parking capacity of which area shall be one adequate parking space for each two trampolines installed within or upon the trampoline center. Adequate areas of ingress and egress shall be provided for each parking space. All such off-street parking areas and ways of ingress and egress shall be constructed and surfaced in accord with accepted standards prevailing in the area in which the trampoline center is located. 
(Prior code § 6408.2)  
5.72.040 - Regulations—Operating. 
A.  No person shall use or permit or allow the use of any trampoline in or upon any trampoline center or be in or upon any trampoline center otherwise than in accord with the regulations prescribed by this chapter. 
B.  Operating regulations governing the use of any trampoline center by any member of the general public are prescribed as follows: 
1.  No child under the age of two years shall use any trampoline at any time. 
2.  No child over the age of two years and prior to the attainment of the age of six years shall use any trampoline except when in the immediate presence of and within the view of a parent or legal guardian. 
3.  No person shall use or perform upon any trampoline otherwise than in accord with accepted gymnastic practice relating to such use or performance. 
4.  No person, other than a person actually performing upon a trampoline, shall stand, lie or otherwise be within any of the distances from the frame of any trampoline as prescribed and delineated by the provisions of Section 5.72.030(C). The provision of this subdivision shall not apply to the operator of a trampoline center or any trampoline supervisor. 
5.  No individual shall use or perform upon any trampoline except in the presence of and under the supervision and direction of a trampoline supervisor. Any and all persons using or performing upon any trampoline in any trampoline center shall accede at all times to the direction and control of the trampoline supervisor. 
(Prior code § 6408.3)  
5.72.050 - Trampoline use supervision. 
A.  Any trampoline open to public use shall at all times be under the immediate and continuous supervision, direction and control of a trampoline supervisor. 
B.  It shall be the duty of the trampoline supervisor to supervise, direct and control the public use of any trampoline within or upon any trampoline center. 
C.  The duty hereby imposed upon the trampoline supervisor shall not be construed to prohibit such supervisor from doing or performing other or additional acts or duties within and upon a trampoline center; provided, expressly, however, that no such other additional activity or duty shall in any manner or degree limit, restrict or otherwise infringe upon the duty of the trampoline supervisor as imposed by the provisions of subsections A and B of this section. 
D.  Whenever any trampoline is open to public use, upon any trampoline center there shall be on continuous duty therein one or more trampoline supervisors. The required number of such supervisors is prescribed as follows: 
1.  Twelve trampolines or less open to the public use: one supervisor; 
2.  For each additional twelve trampolines open to public use, or any fraction thereof: one additional supervisor for each such additional twelve trampolines or any fraction thereof. 
E.  Whenever one or more trampolines upon any trampoline center are closed to the public use, the trampolines so closed to such use shall be separated from the trampolines open to public use in such appropriate manner as shall deny access by any person to the area within or upon which are located the closed trampolines. Whenever any one or more trampolines are so closed to public use, the operator shall deny access to such closed area by any person other than the agents or employees of the operator. 
(Prior code § 6408.4)  
5.72.060 - Insurance requirements. 
No trampoline center shall be maintained or operated unless or until there is in full force and effect, and covering the operation of the same, a policy of public liability and property damage insurance issued by a duly authorized insurance carrier and insuring such operations within minimum public liability limits of one hundred thousand dollars/two hundred thousand dollars and property damage limit of five thousand dollars. 
(Prior code § 6408.5)  
5.72.070 - Regulations—Posting required. 
Notice of the regulations prescribed by this chapter or otherwise adopted by authority herein contained and governing the use of a trampoline center by members of the general public shall be clearly and legibly posted by the operator upon such center in such conspicuous location or locations as to be clearly visible at all times to all such members of the general public in or upon such center. 
(Prior code § 6408.6)  
Chapter 5.76 - ADULT BUSINESS LICENSING 
Sections:  
Article 1. - General 
 
5.76.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate adult businesses to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city of Montebello. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. It is recognized that adult businesses have a serious deleterious effect upon adjacent areas, as well as the areas in which they are located. It is therefore the purpose of this chapter to establish standards for the conduct of adult businesses which will protect the public health, safety and welfare, preserve locally recognized values of community appearance, minimize the potential for nuisances related to the operation of adult businesses, and maintain local property values. 
In approving the licensing regulations contained in this chapter, the city council has reviewed detailed studies, reports and letters prepared by other jurisdictions and its own staff with respect to the detrimental social, health and economic effects on persons and properties surrounding adult businesses. These studies included Upland, California (1992); Garden Grove, California (1991); Tucson, Arizona (1990); Seattle, Washington (1989); Austin, Texas (1986); Oklahoma City, Oklahoma (1986); Indianapolis, Indiana (1984); Houston, Texas (1983); Beaumont, Texas (1982); Minneapolis, Minnesota (1980); Phoenix, Arizona (1979); Whittier, California (1978); Amarillo, Texas (1977); Cleveland, Ohio (1977); Los Angeles, California (1977); State of Minnesota, Attorney General Report (1989); Newport News, Virginia (1996); St. Paul, Minnesota (1987); Corpus Christi, Texas (1995); and National Law Center (1995) (collectively "studies"). The studies substantiate the adverse, secondary effects of adult businesses. 
A.  Based on the foregoing studies and the other evidence presented, the city council finds that: 
1.  Adult businesses are linked to increases in the crime rates in those areas in which they are located and that surround them; and 
2.  Both the proximity of adult businesses to sensitive land uses and the concentration of adult businesses tend to result in the blighting and downgrading of the areas in which they are located. 
3.  Unregulated adult businesses create serious public health concerns and hazards since the studies and cases demonstrate that such businesses have been linked to the spread of communicable and sexually-transmitted diseases. 
4.  Special regulation of adult businesses is necessary to ensure that their adverse secondary effects will not contribute to an increase in the crime rates or the blighting or downgrading of the areas in which they are located or surrounding areas. The need for special regulation is based on the recognition that adult businesses have serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances or located in direct proximity to sensitive uses such as residential zones and uses, parks, schools, churches or day care centers. 
5.  It is the purpose and intent of these special regulations to prevent the establishment and operation of adult businesses in a manner that would create such adverse secondary effects. Thus, in order to protect and preserve the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizenry, especially minors, special regulations are necessary. 
6.  The protection and preservation of the public health, safety and welfare require that certain operational requirements for adult businesses also be imposed. 
B.  In adopting these regulations, the city council is mindful of legal principles relating to regulation of adult businesses and does not intend to suppress or infringe upon any expressive activities protected by the First Amendments of the United States and California Constitutions, but instead desires to enact reasonable time, place, and manner regulations that address the adverse secondary effects of adult businesses. The city council has considered decisions of the United States Supreme Court regarding adverse secondary effects and the local regulation of adult businesses, including but not limited to: Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc., 427 U.S. 50 (1976) (Reh. denied 429 U.S. 873); Renton v. Playtime Theaters, 475 U.S. 41(1986) (Reh. denied 475 U.S. 1132); FW/PBS. Inc. v. Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); Barnes v. Glenn Theater, 501 U.S. 560 (1991), and City of Erie v. Paps A.M. (2000) 529 U.S. (2000 Daily Journal DAR 3255), United States Court of Appeals 9th Circuit decisions, including but not limited to: Topanga Press, et al. v. City of Los Angeles, 989 F.2d 1524 (1993); Kev, Inc. v. Kitsap County, 793 F.2d 1053 (9th Cir. 1986); Colacurcio v. City of Kent, 163 F.3d 545 (9th Cir. 1998), pet. For cert. Filed (1999); several California cases including but not limited to: Tily B. v. City of Newport Beach, 69 Cal. App. 4th 1 (1998); City of National City v. Wiener, 3 Cal. 4th 832 (1993); People v. Superior Court (Lucero) 49 Cal. 3d 14 (1989); and City of Vallejo v. Adult Books, et al., 167 Cal. App. 3d 1169 (1985); and other federal cases including Lakeland Lounge v. City of Jacksonville (5th Cir. 1992) 973 F.2d 1255, Hang On, Inc. v. Arlington (5th Cir. 1995) 65 F.3d 1248, Mitchell v. Commission on Adult Entertainment (3rd Cir. 1993) 10 F.3d 123, International Eateries v. Broward County (11th Cir. 1991) 941 F.2d 1157, and Star Satellite v. City of Biloxi (5th Cir. 1986) 779 F.2d 1074. 
C.  The city council hereby adopts each of the regulations contained in this chapter as a means to reasonably address the adverse secondary effects of adult businesses. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth below: 
A.  Adult Businesses. An "adult business": 
1.  Is any business, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities, or any business which offers to its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, exposing, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Adult businesses do not include bona fide medical establishments operated by properly licensed and registered medical personnel with appropriate medical credentials for the treatment of patients. 
In determining whether a use is an adult business, only conduct or activities which constitute a regular and substantial course of conduct or a use which has a majority of its floor area, stock-in-trade, or revenue derived from material characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, exposing, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall be considered. Isolated instances of conduct or activities described in this section as characterizing an adult business shall not be considered except where such activities, taken together, constitute a regular and substantial course of conduct; 
2.  Shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Adult Arcade. An "adult arcade" means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated, or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
b.  Adult Bookstore, Novelty Store, Video/DVD Store. "Adult bookstore, novelty store, video/DVD store," is an establishment which has as a substantial portion of its stock-in-trade, a majority of its floor area or revenue derived from and offering for sale for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following: 
i.  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas; 
ii.  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities; or 
iii.  Goods which are replicas of or which simulate, specified anatomical areas, or goods which are designed to be placed on or in specified anatomical areas, or to be used in conjunction with specified sexual activities to cause sexual excitement. 
A business establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing "specified sexual activities' or "specified anatomical areas" and still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult/video/DVD store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult/video/DVD store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
c.  Adult Cabaret. An "adult cabaret" is a bar, nightclub or similar establishment which features dancers, strippers or similar entertainers who expose specified anatomical areas of their bodies or simulate specified sexual activities. 
d.  Adult Motel. An "adult motel" means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
i.  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions, videos or films, 
ii.  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours, or 
iii.  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
e.  Adult Motion Picture Theater. An "adult motion picture theater" means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
f.  Adult Tanning Salon. An "adult tanning salon" or "parlor" means a business establishment where patrons receive tanning services in groups of two or more and where patrons or employees of the establishment expose specified anatomical areas. Adult tanning salon or parlor shall also include a business establishment where a patron and an employee of the establishment are nude or expose specified anatomical areas. An adult tanning salon or parlor shall also include a business establishment where the employees thereof are nude or expose specified anatomical areas. 
g.  Adult Theater. An "adult theater" is any place, building, enclosure, theater, concert hall, auditorium or structure, partially or entirely used for live performances or presentations, which place, building, enclosure, theater, concert hall, auditorium or structure is used for presenting matter characterized by an emphasis on depicting, exposing, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, for observation by patrons therein. Such place shall also include an adult theater wherein persons are regularly featured appearing in a state of nudity, ongoing performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified sexual activities, or by specified anatomical areas. 
h.  Employee. "Employee" means a person who performs any service on the premises of an adult business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis whether or not the person is denominated as an employee, independent contractor agent or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of the adult business. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises to conduct repair or maintenance for the premises or equipment on the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
i.  Nude Model Studio. A "nude model studio" means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be conversed with or be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons, for any form of consideration. Nude model studio shall not include any classroom of any school licensed under state law to provide art education, while such classroom is being used in a manner consistent with such state license. 
j.  Sex Supermarket/Sex Mini-Mall. A "sex supermarket/sex mini-mall means the establishment or operation of more than one type of adult business or use as defined in this chapter within the same building or property. 
k.  Sexual Encounter Center. "Sexual encounter center" means a business or commercial enterprise that as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
i.  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex, or 
ii.  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or is semi-nude. 
l.  Reserved. 
m.  Sexually Oriented Business or Adult Business. A "sexually oriented business" or "adult business" is any business not otherwise defined or provided for herein where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in or simulate specified sexual activities or any business which offers to its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting exposing, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas located, or proposed to be located, within the city. 
B.  Appeal. Wherever the reference to an "appeal" being filed or available to be filed, such right of appeal shall also include the right to appeal administrative determinations made by the city manager/designee in accordance with the procedures established in this chapter. 
C.  Person. "Person" means and includes person(s), firms, corporations, partnerships, associations or any other forms of business organization or group(s). 
D.  Specified Anatomical Areas. "Specified anatomical areas" shall include any of the following human anatomical areas: 
1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
2.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
E.  Specified Sexual Activities. "Specified sexual activities" includes all the following: 
1.  The fondling or other erotic touching of the following human anatomical areas: genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses or female breasts; 
2.  Human sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
3.  Human masturbation, actual or simulated; 
4.  The actual or simulated infliction of pain by one human upon another, or by an individual upon himself or herself for the purpose of the sexual gratification or release of either individual as a result of flagellation, beating, striking or touching of an erogenous zone, including without limitation, the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if such person is a female, a breast; 
5.  Sexual intercourse, actual or simulated, between a human being and an animal; or 
6.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (E)(1) through (5), above. 
F.  Definitions. In addition to the terms defined above, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning as set forth below: 
1.  Couch Dance or Couch Dancing. The term "couch dance" or "couch dancing" means an employee of an adult business intentionally touching any patron while engaged in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area or while simulating any specified sexual activity. 
2.  Establishment. An "establishment" means and includes any of the following: 
a.  The opening or commencement of any adult business as a new business; 
b.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult business, to any adult business; 
c.  The addition of any adult business to any other existing adult business or to another existing adult business, with or without expansion of floor area; 
d.  The relocation of any adult business; or 
e.  The expansion or enlargement of the premises by ten percent or more of the existing floor area. 
3.  Nudity or a State of Nudity. "Nudity" or a "state of nudity" means the showing of the human male or female genitals, buttocks, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the areola. 
4.  Private Viewing Area. "Private viewing area" means an area or areas in an adult business designed to accommodate no more than five or less patrons or customers for purposes of viewing or watching a performance, picture, show, film, videotape, slide, movie or other presentation. No private viewing areas shall be established, maintained or authorized, and there shall be no doors, curtains, stalls or other enclosures creating a private viewing area. 
5.  School. "School" means any public or private educational institution which is run by the state or a subdivision thereof or which is licensed by the state to offer pre-school, elementary or secondary academic instruction, including kindergartens, elementary schools, middle or junior high schools, and high schools. 
6.  Semi-Nude. "Semi-nude" means the showing of the male genitals or female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the showing of a substantial portion of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
7.  Specified Criminal Act. A "specific criminal act" also means "specified criminal acts" and includes sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult business including, but not limited to, the distribution of obscenity; convictions involving the distribution, display or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering. Specified criminal acts excludes those acts which are authorized or required to be kept confidential pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 600 to 900. 
8.  Straddle Dance or Straddle Dancing. The term "straddle dance" or "straddle dancing" shall have the same meaning as "couch dance" or "couch dancing" as defined in subsection (F)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
Article 2. - Adult Business Licenses for Operators 
 
5.76.030 - License required. 
A.  A person commits a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Title 1 of this code, if he or she operates an adult business within the city without obtaining all applicable adult business licenses and permits required by the city pursuant to this code. 
B.  An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the city. The application shall, at a minimum, require the submittal of the following information: 
1.  If the applicant is: 
a.  An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and any aliases and submit proof of age; 
b.  A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any; 
c.  A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation and the state of California, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and controlling stockholders, and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process; 
2.  If the applicant intends to operate the adult business under a name other than that of the applicant, he or she must state: (a) the adult business's fictitious name; and (b) submit the required registration documents. 
3.  Whether the applicant, or any person with management responsibilities for the adult business, has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter, and if so the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each. 
4.  Whether the applicant, or any person with management responsibilities for the adult business, has had a previous license under this chapter or other similar adult business ordinance or regulation from another city or county, denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the adult business for which the license or permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation. In addition, whether the applicant or any person with management responsibilities for the adult business has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is licensed under this chapter whose license or permit in another city or county has previously been denied, suspended or revoked including the name and location of the adult business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation. 
5.  Whether the applicant or any person with management responsibilities for the adult business holds any other licenses under this chapter or other similar adult business from another city or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses. 
6.  The type of classification of the license for which the applicant is filing. 
7.  The location of the proposed adult business, including a legal description of the property, street address and telephone number(s), if any. In addition, the application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises. The application shall include at a minimum the street address of the principal place of business where business records are kept and any location current or proposed for the adult business in the city. Post office boxes or postal annex addresses shall not be sufficient to meet this requirement. 
8.  A recent photograph of the applicant and all persons with management responsibilities for the adult business. 
9.  The applicant's and all persons with management responsibilities for the adult business driver's license number. 
10.  A set of fingerprints for the applicant and all persons with management responsibilities for the adult business. 
11.  A signed and notarized authorization and waiver authorizing the chief of police, the Montebello police department or any law enforcement body or authorized law enforcement contractor to verify all of the information on the application. 
12.  A statement in writing, signed and dated by the applicant, that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that all information contained in the application is true and correct. 
Notwithstanding the fact that an application filed hereunder may be a "public record" under Government Code Section 6250 et seq., certain portions of such application contain information vital to the effective administration and enforcement of the licensing and/or permit scheme established herein which information is personal, private, confidential or the disclosure of which could expose the applicant to a risk of harm. Such information includes, but is not limited to, the applicant's residence address and telephone number, the applicant's date of birth and/or age, the applicant s driver's license and/or Social Security Number, and/or personal financial data. The city council in adopting the application and licensing and/or permit system set forth herein has determined in accordance with Government Code Section 6255 that the public interest in disclosure of the information set forth above is outweighed by the public interest in achieving compliance with this chapter by ensuring that the applicant's privacy, confidentiality or security interests are protected. The city clerk shall cause to be obliterated from any copy of a license application made available to any member of the public, the information set forth above. 
C.  An adult use planning permit application must also be concurrently filed with the license application. The license application shall contain the same information required of the adult use planning permit. The adult use planning permit application will be processed in accordance with the time limits of Chapter 17.60 of this code. Before a business regulated by this chapter may commence operation, the applicant must have been issued a valid adult use planning permit or interim adult use planning permit pursuant to Chapter 17.60 of this code. 
D.  The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the law by the city and by the Montebello fire department. 
E.  Any person who wishes to operate an adult business must sign the application for the license as the applicant. If the applicant consists of multiple persons, a firm, corporation, partnership, association or other form of business ownership, then the president or other officer authorized by the incorporation documents or bylaws shall sign the application. 
F.  The fact that a person possesses any other valid license issued by the city or the county does not exempt the person from the requirement of obtaining all licenses required by this code for an adult business. A person who operates an adult business and possesses any other city or county license shall comply with the requirements and provisions of this chapter and all city codes as well as the requirements and provisions of such other license. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.040 - Issuance of license. 
A.  Upon receipt of a license application, the city manager or designee shall determine whether it is complete and contains all information required by this section within two days of its receipt. If the application is incomplete, the city manager or designee shall deny the application and immediately inform the applicant in writing of the items needed to complete the application. 
B.  The city manager, or designee/thereof, shall issue or deny the issuance of a license to an applicant within ten days after receipt of a properly completed and executed application and the concurrently filed and completed application for an adult use planning permit—including an interim adult use planning permit—which shall be processed pursuant to Chapter 17.60 of this code. The city manager, or designee thereof, shall issue the license unless he/she finds one or more of the following to be true: 
1.  An applicant is under eighteen years of age; 
2.  An applicant is overdue in payment to the city of fees owed by the applicant in relation to the adult business which is the subject of the application; 
3.  An applicant has failed to completely fill out the application for the license or has provided materially false information on the application; 
4.  The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid; 
5.  The premises to be used for the adult business has not been approved by the city and the fire department, as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances, including the issuance of an adult use planning permit or interim adult use planning permit pursuant to Chapter 17.60 of this code; 
6.  The applicant is operating the adult business without a license in violation of this code; 
7.  That an applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act for which: 
a.  Less than eight years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; distribution, display or sale of material harmful to minors; solicitation of prostitution and prostitution, or pandering; 
b.  Less than eight years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; distribution, display or sale of material harmful to minors; solicitation of prostitution or prostitution; or pandering; 
c.  Less than eight years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanors for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; distribution, display or sale of material harmful to minors; solicitation of prostitution or prostitution; or pandering; convictions of any such offense occurring within twenty-four months prior to the application. 
8.  The premises to be operated comply with the location, design and performance standards contained in Chapter 17.60 of this code. 
The city's decision to grant or deny license shall not be based upon information authorized or required to be kept confidential pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 600-900. 
C.  Within ten days of the receipt of a completed application in accordance with the requirements of this section, the city manager, or designee thereof shall refer the application to the chief of police to investigate and verify the information contained in the application. The chief of police may refer the application to any law enforcement body or authorized law enforcement contractor to assist in this determination. In the event the information requested pursuant to this section of this code is not available within the ten-day period, the chief of police shall—if the application otherwise meets the requirements of this code—issue a status report on the issuance of the adult business license, whereupon, the city manager, or designee thereof, shall issue the same within ten days of the receipt of the application. Should the information obtained from the chief of police vary in a material degree from that set forth by the applicant in the application, such variance shall be cause to deny, suspend or revoke the license in accordance with this code. Any license issued prior to the city receiving the background information required by this section shall state clearly on its face that the license is subject to suspension or revocation pursuant to this code. 
D.  The license shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is issued, the expiration date, and the address of the adult business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
E.  The city clerk shall send to the applicant or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action to issue or deny the license within ten days of the receipt of the completed application by the city manager. The decision of the city manager or designee thereof, to issue or deny issuance of the license shall be subject to appeal in accordance with the following procedures: 
1.  The appeal shall be submitted to and received by the city clerk within ten days of the date of such action for which the appeal is made. The appeal must be in writing on forms provided by the city, together with an appeal fee established by resolution of the city council, which may be amended from time to time. All appeals shall set forth the reason for asserting the appeal; 
2.  When a timely appeal is filed, the city council shall hear the matter or appoint a hearing officer to conduct a hearing on the matter. The hearing officer may be such person or body designated by the city council to perform all or a portion of their duties, or may be another official or body from another city or agency, or other person qualified to conduct a review of the matter. The hearing for an appeal shall take place within ten business days of the receipt of the appeal unless the parties mutually agree to an extension. All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; and may be represented by counsel. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness; 
3.  The city council or hearing officer shall render a written decision on the matter within five days of the close of the hearing on the appeal. In no event may the appeal hearing be continued for longer than thirty days, unless the applicant consents to a longer period of time. 
F.  The decision of the city council or hearing officer concerning the appeal of a denial of a permit shall be final. The applicant or permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law, pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 et seq. The city shall make all reasonable efforts to expedite judicial review in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.050 - Fees. 
The initial application fee, the initial license fee, the police department background investigation fee and the annual renewal fee for an adult business license shall be set by separate resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.060 - Inspection. 
An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the city, the city's police department, Los Angeles County department of health services, the fire department, the city building and safety department, and the community development department to inspect the premises of an adult business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the provisions of this chapter at any time the premises is open for business, provided reasonable and normal business operations shall not be interfered with and the inspection is conducted in the same manner as an inspection for other businesses. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.070 - Expiration and renewal of license. 
Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application upon penalty of perjury that there has been no material change in the business or its operation. Applications for renewal shall be filed at least thirty days before the expiration date; the application for renewal shall not extend the license beyond the expiration date. The city manager, or designee thereof, shall issue the license or deny the application for renewal within ten days of the receipt of a completed application. The city manager shall base the decision to renew on the same factors as the issuance of the original license. If in reviewing the application for renewal of the license, the city manager, or designee thereof, determines that the application will likely be denied, then the city manager, or designee thereof, shall cause an administrative hearing to be held within the same ten-day period at which time the applicant may present evidence supporting the application or contradicting the evidence presented by the city. The decision of the city manager, or designee thereof, to deny renewal of the license shall be subject to appeal to the city council by following the same procedures as set forth in Section 5.76.040(E) of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.080 - Suspension and revocation hearings. 
The city manager or his/her designee, or the city council may initiate proceedings to consider the suspension or revocation of an existing adult business license as may be necessary to assure the preservation of the public health and safety. Such proceedings shall include a hearing wherein the license holder is provided the opportunity to refute any evidence or findings of the city. If the evidence presented at the hearing establishes that one or more of the conditions exist as set forth in Section 5.76.090 then suspension shall be ordered; and, if the conditions set forth in Section 5.76.100 exist, then revocation of the adult business license shall be ordered. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.090 - Suspension. 
An adult business license shall be suspended if the evidence at the hearing establishes any one or more of the following conditions exist: 
A.  The conduct of the adult business does not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the city's fire, building, zoning, or Health and Safety Codes; or the locational criteria or design and performance standards set forth in this chapter and in Chapter 17.60 of this code are violated or not complied with by the adult business; 
B.  There was not a responsible person over eighteen years of age on the premises to act as a manager at all times during which the adult business was open; 
C.  The licensee, manager or any agent or employee of the licensee or manager knows or should have known that the adult business has been used as a place where sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, prostitution, assignation or other lewd acts occur or have occurred in the building or on the property; 
D.  The licensee, his or her employees, agent, partner, director, officer, controlling stockholder or manager with management of day-to-day operations has violated any provision of this title or this chapter; 
E.  The licensee or manager has failed to remove all materials harmful to minors, including, but not limited to, wrappers, covers, labels, packaging, bags and magazines that have been discarded upon the grounds within one thousand feet of the premises of the adult business; 
F.  The adult business is being operated, managed or conducted in violation of any condition of approval or performance standard of the adult business license, or adult use planning permit, if required; 
G.  The licensee, manager or any agent or employee of the licensee or manager refused to allow the lawful inspection of the premises by a city inspector or official, the police department, the fire department, city code enforcement officer, director of community development, or county health department or any designee thereof; 
H.  The licensee, manager or any agent or employee of the licensee or manager knowingly permitted gambling on the premises; 
I.  The manager or person acting in that capacity was found to be intoxicated or under the influence of a controlled substance while on duty at the adult business; 
J.  The adult business is operating in violation of the permitted hours of operation, if any; 
K.  The adult business is operating without a city business license; 
L.  The adult business is operating so as to constitute a nuisance pursuant to the Montebello Municipal Code. 
The suspension shall be for a period of up to thirty days or until the violation is corrected, whichever is longer. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.100 - Revocation. 
An adult business license shall be revoked and no new adult business license may be requested by the licensee for any location within the city or by any other person for that same location within a one-year period following revocation if the evidence presented at the hearing on the revocation of the license establishes that one or more of the following conditions exists: 
A.  The licensee, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, controlling stockholder or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material facts in the application for a license or permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with the city's police department, county health department, or any other city department or office in connection with the operation of the business; 
B.  The licensee, manager or any agent or employee of the licensee or manager has been convicted of a felony in a court of competent jurisdiction in conjunction with or as a result of the operation of the adult business; 
C.  The licensee, manager or any employee of the licensee or manager knowingly or with reckless disregard of the requirements of this title allows any minor into the establishment, permits the use of the facilities by a minor, and/or sells adult materials to a minor and/or material harmful to a minor; 
D.  The approved adult business has been expanded, or partially or wholly converted to another adult business without the required city approvals and permits; 
E.  There have been two suspensions of an adult business license within a twelve month period; 
F.  The licensee or manager knowingly or with reckless disregard of the requirements of this code and state and federal law allowed the sale of controlled substances or allowed acts of prostitution on or about the premises; 
G.  The licensee or manager continued to operate the adult business during a suspension period of the adult business license; 
H.  The licensee or manager has been convicted of a specified criminal act for which the required time period has not yet elapsed, 
I.  That on two or more occasions within a twelve month period, a person or persons committed an offense, occurring in or on the licensed premises, constituting a specified criminal act for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the adult business at the time the offenses were committed; 
J.  The licensee or manager is operating more than one adult business in the same building; 
K.  The adult business contains one or more private viewing areas as defined herein; 
L.  The adult business has failed to provide, inaccurately provided, or failed to keep current approved configuration of the adult business or the location of any adult business in the city in accordance with this chapter; or 
M.  The licensee, manager or any agent or employee of the licensee or manager of the adult business knowingly or with reckless disregard of the requirements, violates or permits the violation of any of the prohibited conduct described in Section 5.76.090 of this chapter on three or more occasions within a twelve month period, regardless of whether a suspension or suspensions have been issued for such violations. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.110 - Appeal. 
A.  The city council or hearing officer designee thereof shall conduct all initial hearings concerning the suspension or revocation of licenses. If the city council or hearing officer designee thereof, suspends or revokes a license, the city clerk shall send to the applicant or licensee, by both certified mail, return receipt requested, and regular first-class mail, written notice of the action. The decision to suspend or revoke the license shall be effective twenty days after the notice of the decision has been deposited in the U.S. mail. 
B.  An appeal of the decision to suspend or revoke the license may be made in accordance with requirements of Section 5.76.040(E) by filing a written notice of the same with the city clerk prior to the date on which the decision becomes effective. A properly filed application for appeal stays the decision to suspend or revoke the license until a decision is rendered on the appeal. 
C.  The appeal proceedings shall be conducted pursuant to Section 5.76.040(E) of this chapter. The decision of the city council or hearing officer concerning the appeal shall be final. The permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law, pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 et seq. The city shall make all reasonable efforts to expedite judicial review in accordance with the Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.120 - Transfer of license. 
Any license shall be immediately void if the licensee attempts to transfer the license to another person or location. The attempted transfer of the adult business license includes the transfer of ownership or control of the adult business by any of the following: 
A.  The sale, lease or sub-lease of an adult business; 
B.  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or 
C.  The establishment of a trust, gift or similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.130 - Location of adult businesses. 
The permitted location of an adult business shall be as provided in Chapter 17.60 of this code. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.140 - Prohibited conduct at adult business. 
A.  No person shall operate or cause to be operated an adult business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued under this code, knowingly, or with reason to know, permitting, suffering or allowing any employee: 
1.  To engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a patron at the business; 
2.  To contract or otherwise agree with a patron to engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a person at the business; 
3.  To intentionally touch any patron at an adult business while engaged in the display or exposure of a specified anatomical area or engaged in or simulating a specified sexual activity; 
4.  To voluntarily be within six feet of any patron while engaged in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area or engaged in or simulating a sexual activity. 
B.  No person at any adult business, regardless of whether or not said business is permitted under this code, shall intentionally touch an employee who is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area or engaging in or simulating a specified sexual activity at the adult business. 
C.  No person at any adult business, regardless of whether or not said business is permitted under this code, shall engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with an employee at the business who is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area or engaging in or simulating a specified sexual activity. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.150 - Injunction. 
A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult business without a valid license is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
Article 3. - Adult Live Entertainer Licenses 
 
5.76.160 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  Adult Live Entertainment. The term "adult live entertainment" means every form of live entertainment, music, band or orchestra, act, play, burlesque, revue, pantomime, scene, song, dance or act participated in by one or more persons and which live entertainment involves the display or simulation of specified sexual activities or the display of specified anatomical areas. 
B.  Adult Live Entertainer. The term "adult live entertainer" means any person who engages in or performs "adult live entertainment." 
C.  Appeal. The term "appeal" shall have the same meaning as provided in Section 5.76.020(B) of this chapter. 
D.  Couch Dance or Couch Dancing. The term "couch dance" or "couch dancing" means an "adult live entertainer" intentionally touching any patron while engaged in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area as defined in Section 5.76.020(D) of this chapter or while simulating any specified sexual activity as defined in Section 5.76.020(E) of this chapter. 
E.  Straddle Dance or Straddle Dancing. The term "straddle dance" or "straddle dancing" shall have the same meaning as "couch dance" or "couch dancing" as defined in subsection (D) of this section 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.170 - Adult live entertainment license required. 
Each individual to be employed or who is employed in the capacity as an adult live entertainer for an adult business shall be required to obtain an adult live entertainer license from the city. Each applicant shall pay an adult live entertainer license fee as set by resolution of the city council. It is unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Title 1 of this code, for any person to work as an adult live entertainer without a license as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.180 - Application form—Contents. 
Before any applicant may be issued an adult live entertainer license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by the city manager, or designee thereof, the following information: 
A.  The applicant's full name and any other names or aliases used by the individual during the last ten years; 
B.  Age, date, and place of birth; 
C.  Height, weight, and color of hair and eyes; 
D.  Present business address and telephone number; 
E.  Proposed business address and telephone number; 
F.  Present residence address and telephone number; 
G.  State driver's license or identification number; 
H.  Social Security number; 
I.  Evidence that the individual is at least eighteen years of age; 
J.  A statement describing the business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for three years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application; 
K.  A statement detailing the license or permit history of the applicant for the ten years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant has ever had a license, permit or authorization to do business denied, revoked or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked or suspended regarding a business in this state or anywhere else. In the event of any such denial, revocation or suspension, state the date, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the reasons for the denial, revocation or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation or suspension shall be attached to the application; 
L.  A statement listing all criminal convictions or pleas of nolo contendere, except those which have been expunged or sealed by court order, or authorized or required to be kept confidential pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 600-900, and the disposition of all arrests of the applicant, individual or other entity subject to disclosure under this chapter, for eight years prior to the date of the application. This disclosure shall include identification of all ordinance violations, except minor traffic offenses (any traffic offense designated as a felony shall not be construed as a minor traffic offense), stating the date, place, nature of each conviction or plea of nolo contendere, and sentence of each conviction or other disposition; identifying the convicting jurisdiction, and sentencing court providing court identifying case numbers or docket numbers; 
M.  Attached to the application form as provided above, two color photographs of the applicant clearly showing the individual's face. The application form shall be signed under penalty of perjury; 
N.  A signed and notarized authorization and waiver authorizing the chief of police, the Montebello police department, or any law enforcement body or authorized law enforcement contractor to verify all of the information on the application; and 
O.  A statement in writing, signed and dated by the applicant, that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that all information contained in the application is true and correct. 
Notwithstanding the fact that an application filed hereunder may be a "public record" under Government Code Section 6250 et seq., certain portions of such application contain information vital to the effective administration and enforcement of the licensing and/or permit scheme established herein which is personal, private, confidential or the disclosure of which could expose the applicant to a risk of harm. Such information includes, but is not limited to, the applicant s residence address and telephone number, the applicant's date of birth and/or age, the applicant's driver's license and/or Social Security Number and/or personal financial data. The city council in adopting the application and licensing and/or permit system set forth herein has determined in accordance with Government Code Section 6255 that the public interest in disclosure of the information set forth above is outweighed by the public interest in achieving compliance with this chapter by ensuring that the applicant's privacy, confidentiality or security interests are protected. The city clerk shall cause to be obliterated from any copy of a completed license application made available to any member of the public the information set forth above. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.190 - Referral for investigation—License issuance. 
A.  Upon receipt of a license application, the city manager or designee shall determine whether it is complete and contains all information required by this section within two days of its receipt. If the application is incomplete, the city manager or designee shall deny the application and immediately inform the applicant in writing of the items needed to complete the application. 
B.  Upon receipt of a completed application, the city manager, or designee thereof, shall refer the adult live entertainer license application to the chief of police to investigate and verify the information contained in the application. The chief of police may refer the application to any law enforcement body or authorized law enforcement contractor to assist in this determination. In no event shall the investigation or the decision to grant or deny a license include information authorized or required to be kept confidential in accordance with Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 600 to 900. After the investigation, including obtaining the information pursuant to Section 5.76.180 of this chapter, the chief of police shall, within ten days of the receipt of the complete application, issue a report on the issuance of the adult live entertainer license to the city manager, or designee thereof, and the city manager or designee shall issue such license within the same ten-day period unless one or more of the following findings is true: 
1.  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a license, permit or in any report or record required to be filed with the city or county; 
2.  An applicant is under eighteen years of age; 
3.  An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act for which: 
a.  Less than eight years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; the distribution, display or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering, 
b.  Less than eight years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense, for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; the distribution, display or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering, or 
c.  Less than eight years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanors for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; distribution, display or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering; conviction of any such offense occurring within twenty-four months prior to application; 
4.  The adult live entertainer will be performing in a building, structure and location which does not comply with the requirements or meet the standards of the health zoning, fire and safety laws of the state of California and ordinances of the city applicable thereto; 
5.  The applicant has had an adult live entertainer license revoked by the city within two years of the date of the current application; 
6.  The adult live entertainer license is for a business prohibited by a local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited in the particular location by the provisions of this code; or 
7.  The applicant has been refused a license or had a license revoked by this city or any other county or municipality within two years of the date of the current application. 
C.  In the event the information requested pursuant to this section is not available within said ten-day period the chief of police shall, if the application otherwise meets the requirements of this code, issue a report on the issuance of the adult live entertainer license; whereupon the city manager or designee thereof shall issue the same. Should the information obtained pursuant to this section materially vary from that on the application, such variance shall be cause to suspend or revoke the license. Any license issued prior to the city receiving the information required by Section 5.76.190(B) of this chapter shall state clearly on its face that the license is subject to suspension on revocation pursuant to this chapter. 
D.  The city clerk shall send to the applicant or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action to issue or deny the license within ten days of the receipt of a completed application. The decision of the city manager, or designee thereof, to issue or deny issuance of the license shall be subject to appeal in accordance with the following procedures: 
1.  The appeal shall be submitted to and received by the city clerk within ten days of the date of such action for which the appeal is made. The appeal must be in writing on forms provided by the city, together with an appeal fee established by resolution of the city council, which may be amended from time to time. All appeals shall set forth the reason for asserting the appeal. 
2.  When a timely appeal is filed, the city council shall hear the matter or appoint a hearing officer to conduct a hearing on the matter. The hearing officer may be such person or body designated by the city council to perform all or a portion of their duties, or may be another official or body from another city or agency, or other person qualified to conduct a review of the matter. The hearing for an appeal shall take place within ten business days of the receipt of the appeal unless the parties mutually agree to an extension. All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; and may be represented by counsel. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness. 
3.  The city council or hearing officer shall render a written decision on the matter within five days of the close of the hearing on the appeal. In no event may the appeal hearing be continued for longer than thirty days unless the applicant consents to a longer period of time. 
E.  The decision of the city council or hearing officer concerning the appeal of a denial of a license shall be final. The applicant or permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law, pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 et seq. The city shall make all reasonable efforts to expedite judicial review in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.200 - Conduct of adult live entertainer. 
In addition to the requirements of this title, adult live entertainment shall be subject to the following regulations: 
A.  No adult live entertainer shall mingle or fraternize with the patrons on the premises of the adult business while performing. 
B.  Adult live entertainers shall be restricted to performing on a raised platform which is at least eighteen inches above the floor level, and a minimum of six feet in distance from the nearest patron or customer. A rail of at least forty-two inches in height shall be installed around the perimeter of the stage. 
C.  No adult live entertainer shall: 
1.  Engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a patron at the business; 
2.  Contract or otherwise agree to engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a patron at the business; 
3.  Engage in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area or engage in or simulate a specified sexual activity while intentionally touching a patron at the adult business; 
4.  Engage in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area or engage in or simulate a specified sexual activity closer than six feet from any patron. 
D.  No employee, regardless of whether or not a license or other permit has been issued for said business under this chapter, shall engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service or solicit a service between the hours of two a.m. and nine a.m. of any particular day. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.210 - Expiration and renewal of license. 
The adult live entertainer license granted pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to annual renewal by the city manager, or designee thereof, upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the city manager, or designee thereof, and the chief of police that the applicant has not committed any offense or committed any act during the existence of the license which would give grounds to deny the license or refuse the renewal or to revoke the license. If in reviewing the application for renewal of the license, the city manager, or designee thereof, determines that the application will likely be denied, then the city manager, or designee thereof, shall cause an administrative hearing to be held within ten days of the date on which the renewal application was filed with the city. At the hearing, the applicant may present evidence supporting the application or contradicting the evidence presented by the city. The decision of the city manager or designee thereof, to deny renewal of the license shall be subject to appeal to the city council by following the same procedures as set forth in Section 5.76.040(E) of this chapter. The renewal of an adult live entertainer license shall be subject to payment of a fee as set by a resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.220 - Suspension and revocation of license. 
Any license issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked by the city for a violation of the provisions of this chapter or code or a failure to comply with the provisions hereof. Any proceeding to consider the suspension or revocation of a license shall utilize the procedures to suspend or revoke an adult business license set forth in Sections 5.76.080, 5.76.090 and 5.76.100 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
Article 4. - Figure Model Licenses 
 
5.76.230 - Definitions. 
The following terms used in this article shall have the meanings indicated below: 
A.  Appeal. "Appeal," as used herein, shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 5.76.020(B) of this chapter. 
B.  Figure Model. "Figure model" means any person, male or female, who models or poses at a nude model studio while nude or semi-nude to be observed, viewed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculpted, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted. 
C.  Nude, Semi-Nude and State of Nudity. "Nude," "semi-nude" and "state of nudity," as used herein, shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 5.76.020(F) of this chapter. 
D.  Nude Model Studio. "Nude model studio" shall have the same meaning herein as defined in Section 5.76.020(A)(2)(i) of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.240 - License required. 
No person shall engage in, conduct, perform, model or pose as a figure model, or conduct manage or carry-on any place where such posing or modeling is available or open to the public within the city without first obtaining a figure model license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and securing the necessary zoning permits and business licenses required by the code. No person shall act as a figure model for a fee or gratuity without a license from the city. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.250 - License application—Contents. 
A.  Applications for figure model licenses shall be filed with the city manager on forms supplied by the city together with a fee established by resolution of the city council to cover the cost of processing and investigation. The application shall be signed and verified by the applicant and shall contain such information as set forth below. The city manager may require that the applicant be fingerprinted and photographed. 
B.  Any applicant for a license shall submit the following information: 
1.  The full name and present address of the applicant; 
2.  The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant; 
3.  Written proof that the applicant is over the age of eighteen years; 
4.  Applicant's height, weight, color of eyes, and hair; 
5.  Applicant's business, occupation or employment for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application; 
6.  The business license and/or permit license history of the applicant, including whether the applicant has ever had any license or permit issued by any agency, board, city, county, territory or state. The date of issuance of such license or permit, including whether the license or permit was denied, revoked or suspended shall also be included; 
7.  Information concerning specified criminal acts for which: 
a.  Less than eight years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; the distribution, display or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering, 
b.  Less than eight years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; the distribution, display or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering, or 
c.  Less than eight years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanors for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; distribution, display or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering; conviction of any such offense occurring within twenty-four months prior to application; 
8.  A signed and notarized authorization and waiver authorizing the chief of police, the Montebello police department, or any law enforcement body or authorized law enforcement contractor to verify all of the information on the application; 
9.  A statement in writing, signed and dated by the applicant, that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that all information contained in the application is true and correct. 
Notwithstanding the fact that an application filed hereunder may be a "public record" under Government Code Section 6250 et seq., certain portions of such application contain information vital to the effective administration and enforcement of the licensing and/or permit scheme established herein which is personal, private, confidential or the disclosure of which could expose the applicant to a risk of harm. Such information includes, but is not limited to, the applicant's residence address and telephone number, the applicant's date of birth and/or age, the applicant's driver's license and/or Social Security number, and/or personal financial data. The city council in adopting the application and licensing and/or permit system set forth herein has determined in accordance with Government Code Section 6255 that the public interest in disclosure of the information set forth above is outweighed by the public interest in achieving compliance with this chapter by ensuring that the applicant's privacy, confidentiality or security interests are protected. The city clerk shall cause to be obliterated from any copy of a completed license application made available to any member of the public, the information set forth above. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.260 - Issuance of license—Investigation. 
A.  Upon receipt of a license application, the city manager or designee shall determine whether it is complete and contains all information required by this section within two days of its receipt. If the application is incomplete, the city manager or designee shall deny the application and immediately inform the applicant in writing of the items needed to complete the application. 
B.  Upon receipt of a completed application, the city manager, or designee thereof, shall refer the application to the chief of police to investigate and verify the information contained in the application. The chief of police may refer the application to any law enforcement body or authorized law enforcement contractor to assist in this determination. In no event shall the investigation or the decision to grant or deny a license include information authorized or required to be kept confidential in accordance with Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 600 to 900. The chief of police shall, within ten days of the filing of a complete application, recommend that the city manager, or designee thereof, approve, conditionally approve or deny the application based on the information obtained during the background investigation. Whereupon the city manager, or designee thereof, shall issue or deny the same. In the event the background information requested is not available within said ten-day period, the chief of police shall, if the application otherwise meets the requirements of this code, recommend issuance of the figure model license. Should the information obtained materially vary from that on the application, such variance shall be cause to suspend or revoke the license. Any license issued prior to the city receiving the information required by this section shall state clearly on its face that the license is subject to suspension or revocation pursuant to Sections 5.76.080, 5.76.090 and 5.76.100 of this chapter. In no event shall the decision to grant or deny the license be based on information authorized or required to be kept confidential pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 600-900. 
C.  The city manager, or designee thereof, shall issue such license within the ten-day period as requested, unless the city manager, or designee thereof, makes any of the following findings: 
1.  The applicant: 
a.  Has been convicted of a violation of California Penal Code Sections 266h; 266i; 314; 315; 316; 318; subsections (a), (b) and (h) of Penal Code Section 647, or any other provision of law pursuant to which a person is required to register under the provisions of Penal Code Section 290; 
b.  Has been subjected to a permanent injunction against the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to Sections 11225 through 11235 of the California Penal Code or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the state of California; 
c.  Has been convicted of any offense in any other state which is the equivalent of any of the above-mentioned offenses; 
d.  Reserved; 
e.  Has committed an act in another jurisdiction, if done by a licensee under this chapter, would be grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of the license; 
f.  Has been convicted of an act involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude or an act of violence, which act or acts are related to the qualifications, functions or duties of the licensee; 
g.  The applicant has made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact to the city in the license application process; 
h.  The application does not contain all of the information required; 
i.  The nude model studio, where the applicant proposes to use the license, does not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, fire and safety requirements and standards. 
2.  The location of the proposed nude model studio is at a site or location that does not meet the requirements of Chapter 17.60 of this code. 
D.  The city clerk shall send to the licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested written notice of the action to issue or deny the license within ten days of the receipt of the application. The decision of the city manager, or designee thereof, to issue or deny issuance of the license shall be subject to appeal in accordance with the procedures contained in Section 5.76.040(E) of this code. 
E.  The decision of the city council or hearing officer concerning the appeal of a denial of a permit shall be final. The applicant or permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law, pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 et seq. The city shall make all reasonable efforts to expedite judicial review in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.270 - Transfer and duration of license. 
A.  No license issued hereunder shall be transferable to any other person. 
B.  Figure model licenses shall be issued for the period of twelve months and shall expire twelve months from issuance. 
C.  Renewal application shall be filed no later than thirty days prior to the expiration of the license to prevent a lapse of the license. 
D.  Each applicant for renewal shall file such information as may be required by the city manager to update the information required for his or her original license application. The application for renewal shall include the appropriate filing fees as set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.280 - Disrobing prohibited. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor subject to punishment in accordance with Title 1 of this code for any person, customer or patron to disrobe while on the premises. A person operating a nude model studio shall cause a sign, to be posted in a conspicuous space visible from the main entrance of the establishment, containing the message, with one and one-half inch height and width lettering, which reads: 
PATRONS ARE PROHIBITED FROM 
DISROBING ON PREMISES 
A person that operates a nude model studio who knowingly permits a customer or patron to disrobe shall subject their adult business license to suspension and/or revocation pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.290 - Figure model license. 
No operator of a nude model studio shall employ or utilize the services in any way of a figure model who does not possess a valid license therefore. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.300 - Figure model license—Display. 
The license issued pursuant to this chapter for each figure model shall be displayed within an area on the premises open to the public at all times The identification card issued to a figure model shall be available for display to any police officer or other city officer upon demand. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.310 - Suspension, revocation, denial and appeal. 
A.  Violation. The city manager may refuse to renew a license or may revoke or suspend an existing license on the grounds that the applicant or license holder has failed to comply with the license conditions or other requirements of this chapter. If in reviewing the application for renewal, the city manager or designee thereof, determines that the application will likely be denied, then the city manager, or designee thereof, shall cause an administrative hearing to be held within ten days from the date on which the complete application was filed with the city. At the hearing, the applicant may present evidence supporting the application or contradicting the evidence presented by the city. If a suspended license lapses during the suspension period, a new application must be made at the end of the suspension period. In any such case, the applicant or license holder shall have the right to appeal to the city council in the time and manner set forth in this section. 
B.  Revocation and Suspension. 
1.  The city manager, or designee thereof, may revoke or refuse to renew a figure model license if he or she makes any of the findings for denial of a license under Section 5.76.260(C) or 5.76.280, or upon any subsequent violation of any provision of this chapter within one year following a prior suspension under subsection (B)(2) of this section. 
2.  The city manager, or designee thereof, may suspend a figure model license for a period of thirty days for any violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Notice. When the city manager concludes that grounds for denial, suspension, revocation or refusal to renew a license exist, the city manager shall serve the applicant or license holder, either personally or by certified mail, addressed to the business or residence address of the applicant or license holder, with a notice of denial or notice of intent to suspend, revoke or refusal to renew license. In the event certified mail is used, the notice shall also be sent by regular first-class mail to the same address with postage fully paid thereon. This notice shall state the reasons for the proposed action, the effective date of the decision if no appeal is filed by applicant or license holder, and the right of the applicant or license holder to appeal to the city council. 
D.  Appeal. The applicant or license holder may appeal the decision of the city manager by following the same procedures as set forth in Section 5.76.040(E) of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
5.76.320 - Violation and penalty. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to engage in, conduct, perform, model or pose as a figure model without obtaining the figure model license required by this chapter. Violations shall subject the violator to punishment in accordance with Title 1 of this code. Violation of the provisions of this chapter by existing licensees shall subject their license to suspension and/or revocation in accordance with the provisions in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2288 § 3 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 5.80 - LICENSING REGULATIONS FOR TOBACCO RETAILERS 
Sections: 
 
5.80.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate tobacco retailers to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Montebello. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the sale of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia, in accordance with all provisions of the Government Code and the Montebello Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2335, § 2, 9-23-2009)  
5.80.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
"Arm's length transaction" means a sale in good faith and for valuable consideration that reflects the fair market value in the open market between two informed and willing parties, neither of which is under any compulsion to participate in the transaction. A sale between relatives, related companies or partners, or a sale for which a significant purpose is avoiding the effect of the violations of this chapter is not an arm's length transaction. 
"Department" means the Montebello Police Department, and any agency or person designated by the department to enforce or administer the provisions of this chapter. 
"Drug paraphernalia" shall have the definition set forth in California Health and Safety Code section 11014.5, as that section may be amended from time to time. 
"Person" means any natural person, partnership, cooperative association, corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity. 
"Proprietor" means a person with an ownership or managerial interest in a business. An ownership interest shall be deemed to exist when a person has a ten percent or greater interest in the stock, assets, or income of a business other than the sole interest of security for debt. A managerial interest shall be deemed to exist when a person can or does have or share ultimate control over the day-to-day operations of a business. 
"Self-service display" means the open display or storage of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia in a manner that is physically accessible in any way to the general public without the assistance of the retailer or employee of the retailer and a direct person-to-person transfer between the purchaser and the retailer or employee of the retailer. A vending machine is a form of self-service display. 
"Smoking" means possessing a lighted tobacco product, lighted tobacco paraphernalia, or any other lighted weed, shisha, herb, or plant (including a lighted pipe, cigar, hookah pipe, or cigarette of any kind) and means the lighting of a tobacco product, tobacco paraphernalia, or any other weed, shisha, herb, or plant (including in a pipe, cigar, hookah pipe, or cigarette of any kind). 
"Tobacco paraphernalia" means cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other item designed for the smoking, preparation, storing, or consumption of tobacco products. 
"Tobacco product" means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, snus, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco; and any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human body, but does not include any cessation product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependence; and any product that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human body, including but not limited to shisha, herbs, or plants of any kind, by means of inhalation through smoking. 
"Tobacco retailer" means any person who sells, offers for sale, or does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia. "Tobacco retailing" shall mean the doing of any of these things. This definition is without regard to the quantity of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia sold, offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange. 
(Ord. No. 2335, § 2, 9-23-2009)  
5.80.030 - Requirements and prohibitions. 
A.  Tobacco Retailer License Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco retailer in the city without first obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco retailer's license pursuant to this chapter for each location at which that activity is to occur. Tobacco retailing without a valid tobacco retailer's license is a nuisance as a matter of law. 
B.  Lawful Business Operations. In the course of tobacco retailing or in the operation of the business or maintenance of the location for which a license [is] issued, it shall be a violation of this chapter for a licensee, or any of the licensee's agents or employees, to violate any local, state, or federal law applicable to tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, or tobacco retailing. 
C.  Display of License. Each tobacco retailer license shall be prominently displayed in a publicly visible location at the licensed location. 
D.  Positive Identification Required. No person engaged in tobacco retailing shall sell or transfer a tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia to another person who appears to be under the age of twenty-seven years without first examining the identification of the recipient to confirm that the recipient is at least the minimum age under state law to purchase and possess the tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia. 
E.  Minimum Age for Persons Selling Tobacco. No person who is younger than the minimum age established by state law for the purchase or possession of tobacco products shall engage in tobacco retailing. 
F.  Self-Service Display Prohibited. Tobacco retailing by means of a self-service display is prohibited. 
G.  False and Misleading Advertising Prohibited. A tobacco retailer or proprietor without a valid tobacco retailer license, including, for example, a person whose license has been suspended or revoked: 
1.  Shall keep all tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia out of public view. The public display of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia in violation of this provision shall constitute tobacco retailing without a license under Section 5.80.130; and 
2.  Shall not display any advertisement relating to tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia that promotes the sale or distribution of such products from the tobacco retailer's location or that could lead a reasonable consumer to believe that such products can be obtained at that location. 
H.  Drug Paraphernalia. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any licensee or any of the licensee's agents or employees, to violate any local, state, or federal law regulating controlled substances or drug paraphernalia, such as, for example, California Health and Safety Code section 11364.7, except that a violation of federal law relating to the use of medical marijuana shall not be a violation of this chapter if the conduct at issue is authorized pursuant to California Health and Safety Code sections 11362.7 et seq. 
I.  Pseudoephedrine. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any licensee or any of the licensee's agents or employees, to violate any state or federal law regulating sales or display of pseudoephedrine, such as, for example, California Health and Safety Code sections 11100 and 11106, and 21 U.S.C. 830. 
J.  On-site Smoking Prohibited. No person engaged in tobacco retailing shall permit smoking inside the licensed premises or in any adjacent outdoor area owned, leased, or operated by the person engaged in tobacco retailing. 
(Ord. No. 2335, § 2, 9-23-2009)  
5.80.040 - Limits on eligibility for a tobacco retailer license. 
A.  No license may be issued to authorize tobacco retailing at other than a fixed location. For example, tobacco retailing by persons on foot or from vehicles is prohibited. 
B.  No license may be issued to authorize tobacco retailing at any location where smoking is permitted inside the premises or in any adjacent outdoor area owned, leased, or operated by the person applying for a license to engage in tobacco retailing. In addition, no license may be issued to authorize tobacco retailing at any location where smoking is permitted within twenty-five feet of any doorway, window, opening, or other vent into the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 2335, § 2, 9-23-2009)  
5.80.050 - Application procedure. 
A.  Application for a tobacco retailer's license shall be submitted in the name of each proprietor proposing to conduct retail tobacco sales and shall be signed by each proprietor or an authorized agent thereof. 
It is the responsibility of each proprietor to be informed regarding all laws applicable to tobacco retailing, including those laws affecting the issuance of a tobacco retailer's license. No proprietor may rely on the issuance of a license as a determination by the city that the proprietor has complied with all laws applicable to tobacco retailing. A license issued contrary to this chapter, contrary to any other law, or on the basis of false or misleading information supplied by a proprietor shall be revoked pursuant to Section 5.80.120. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to vest in any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer's license any status or right to act as a tobacco retailer in contravention of any provision of law. 
All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the police department and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name, street address, and telephone number of each proprietor of the business seeking a license. 
2.  The business name, address, and telephone number of the single fixed location for which a license is sought. 
3.  A single name and mailing address authorized by each proprietor to receive all communications and notices (the "authorized address") required by, authorized by, or convenient to the enforcement of this chapter. If an authorized address is not supplied, each proprietor shall be deemed to consent to the provision of notice at the business address specified in subparagraph (2) above. 
4.  Proof that the location for which a tobacco retailer's license is sought has been issued a valid state tobacco retailer's license by the California Board of Equalization. 
5.  Proof that the business at the location for which a tobacco retailer's license is sought has obtained a valid business license pursuant to Title 5 of the Montebello Municipal Code, and has paid all applicable business license taxes. 
6.  Whether or not any proprietor or any agent of the proprietor has admitted violating, or has been found to have violated, this chapter and, if so, the dates and locations of all such violations within the previous five years. 
7.  A statement signed by each proprietor that no drug paraphernalia is or will be sold at the location for which the license is sought. 
8.  Such other information as the police department deems necessary for the administration or enforcement of this chapter as specified on the application form required by this section. 
B.  A licensed tobacco retailer shall inform the police department in writing of any change in the information submitted on an application for a tobacco retailer's license within fourteen business days of a change. 
C.  All information specified in an application pursuant to this section shall be subject to disclosure under the California Public Records Act (California Government Code section 6250 et seq.) or any other applicable law, subject to the laws' exemptions. 
(Ord. No. 2335, § 2, 9-23-2009)  
5.80.060 - Issuance of license; appeal. 
A.  Upon the receipt of a complete application for a tobacco retailer's license and the license fee required by this chapter, the chief of police shall issue a license unless substantial evidence demonstrates that one or more of the following bases for denial exists: 
1.  The information presented in the application is inaccurate or false. Intentionally supplying inaccurate or false information shall be a violation of this chapter. 
2.  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing at a location for which this chapter prohibits issuance of tobacco retailer licenses. However, this subparagraph shall not constitute a basis for denial of a license if the applicant provides the city with documentation demonstrating by clear and convincing evidence that the applicant has acquired or is acquiring the location or business that was otherwise legally operating at the time of enactment of this chapter. 
3.  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing for a proprietor to whom this chapter prohibits a license to be issued. 
4.  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing that is prohibited pursuant to this chapter, (e.g., mobile vending), that is unlawful pursuant to this Code, or that is unlawful pursuant to any other law. 
B.  Should an application be denied for any of the foregoing reasons, the chief of police shall issue a written notice of decision to deny such application within fifteen days of receipt of a complete application stating the basis for such denial. 
C.  Within ten days of receipt of such decision, an applicant who is aggrieved by the decision declining to issue such permit may file a written letter of appeal along with the appeal fee as specified by the citywide user fees with the city manager, appealing the decision of the chief to the city manager. The letter of appeal shall briefly outline the basis for such appeal. The city manager upon receipt of such written letter of appeal, shall obtain from the chief all of the files applicable to the application. The city manager shall hereafter conduct an informal hearing for the purpose of determining whether the decision, as rendered by the chief, was within the authority granted to him pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The city manager shall give written notice of the time and place of such hearing to the applicant, to the chief and to any other person requesting such notice. At the time and place set for such hearing, the city manager shall act as the hearing officer and shall accept all relevant evidence pertaining to the application, including, but not limited to, the files and records in custody of the chief relating thereto. The city manager shall give the applicant, and any other interested person, a reasonable opportunity to be heard with respect to the merits of such appeal. The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to show that the action of the chief was arbitrary, capricious or in excess of the authority granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The city manager shall affirm, reverse or modify, in whole or in part, the decision as rendered by the chief of police. The city manager shall, promptly, give written notice, to the applicant and any other person requesting the same, of his decision, together with the reasons therefore. The decision of the city manager shall be final and conclusive in the absence of an appeal to the city council as hereinafter provided. (Prior code § 4254 (part)) 
D.  Any applicant who is aggrieved by a decision of the city manager, as hereinbefore provided, shall have the right to appeal such decision to the city council. Such an appeal shall be perfected by the filing of a written letter of appeal, briefly stating the grounds therefore, with the city clerk, within ten days after the giving of notice of the city manager's decision. Upon receipt of a letter of appeal, the city clerk shall place the same on the city council's agenda at its next most convenient meeting. The city clerk shall give the applicant, and any other person requesting the same, ten days' written notice of the time and place of such hearing before the council. At such time and place, the city council shall hear the matter, and shall, thereafter, issue, conditionally issue, or decline to issue, the permit as requested. The city council shall give the applicant and any other interested person the right to present any relevant evidence bearing upon such appeal. The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to show that the action of the city manager was arbitrary, capricious or outside the scope of authority granted to him by the provisions of the chapter. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 2335, § 2, 9-23-2009)  
5.80.070 - License renewal and expiration. 
A.  Renewal of License. A tobacco retailer's license is invalid if the appropriate fee has not been timely paid in full or if the term of the license has expired. The term of a tobacco retailer's license is one year. Each tobacco retailer shall apply for the renewal of his or her tobacco retailer's license and submit the license fee no later than thirty days prior to expiration of the term. 
B.  Expiration of License. A tobacco retailer's license that is not timely renewed shall expire at the end of its term. To renew a license not timely renewed pursuant to subparagraph (a), the proprietor must: 
1.  Submit the license fee and application renewal form; and 
2.  Submit a signed affidavit affirming that the proprietor: 
a.  Has not sold and will not sell any tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia after the license expiration date and before the license is renewed; or 
b.  Has waited the appropriate ineligibility period established for tobacco retailing without a license, as set forth in Section 5.80.130, before seeking renewal of the license. 
(Ord. No. 2335, § 2, 9-23-2009)  
5.80.080 - License non-transferable. 
A.  A tobacco retailer's license may not be transferred from one person to another or from one location to another. A new tobacco retailer's license is required whenever a tobacco retailing location has a change in proprietor(s). 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, prior violations at a location shall continue to be counted against a location and license ineligibility periods shall continue to apply to a location unless: 
1.  The location has been fully transferred to a new proprietor or fully transferred to entirely new proprietors; and 
2.  The new proprietor(s) provide the city with clear and convincing evidence that the new proprietor(s) have acquired or is acquiring the location in an arm's length transaction. 
(Ord. No. 2335, § 2, 9-23-2009)  
5.80.090 - License conveys a limited, conditional privilege. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to grant any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer's license any status or right other than the limited conditional privilege to act as a tobacco retailer at the location in the city identified on the face of the permit. For example, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to render inapplicable, supersede, or apply in lieu of, any other provision of applicable law, including but not limited to, any provision of this Code or any condition or limitation on smoking in an enclosed place of employment pursuant to California Labor Code section 6404.5. For example, obtaining a tobacco retailer license does not make the retailer a "retail or wholesale tobacco shop" for the purposes of California Labor Code section 6404.5. 
(Ord. No. 2335, § 2, 9-23-2009)  
5.80.100 - Fee for license. 
The fee to issue or to renew a tobacco retailer's license shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. The fee shall be calculated so as to recover the cost of administration and enforcement of this chapter, including, for example, issuing a license, administering the license program, retailer education, retailer inspection and compliance checks, documentation of violations, and prosecution of violators, but shall not exceed the cost of the regulatory program authorized by this chapter. All fees and interest upon proceeds of fees shall be used exclusively to fund the program. Fees are nonrefundable except as may be required by law. 
(Ord. No. 2335, § 2, 9-23-2009)  
5.80.110 - Compliance monitoring. 
A.  Compliance with this chapter shall be monitored by the department. In addition, any peace officer or code enforcement officer may enforce any provision of this chapter. The city may designate any number of additional persons to monitor compliance with this chapter. 
B.  The department or other person designated to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall check the compliance of each tobacco retailer in the city at least two times per twelve-month period. The department may check the compliance of tobacco retailers previously found to be in compliance a fewer number of times so that the department may check the compliance of new licensees and tobacco retailers previously found in violation of the licensing law more frequently. Nothing in this paragraph shall create a right of action in any licensee or other person against the city or its employees or agents. 
C.  Compliance checks shall be conducted so as to allow the department to determine, at a minimum, if the tobacco retailer is conducting business in a manner that complies with laws regulating youth access to tobacco. When the department deems appropriate, the compliance checks shall determine compliance with other laws applicable to tobacco retailing. 
D.  The city shall not enforce any law establishing a minimum age for tobacco purchases or possession against a person who otherwise might be in violation of such law because of the person's age (hereinafter "youth decoy") if the potential violation occurs when: 
1.  The youth decoy is participating in a compliance check supervised by a peace officer or a code enforcement officer of the city; 
2.  The youth decoy is acting as an agent of a person designated by the city to monitor compliance with this chapter; or 
3.  The youth decoy is participating in a compliance check funded in part, either directly or indirectly through subcontracting, by any city agency or the California Department of Health Services. 
(Ord. No. 2335, § 2, 9-23-2009)  
5.80.120 - Suspension or revocation of license. 
A.  In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, a tobacco retailer's license shall be suspended or revoked if any court of competent jurisdiction determines, or the department finds based on a preponderance of the evidence, after the licensee is afforded notice and an opportunity to be heard, that the licensee, or any of the licensee's agents or employees, has violated any of the requirements, conditions, or prohibitions of this chapter or has pleaded guilty, "no contest" or its equivalent, or admitted to a violation of any law designated in Section 5.80.030. 
B.  Suspension or Revocation of License. If the department finds that there are grounds for the suspension of a tobacco retailer's license, the following sanctions shall be imposed: 
1.  A first violation of this chapter shall result in a thirty-day suspension of the right to sell tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia. 
2.  A second violation of this chapter within a sixty-month period shall result in a ninety-day suspension of the right to sell tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia. 
3.  A third or subsequent violation of this chapter within a sixty-month period shall result in a revocation of the right to sell tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia. 
C.  Appeal of Suspension and/or Revocation. The decision of the department is appealable to the city council and must be filed with the city clerk within ten days of receipt of the determination of violation. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the appealed action. 
D.  Revocation of License Wrongly Issued. A tobacco retailer's license shall be revoked if the department finds, after the licensee is afforded notice and an opportunity to be heard, that one or more of the bases for denial of a license under Section 5.80.060 existed at the time application was made or at any time before the license issued. The decision by the department shall be the final decision of the city. Such a revocation shall be without prejudice to the filing of a new license application. 
(Ord. No. 2335, § 2, 9-23-2009)  
5.80.130 - Tobacco retailing without a license. 
A.  In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, if a court of competent jurisdiction determines, or the department finds based on a preponderance of evidence, after notice and an opportunity to be heard, that any person has engaged in tobacco retailing at a location without a valid tobacco retailer's license, either directly or through the person's agents or employees, the person shall be ineligible to apply for, or to be issued, a tobacco retailing license as follows: 
1.  After a first violation of this section at a location within any sixty-month period, no new license may be issued for the person or the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been transferred in an arm's length transaction), until thirty days have passed from the date of the violation. 
2.  After a second violation of this section at a location within any sixty-month period, no new license may be issued for the person or the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been transferred in an arm's length transaction), until ninety days have passed from the date of the violation. 
3.  After of a third or subsequent violation of this section at a location within any sixty-month period, no new license may issue for the person or the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been transferred in an arm's length transaction), until five years have passed from the date of the violation. 
B.  Tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia offered for sale or exchange in violation of this section are subject to seizure by the department or any peace officer or code enforcement officer and shall be forfeited after the licensee and any other owner of the tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia seized is given reasonable notice and an opportunity to demonstrate that the tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia were not offered for sale or exchange in violation of this chapter. The decision by the department may be appealed pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 5.80.120(C). Forfeited tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia shall be destroyed after all internal appeals have been exhausted and the time in which to seek judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.6 or other applicable law has expired without the filing of a lawsuit or, if such a suit is filed, after judgment in that suit becomes final. 
C.  For the purposes of the civil remedies provided in this chapter: 
1.  Each day on which a tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia is offered for sale in violation of this chapter; or 
2.  Each individual retail tobacco product and each individual retail item of tobacco paraphernalia that is distributed, sold, or offered for sale in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2335, § 2, 9-23-2009)  
5.80.140 - Enforcement. 
A.  Violations of this chapter may be enforced in any combination as allowed in Chapters 1.12 and 1.14. The rights and remedies provided in this section are cumulative and in addition to any other rights and remedies provided by law. 
B.  Whenever evidence of a violation of this chapter is obtained in any part through the participation of a person under the age of eighteen years old, such a person shall not be required to appear or give testimony in any civil or administrative process brought to enforce this chapter and the alleged violation shall be adjudicated based upon the sufficiency and persuasiveness of the evidence presented. 
C.  Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall also constitute a violation of this chapter. 
D.  Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 2335, § 2, 9-23-2009)  
Chapter 5.90 - COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITIES[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2400, § 2, adopted Feb. 14, 2018, repealed the former Ch. 5.90., §§ 5.90.010—5.90.170, and enacted a new Ch. 5.90 as set out herein. The former Ch. 5.90 pertained to cannabis cultivation, manufacturing and testing and derived from Ord. No. 2399, 9-13-2017. 
 
5.90.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Act" shall mean the California Medical and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act, as in Business and Professions Code Section 26000 et seq. 
"Applicant" shall mean and refer to a person applying for a development agreement pursuant to this chapter. 
"Bureau" shall have the same meaning as in Section 26001(e) of the Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Cannabis" shall have the same meaning as in subsection (f) of Section 26001 of the Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Cannabis accessories" shall have the same meaning as in subsection (g) of Section 26001 of the Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Cannabis concentrate" as used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as in subsection (h) of Section 26001 of the Business and Professions Code. 
"Cannabis products" as used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as in subsection (i) of Section 26001 of the Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Commercial cannabis activity" shall have the same meaning as in subsection (k) of Section 26001 of the Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Cultivation" shall have the same meaning as in of subsection (1) of Section 26001 of the Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Cultivation site" as used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as in subsection (m) of Business and Professions Code Section 26001, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Customer" as used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as in subsection (n) of Business and Professions Code Section 26000, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Day care center" as used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as in subsection (o) of Business and Professions Code Section 26001, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Development agreement" as used in this chapter shall mean the agreement entered into between a person and the city authorizing said person to engage in commercial cannabis activity within the city's jurisdictional boundaries. 
"Delivery" shall have the same meaning as set forth in subsection (p) of Section 26001 of the Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Delivery-only retailer" shall mean a person that has been issued a Type 9 Non-Storefront Retailer license from the bureau to conduct retail cannabis sales exclusively by delivery, as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 26001(p). 
"Distribution" shall have the same meaning as in subsection (j) of Section 26001 of the Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Distributor" shall have the same meaning as in subsection (a)(2) of Section 26070 of the Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"License" shall have the same meaning as in subsection (y) of Section 26001 of the Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Licensee" shall have the same meaning as in subsection (z) of Business and Professions Code Section 26000, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Manufacture" shall have the same meaning as in subsection (ag) of Section 26001 of the Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Manufacturer" shall have the same meaning as in subsection (ah) of Section 26001 of the Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Manufacture site" shall mean a location where a person conducts the production, preparation, propagation, or compounding of cannabis or cannabis products either directly or indirectly or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis at a fixed location that packages or repackages cannabis or cannabis products or labels or relabels its container. 
"Microbusiness" shall have the same meaning as in subsection (a)(3)(A) of Section 26070 of the Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Operation" or "operate" shall have the same meaning as in subsection (ak) of Section 26001 of the Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Owner" as used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as in subsection (al) of Business and Professions Code Section 26001, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Permittee" shall mean a person that has entered into a development agreement with the city authorizing said person to engage in commercial cannabis within the city's jurisdictional boundaries. 
"Person" shall have the same meaning as in subsection (an) of Section 26001 of the Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Premises" shall have the same meaning as in subsection (ap) of Section 26001 of the Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Purchaser" shall have the same meaning as in subsection (ar) of Section 26001 of the Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Regulations" shall mean the regulations in the California Code of Regulations (Title 16, Div. 24) to implement, interpret, and make specific the Act, and providing licensing and enforcement criteria for commercial cannabis businesses in California. 
"Retailer" or "retail" shall have the same meaning as in subsection (a)(1) of Section 26070 of the Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Sell," "sale," and "to sell" shall have the same meaning as in subsection (as) of Section 26001 of the Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Testing laboratory" shall have the same meaning as in subsection (at) of Section 26001 of the Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Youth Center" as used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as in subsection (av) of Section 26001 of the Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 2, 2-14-2018; Ord. No. 2405, § 3, 6-12-2018)  
5.90.020 - Commercial cannabis activities prohibited; exceptions. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, cause, allow, assist, participate in, engage in, or in any way conduct any commercial cannabis activity within the city, including but not limited to the cultivation, delivery, distribution, manufacture, testing, transport, retail, microbusiness, purchase, sale, testing, distribution, giving away, or otherwise transferring of cannabis or cannabis products, or any other activities for which a license is available under the Act or the regulations. 
B.  The prohibitions of subsection (A) shall not apply to the following persons, provided said person operates the specified activity in strict accordance with state law and this code: (1) a clinic, licensed pursuant to Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; (2) health care facility, licensed pursuant to Chapter 2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; (3) a residential care facility for persons with chronic life-threatening illness, licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.01 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; (3) a residential care facility for the elderly, licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; (4) a residential hospice or home health agency, licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 of the Health and Safety Code; (5) personal indoor cultivation in compliance with Chapter 9.60 of this Code; (6) a licensee's transportation or delivery of cannabis or cannabis products on public roads pursuant to subsection (b) of Section 26080 or subsection (e) of Section 26090 of the Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time, provided the licensee is permitted or approved to operate by the local jurisdiction in which the licensee's facilities are physically located; (7) a permittee authorized to engage in cultivation, manufacturing, or delivery-only retailer activities under this chapter, that also engages in distribution activities related to their business; or (8) a permittee under this chapter, provided that said person has entered into a development agreement with the city, has been granted a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.70, has been issued the requisite license from the bureau, and otherwise complies, at all times, with the provisions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 2, 2-14-2018; Ord. No. 2405, § 4, 6-12-2018)  
5.90.030 - Relationship to other laws. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, this chapter incorporates the requirements of the Act and regulations. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of the foregoing, the more restrictive provision shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 2, 2-14-2018)  
5.90.040 - Cannabis cultivation, manufacturing, distribution, delivery-only, and testing facilities. 
A.  No person shall operate a cultivation site, manufacturing site, delivery-only retailer site, distribution site, or testing laboratory in the city, or otherwise engage in the cultivation, manufacture, delivery, distribution, or testing of cannabis or cannabis products, for profit or otherwise, except in strict accordance with this chapter, the terms and conditions of the development agreement, any conditions of approval specified in the conditional use permit, and other applicable provisions of this code. 
B.  The effectiveness of any provision in this chapter that provides for the operation of specified commercial cannabis activities in the city is conditioned upon the city council's adoption of an amendment to Title 17 of this code adding cannabis cultivation sites, manufacturing sites, delivery-only retailer site, distribution site, and/or testing laboratories, as applicable, as an authorized land use in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 2, 2-14-2018; Ord. No. 2405, §§ 5, 6, 6-12-2018)  
5.90.050 - Application requirements; development agreement and conditional use permit required. 
A.  The city council may, in its sole discretion, approve and direct the issuance of a notice inviting applications, a request for applications, or similar solicitation inviting persons interested in operating commercial cannabis activities in the city to submit an application for a development agreement. 
B.  Whether to issue a solicitation for applications, the manner of accepting applications, the manner of application review, and whether to approve or deny any such application shall be subject to the sole and absolute discretion of the city council. The criteria utilized in evaluating or scoring any application for a development agreement shall be that specified in this chapter, elsewhere in this code, or in the solicitation for applications issued by the city council. Subject to the discretion of the city council, the solicitation may include provisions pertaining to: the information required to be submitted by applicants, including but not limited to the application information specified in the regulations for a license from the bureau; the city's application review, vetting, and approval processes; the review and scoring criteria that will be utilized by the city in distinguishing among applicants; applicant background checks and verification requirements; conditions of approval; security features and requirements; operating guidelines, standards, limitations, and requirements; site improvement obligations; maintenance requirements; book, accounting, and record keeping requirements; and/or a draft development agreement. 
C.  A development agreement approved by the city council is required before any person operates a cultivation site, manufacturing site, distribution site, delivery-only retailer site, or testing laboratory in the city. Said development agreement shall set forth the terms and conditions under which the commercial cannabis activities may be operated, in addition to the terms and conditions otherwise set forth in this chapter or elsewhere in this code. Subject to the agreement of any permittee and approval of the city council, such additional terms and conditions of the development agreement may include, but are not limited to, public outreach and education requirements, community service requirements, the payment of mutually agreeable fees and charges, development and operating plans (including site plan, floor plan, and elevations), security measures, operating standards and procedures, site location and design standards, and such other terms and conditions as may be agreed upon by a permittee and the city council, as well as those that the city council deems necessary to protect and promote the public health, safety, and welfare of the community. 
D.  In addition to a development agreement, no person shall operate a cultivation site, manufacturing site, distribution site, delivery-only retailer site, or testing laboratory unless and until a conditional use permit therefor has been approved by the planning commission or city council, as applicable, in accordance with Chapter 17.70 of this code. The application process for the conditional use permit shall be the same as is generally applicable to conditional use permits in the city, provided that a development agreement between the permittee and the city shall be a condition precedent to approving a conditional use permit. 
E.  Nothing in this chapter is intended or shall be construed as requiring the city council to approve or any development agreements or to otherwise allow commercial cannabis activities in the city. No application for a development agreement will be accepted except during the times specified by the city Council in a solicitation for applications. The city council's solicitation for, review of, and approval of any application for a development agreement is discretionary, and nothing in this chapter is intended or shall be interpreted as rendering commercial cannabis activities a "by-right" land use in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 2, 2-14-2018; Ord. No. 2405, § 7, 6-12-2018)  
5.90.060 - Permitted zones and locations; activities prohibited. 
A.  No commercial cannabis activities shall be permitted in the city except in the zones and locations authorized by Title 17, and except upon the specific premises identified in a permittee's development agreement and conductional use permit. 
B.  No commercial cannabis activities shall be operated except within a fully enclosed and permanent building. For purposes of this section, the phrase "fully enclosed and permanent building" shall mean a structure having a roof that is enclosed on all sides and is intended and has a useful life appropriate for long-term use, as contrasted with a "temporary building" that is not designed or intended to be permanently located, placed, or affixed to the premises. 
C.  Delivery-only retailer establishments shall be closed to the public and shall conduct retailer cannabis sales exclusively by delivery. No distribution facility shall be physically located in the city, unless the distribution facility is established and operated in conjunction with a cannabis cultivation, manufacturing, or delivery-only retailer site permitted under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 2, 2-14-2018; Ord. No. 2405, §§ 8, 9, 6-12-2018)  
5.90.070 - No transfer or change in ownership or location. 
A.  No permittee may sell, transfer, pledge, assign, grant an option, or otherwise dispose of, in whole or in part, their rights or interest under a development agreement entered into pursuant to this chapter, and no owner may sell, transfer, pledge, assign, grant an option, or otherwise dispose of, in whole or in part, their ownership interest in a cultivation site, manufacturing site, or testing laboratory permitted under this chapter, without the advanced discretionary approval of the city council. Before approving any such request, the city may require the purchaser, assignee, or transferee to provide the same information and materials that are required of an initial applicant, including the payment of associated fees. 
B.  Before exercising any rights under a development agreement, permittees shall demonstrate proof of lawful possession of the premises where commercial cannabis activities will be operated with such evidence consisting of properly executed deeds of trust, leases, licenses, or similar documents evidencing the permittee's right to possession and use of the premises. Subject to the criteria specified by the city council in a solicitation for applications, a development agreement may be awarded contingent upon an applicant's subsequent identification of a premises that is acceptable to the city, or subject to an applicant's provision of an option, letter of intent, or similar instrument executed by the current owner of the proposed premises in favor of a permittee or applicant authorizing commercial cannabis activities to be operated thereon. 
C.  A permittee shall only operate commercial cannabis activities within the area, building, structure, and portion of the premises that is specifically described in development agreement and/or conditional use permit. A permittee shall not relocate, move, or otherwise alter the location of its operations from the specific area so identified without first obtaining approval from the city, regardless of any possessory interest or right to possession to such additional areas. No permittee shall add additional or contiguous units or areas, thereby altering the initially approved premises, without first obtaining the approval of the city council. 
D.  No permittee shall sublet, transfer, or otherwise assign any portion of any approved premises for any purpose, unless approved in advance by the city council. 
E.  No permittee shall make any physical change, alternation, or modification to the approved premises that materially or substantively alters, in the discretion of the building official, the location, production estimates, or the usage of the premises from the plans approved in the development agreement and/or conditional use permit, without the advanced approval of the city council. For purposes of this subsection, the phrase "materially or substantively alters" shall mean any physical change, alternation, or modification to the area of the premises identified a development agreement or conditional use permit for the operation of commercial cannabis activities that either: (1) increases the capacity or scope of commercial cannabis activities by five percent or more, or (2) requires a building permit under this code. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 2, 2-14-2018)  
5.90.080 - Nonconforming uses. 
Any premises, location, or person establishing or operating commercial cannabis activities in the city in violation of this chapter shall not be considered a lawful or permitted nonconforming use. Any such unlawfully established business, location, or operation shall constitute a public nuisance subject to abatement by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 2, 2-14-2018)  
5.90.090 - Fees and charges. 
A.  Each applicant or permittee shall timely and fully pay all fees set forth in this section. The failure of an applicant to pay the requisite fees is grounds for denial, and the failure of a permittee to pay the requisite fees shall constitute a breach of the development agreement, and is grounds for revocation of the conditional use permit. Except as otherwise provided herein, the amount of each fee may be established by resolution of the city council. 
1.  Application fee to cover the city's costs incurred in the initial acceptance and review of an application for a development agreement, due and payable in full at the time an application is submitted. 
2.  Processing fee to cover the city's costs incurred in the review, investigation, scoring, and/or selection of applicant for the award of a development agreement, in accordance with evaluation criteria specified by the city council in a notice inviting applications, a request for applications, or similar solicitation, due and payable in full at the time an application is submitted. The city may charge a separate processing fee for each round of the application review and selection process. 
B.  In addition to the fees specified in subsection (A), applicants and permittees shall timely pay all other applicable fees provided for in this code, including, but not limited to, fees associated with processing applications for conditional use permits, development agreements, building permits, and plan checks, as well as the city's cost of preparing a development agreement. 
C.  In addition to the fees set forth in this section, a development agreement entered into pursuant to this chapter may provide for a permittee to pay the city a fair share contribution towards the city's costs incurred in, without limitation, enforcing the provisions of this chapter, inspecting for and remediating any direct or secondary negative impacts of the commercial cannabis activities, and mitigating impacts to the city's existing public facilities caused by the commercial cannabis facility. If applicable, the remediation payments described in this section shall be memorialized in a development agreement, and paid by a permittee to the city in strict accordance with the terms thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 2, 2-14-2018)  
5.90.100 - Limitation on liability. 
A.  To the fullest extent permitted by law, the city shall not assume any liability whatsoever, with respect to receiving, reviewing, processing, denying, or approving any application to operate commercial cannabis activities under this chapter. 
B.  As a condition of submitting an application for a development agreement, and as a further condition of approval, each applicant or permittee, as applicable, shall: (1) agree to indemnify the city and its elected and appointed officers, employees, and representatives, from and against any claims, damages, injuries, or liabilities of any kind relating to or arising from an application, the city's denial or approval of an application, or the operation of commercial cannabis activities; (2) waive any and all claims, damages, injuries, or liabilities of any kind against the city and its elected and appointed officers, employees, and representatives; (3) agree to defend, at its sole cost and expense, any action against the city and/or its elected and appointed officers, employees, and representatives, relating to or arising from an application, denial or approval of an application, or the operation of a commercial cannabis activity; and (4) agree to reimburse the city for any court costs and attorneys' fees (with legal counsel of the city's choice) incurred in any legal challenge relating to an application, the denial or approval of any application, or the operation of a commercial cannabis activity. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 2, 2-14-2018)  
5.90.110 - Inspections. 
The city manager, local law enforcement or code enforcement, or other public safety personnel, shall have the right to enter any and all portions of a-premises from time to time, without notice, a search warrant, inspection warrant, subpoena, or court order, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., or any other reasonable time, to ensure compliance with this chapter, the Act, the Regulations, and any provision or condition of the development agreement or conditional use permit. Such inspection shall include the authority to review or copy any recordings, documents, or other records required to be maintained on the premises. It is unlawful for any permittee, owner, landlord, lessee, employee, or any other person having any responsibility over the operation of the premises to refuse to allow, impede, obstruct or interfere with an inspection or the review or copying of records required under this chapter, including but not limited to, the concealment, destruction, and falsification of any recordings, records, or monitoring. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 2, 2-14-2018)  
5.90.120 - Records. 
A.  Permittees shall maintain records at the premises accurately and truthfully documenting the following: 
1.  The full name, address, and telephone number(s) of the owner, landlord and/or lessee of the premises; 
2.  The full name, address, and telephone number(s) of all persons or owners who are engaged in the management of the premises, and the exact nature of each member's participation in the management or ownership of the premises; 
3.  All receipts of the premises, including but not limited to all payments, purchases, contributions, reimbursements, and reasonable compensation, whether in cash or in kind, concerning commercial cannabis activities, whether among licensees or otherwise; 
4.  Proof of compliance with the Act and regulations, including but not limited to the license issued by the bureau authorizing a permittee to operate commercial cannabis activities on the premises; 
5.  Any other documentation described in the development agreement required to be maintained on the premises. 
B.  The foregoing records shall be maintained by permittees for a period of seven years and shall be made available by the permittee to the Montebello Police Department, other local law enforcement, or the city manager upon request. If such records are not produced as requested, the city may seek a search warrant, subpoena, or court order to compel access thereto. The records shall be stored at the premises in a manner capable of being reproduced promptly and accurately. Any loss, damage or destruction of the records shall be reported to the Montebello Police Department within twenty-four hours of the loss, destruction or damage. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 2, 2-14-2018)  
5.90.130 - Audits. 
No later than February 15 of every calendar year, each permittee shall file with the city one copy of an audit of its operations for the previous calendar year, completed and certified by an independent certified public accountant in accordance with generally accepted auditing and accounting principles. The audit shall include, but not be limited to, a discussion, analysis, and verification of each of the records required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 2, 2-14-2018)  
5.90.140 - Violations. 
A.  The city may initiate abatement proceedings as authorized by this code or state law to correct or cure any violation of this chapter or code. The city shall be entitled to recover its courts costs and reasonable attorneys' fees in the event of a court order or judgment of abatement is entered in favor of the city. 
B.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable pursuant to Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
C.  The penalties and remedies provided herein are in addition to other remedies available at law, and the city shall have the discretion to pursue and prosecute any such available remedy. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 2, 2-14-2018)  
5.90.150 - Interpretation. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be read consistent with all the provisions of state and local law, and their implementing regulations, as well as the other provisions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 2, 2-14-2018)  
5.90.160 - Severability. 
Should any provision of this chapter, or its application to any persons or circumstance, be determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unlawful, unenforceable, or otherwise void, that determination shall have no effect on any other provision of this chapter or the application of this chapter to any other person or circumstance and, to that end, the provisions hereof are severable. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 2, 2-14-2018)  
Title 6 - ANIMALS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 6.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
6.04.010 - Title. 
The ordinance codified in this title shall be known as, and may be cited and referred to as, "the animal control ordinance." 
(Prior code § 4100)  
6.04.020 - Applicability of references to amendments and additions. 
Whenever any reference is made to any portion of the ordinance codified herein such reference applies to all amendments and additions thereto now or hereafter made. 
(Prior code § 4100.1)  
6.04.030 - Tense. 
The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the future, the present. 
(Prior code § 4100.2 (part))  
6.04.040 - Gender. 
Each gender includes other gender. 
(Prior code § 4100.2 (part))  
6.04.050 - Number. 
The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular. 
(Prior code § 4100.3)  
6.04.060 - Acts by deputy. 
Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon the director of animal care and control or other public officer, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of the officer or by a person authorized, pursuant to law, by the officer, unless this title provides otherwise. 
(Prior code § 4100.4)  
6.04.070 - Fees. 
Whenever provision is made in this ordinance for the payment of fees, such fees shall be those which the city council from time to time approves, by resolution or minute order. 
(Prior code § 4100.6)  
6.04.080 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this title, unless otherwise specified, is guilty of an infraction, and upon a conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred and fifty dollars. Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which any violation of any of the provisions of this title is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished therefor as provided under this title. 
(Prior code § 4100.5)  
Chapter 6.08 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
6.08.010 - Generally. 
For the purpose of this title unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, certain terms used herein are defined as follows. 
(Prior code § 4101 (part))  
6.08.020 - Animal. 
"Animal" includes any beast, poultry, bird, reptile, fish or any other dumb animal. 
(Prior code § 4101 (2))  
6.08.030 - Animal menagerie. 
"Animal menagerie" means a place where wild animals are kept or maintained for any commercial purpose, including places where wild animals are boarded, trained or kept for hire. 
(Prior code § 4101 (P))  
6.08.040 - Animal shelter. 
"Animal shelter" means a place where all animals impounded by the department of animal care and control are placed for their humane care and keeping. 
(Prior code § 4101 (Q))  
6.08.050 - Approved canine rabies vaccine. 
"Approved canine rabies vaccine" means a canine rabies vaccine which is approved for use by the state of California Department of Public Health. 
(Prior code § 4101 (R))  
6.08.060 - At large. 
"At large" means an animal off the premises of its owner unless such animal is securely confined by a strong leash securely and continuously held by the owner of such animal, or confined within an automobile. 
(Prior code § 4101 (E))  
6.08.070 - Cat. 
"Cat" means any cat of any age, female as well as male. 
(Prior code § 4101 (H))  
6.08.080 - Cat kennel. 
"Cat kennel" means any lot, building, structure or premises wherein four or more cats over the age of four months are kept and maintained for any purpose. 
(Prior code § 4101 (I))  
6.08.090 - City. 
"City" means the city of Montebello. 
(Prior code § 4101 (S))  
6.08.100 - Director. 
"Director" means the director of the department of animal care and control. 
(Prior code § 4101 (O))  
6.08.110 - Dog. 
"Dog" means any dog of any age, female as well as male. 
(Prior code § 4101 (F))  
6.08.120 - Dog kennel. 
"Dog kennel" means any lot, building, structure or premises wherein four or more canine animals over the age of four months are kept or maintained for any purpose. 
(Prior code § 4101 (G))  
6.08.130 - Horse. 
"Horse" includes mule, burro, pony, jack, hinny or jenny. 
(Prior code § 4101 (J))  
6.08.140 - Impounded. 
If any animal pursuant to this title or any state statute has been received into the custody of any animal shelter, such animal will have been "impounded" as the word is used in this title. 
(Prior code § 4101 (a))  
6.08.150 - Owner. 
"Owner" means any person, firm or corporation having an interest in, or having control or custody or possession of any animal. 
(Prior code § 4101 (K))  
6.08.160 - Person. 
"Person" means any firm, partnership, corporation, trust or association or person. 
(Prior code § 4101 (L))  
6.08.170 - Pet shop. 
"Pet shop" means any place of business where dogs, under four months of age, or cats, monkeys, birds, reptiles, fish, or any other animal to be used as pets, are kept for sale. 
(Prior code § 4101 (M))  
6.08.180 - Shall and may. 
"Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. 
(Prior code § 4101 (B))  
6.08.190 - Unlicensed dog. 
"Unlicensed dog" means any dog for which the license for the current year has not been paid, or to which the tag for the current year provided in this title is not attached. 
(Prior code 4101 (C))  
6.08.200 - Wild animal. 
"Wild animal" means any wild, exotic, dangerous or nondomestic animal, including but not limited to, mammals, fowl, fish or reptiles. 
(Prior code § 4101 (N))  
Chapter 6.12 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
6.12.010 - Department of animal care and control and office of director established. 
The department of animal care and control under the administrative management of the director, and the office of the director is established. 
(Prior code §§ 4102.1 and 4102.2)  
6.12.020 - Director of animal care and control—Powers and duties. 
A.  The director of animal control shall be vested with the necessary police powers and duties of a police officer for the exclusive purpose of enforcing the provisions of this title, and it shall be his duty to make arrests and issue citations for violations of any of the provisions of this title. The director of animal care and control shall enforce all of the laws of the city, county and state relating to the care, treatment and impounding of dumb animals and to the prevention of cruelty to dumb animals. 
B.  It is made the duty of the director of animal care and control to enforce any other sections of this ordinance whether enumbrated as a duty or not. 
(Prior code §§ 4102.1 and 4102.2)  
6.12.030 - Director of animal care and control—Interference with prohibited. 
No person shall rescue or attempt to rescue any animal mentioned herein from the possession of the director of animal care and control or his deputies, in the performance of their official duties. 
(Prior code § 4102.3)  
6.12.040 - Entering upon premises. 
The director of animal care and control or his deputy animal control officers or any police officer is authorized to enter upon any premises upon which any animal is kept, for the purpose of taking up, seizing or impounding any animal found running at large, or staked, herded or grazing thereon, contrary to the provisions of this title for the purpose of ascertaining whether such animal is licensed as provided in this title or determining whether any regulation or law of the state relating to the care, treatment or impounding of dumb animals or to the prevention of cruelty to dumb animals is being violated: provided there is probable cause to believe there is such violation, and provided that, except in cases of emergency or where necessary to complete a pursuit initiated outside the premises. Such entry shall be performed pursuant to a valid inspection warrant issued pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure, Section 1822.50 et seq. Any person who denies or prevents, obstructs, or attempts to deny, prevent, or obstruct the taking up, seizing or impounding is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 4102.4)  
6.12.050 - Cruelty statutes. 
It shall be the duty of the director of animal care and control to enforce those sections of the Penal Code of the state pertaining to the inhumane treatment of dumb animals, and to take possession of animals so abandoned or neglected, and care for or dispose of same as provided for in the Penal Code of the state or this title. 
(Prior code § 4102.5)  
6.12.060 - Spay and neuter clinic. 
A.  The director of animal care and control may establish a clinic, at which members of the public may have dogs and cats spayed or neutered in a humane manner upon payment of the fees established by the director. 
B.  A person submitting a dog or cat for this service shall sign a consent form certifying thereon under penalty of perjury that he is owner of the animal or setting forth facts showing that he is otherwise authorized to present the animal for this operation and such person may be required to furnish proof of such ownership or authority. Such consent shall contain a waiver of any and all liability of the city, the department of animal care and control and any employees thereof for any injury or death to an animal arising out of the aforementioned operation or any services provided incidental thereto. 
C.  The department of animal care and control shall establish a return date by which a person submitting an animal for the operation shall pick up the animal or be subject to a reasonable board and care fee to commence the day after such return date. Failure to pick up an animal within fifteen days of the return date shall be deemed abandonment of such animal and the director may dispose of it by sale or destruction. 
(Prior code § 4102.6)  
Chapter 6.16 - ANIMALS GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
6.16.010 - Cats—Spaying or altering required. 
The animal shelter shall not sell or give away any female cat more than six months of age that has not been spayed, or any male cat of more than six months of age that has not been altered. The animal shelter shall not sell or give away any cat less than six moths of age unless the cost of spaying or altering such cat has been deposited in trust with the director for payment to a veterinarian or spaying or altering clinic designated by the person purchasing or receiving the cat. The deposit shall be refunded to the owner upon proof of sterilization. 
(Prior code 4108)  
6.16.020 - Cats—Optional identification license for cats. 
In order to provide a method for identifying cats, a license may be obtained as prescribed in Chapter 6.24 of this code. This section shall not require the licensing of cats, but merely provide for their optional licensing. 
(Prior code § 4110)  
6.16.030 - Artificial treatment. 
A.  No person shall dye, color, or otherwise artificially treat any rabbit, baby chick, duckling or other fowl. 
B.  No person shall display, sell, offer for sale, barter or give away any rabbit, baby chick, duckling or other fowl which has been dyed, colored or otherwise artificially treated. 
(Prior code §§ 4108.2 and 4108.3)  
6.16.040 - Sanitary maintenance of premises where kept. 
Every person owning or occupying premises where any animal, fowl or bird is kept shall keep the stable, barn, stall, pen, coop, building or place in which the animal is kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Prior code 318.04)  
6.16.050 - Veterinarians required to provide notice of death of animals. 
Every person owning or operating any veterinary hospital or other establishment for the treatment of animals, shall give written notice to the owner of any such animal left in the hospital or institution for treatment, of the death of such animal, provided the name and address of the owner has been filed in the office of the veterinary hospital or other institution. 
(Prior code § 4108.5)  
6.16.060 - Carcasses. 
It is declared to be a nuisance and no person shall cause, suffer or permit the carcass of any animal to remain upon any lot, premises or place owned, controlled or occupied by him or it for a period of more than twenty-four hours, or to bury the carcass of any animal upon any premises owned, controlled or occupied by him or it in the city. 
(Prior code § 4108.6)  
6.16.070 - Animals in stores or conveyances where food is kept for sale. 
No person shall bring any dog, cat or other live animal, or permit any dog, cat or other live animal to be brought into or remain in any room or place, other than a private home where food is not handled for commercial purposes, in which meat, fish, game, poultry, fruit, vegetables, bakery goods or any other food produce is stored, kept, held, prepared, exposed or offered for sale, or sold for human consumption, or permit any dog, cat or other live animal to ride upon or get into or upon any wagon, or other vehicle in which any such articles are offered or to be offered for sale for human consumption are being kept or transported; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to a dog trained to guide the blind. 
(Prior code § 4108.7)  
6.16.080 - Transporting animals in motor vehicles 
No person shall transport any animal on the running board of any motor vehicle or outside the passenger compartment, tonneau or body thereof, unless such animal is protected by a framework or other device which will prevent such animal from falling off, jumping or being thrown from such motor vehicle whether in motion or not. 
(Prior code § 4108.8)  
6.16.090 - Keeping diseased animals. 
No person shall keep any animal which is known or believed by him to be infected with any dangerous or communicable disease, or which is afflicted with any painful disease believed by him to be incurable, without a permit to do so from the health officer of the city or other person(s) designated by the city. 
(Prior code § 4108.9)  
6.16.100 - Noisy animals. 
It is declared to be a nuisance, and no person shall keep, maintain or permit upon any lot or parcel of land within the city under his control, any animal or animals including any fowl or fowls, which by any sound, or cry, shall interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by an individual. 
(Prior code § 4108.10)  
6.16.110 - Traps. 
No person shall set or use any spring steel trap, No. 1 or larger, in the city (this section shall not prohibit the use of gopher traps.) 
(Prior code § 4108.11)  
6.16.120 - Slaughter. 
No person shall, within this city, wilfully slaughter or cause to be slaughtered any cattle, calf, horse, mule, sheep, swine or goat or any other animal. This section shall not apply to the slaughter of such animals within an educational institution, physician's office or laboratory for medical research or other scientific purposes, to the slaughter of such animals by a person licensed by the state to practice veterinary medicine or by any commercial establishment duly licensed by the city and the United States Department of Agriculture as a slaughterhouse. 
(Prior code § 4108.12)  
Chapter 6.20 - WILD OR VICIOUS ANIMALS 
Sections: 
 
6.20.010 - Generally. 
No person owning or having charge, custody, control or possession of any animal, reptile or serpent described in Section 6.28.050, shall allow such animal, reptile or serpent within the enclosed premises of such person unless and until he has first secured a permit to do so and complies with all terms and conditions of such permit and, in addition thereto, such animal, reptile or serpent shall at all times be so confined, controlled and restrained in such manner so the life, limb or property of any person lawfully entering such premises shall not be endangered. 
(Prior code § 4111)  
6.20.020 - Exemptions. 
The provision of this chapter shall not apply to animals which are kept confined in any public zoo, museum or circus, carnival, exhibition or show. 
(Prior code § 4111.13)  
6.20.030 - Transportation through city. 
The permit requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any person so keeping or maintaining or having in his possession or control any animal or reptile defined in Section 6.28.050 when such person is transporting such animal or reptile through the city, has taken adequate safeguards to protect the public, and has notified the local law enforcement agency of the proposed route of transportation and time thereof. 
(Prior code § 4111.12)  
6.20.040 - Permit—Required. 
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall have, keep, maintain or have in his possession or under his control within the city any animal or reptile described in Section 6.28.050 without first applying to and receiving a permit from the director to do so. 
(Prior code § 4111.1)  
6.20.050 - Permit—Application—Content. 
An application for any permit required pursuant to this chapter shall be made to the director in writing and upon a form furnished by the director if so required. The application shall be verified by the person who desires to have, keep, maintain or have in his possession, or under his control, in the city, the animal or reptile for which a permit is required, and shall set forth the following: 
A.  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
B.  The applicant's interest in such animal or reptile; 
C.  The proposed location, and the name, address and telephone number of the owner of such location, and of the lessee, if any; 
D.  The number and general description of all animals or reptiles for which the permit is sought; 
E.  Any information known to the applicant concerning vicious or dangerous propensities of all such animals or reptiles; 
F.  The housing arrangements for all such animals or reptiles with particular details as to safety of structure, locks, fencing, etc.; 
G.  Safety precautions proposed to be taken; 
H.  Noises or odors anticipated in the keeping of such animals or reptiles; 
I.  Prior history of incidents involving the public health or safety involving any of the animals or reptiles; 
J.  Any additional information required by the director at the time of filing such application or thereafter. 
(Prior code § 4111.2)  
6.20.060 - Permit—Application—Fee. 
The fee for a permit application for wild or dangerous animals shall be established by the director. The fee shall be payable to the director at the time of filing the permit application. Accretions by natural birth shall not require additional permits during the period of a valid permit. The fees are not refundable regardless of whether or not any permit is issued. 
(Prior code § 4111.3)  
6.20.070 - Permit—Application—Review. 
Copies of any application for permit under this chapter shall be sent by the director to the law enforcement agency, planning department, and to any other department or agency from which information is sought, and no permit shall be granted without receipt of a report from the departments or agencies to which copies of the application have been sent, unless waived by the city manager for good cause. 
(Prior code § 4111.4)  
6.20.080 - Permits—Temporary. 
The director may, following application for a permit and pending final disposition of the same, grant a temporary permit for the maintenance within the city of any such animal or reptile upon such conditions as he shall, in his sole discretion, require when, in his opinion there is no reasonable doubt as to the consistency thereof with the public health, safety and general welfare, but no animal or reptile shall be otherwise kept or maintained within the city or permitted to occupy any premises within the city, except while such a regular or temporary permit is in full force and effect. 
(Prior code § 4111.7)  
6.20.090 - Permit—Application—Determination. 
No permit shall be granted except with the conditions attached as shall, in the opinion of the person or agency approving such permit, reasonably ensure the public health, safety and general welfare, and no permit shall be granted in any event for any animal, reptile or serpent at any particular location except upon an explicit finding by the person or agency approving such permit that the issuance thereof will not be contrary to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Prior code § 4111.6)  
6.20.100 - Permit—Term and renewal. 
No permit required by this chapter shall be granted for a period in excess of one year. An application for renewal of any permit shall be made not less than forty-five days prior to the expiration thereof, and shall be accompanied by the same fee as required upon making the original application or the payment of a lesser fee when, in the opinion of the director the public health, safety and general welfare do not require further investigation prior to such renewal. 
(Prior code § 4111.9)  
6.20.110 - Result of failure to obtain permit. 
The director shall take possession of any animal or reptile described under section 6.28.050 for which a permit has not been issued, or if previously issued has been revoked, and keep the same until the proper permit has been secured by the owner thereof and shall release the same to the owner when all fees and costs have been paid and all laws and permit conditions complied with. 
(Prior code § 4111.8)  
6.20.120 - Permit—Revocation. 
A.  The director may, for good cause, revoke any permit or modify any terms or provisions thereof, except permits which have been approved by the planning commission or city council, after informal public hearing, and may, in the event it is reasonably necessary to protect against an immediate threat or danger to the public health or safety, suspend any permit or portion thereof without hearing for a period not to exceed thirty days. 
B.  Any person aggrieved by such action may, upon payment of an appeal fee have such action reviewed by the city council but the filing of an appeal shall not stay any order of suspension. 
(Prior code §§ 4111.10 and 4111.11)  
6.20.130 - Appeals. 
A.  Any person dissatisfied with the ruling of the director may, within ten days thereafter, appeal the decision to the city council. Such appeal shall be a simple statement in writing setting forth in common terms the basis of the appeal. 
B.  An appeal fee, as established by the director, shall be required for each appeal to the city council. No appeal shall be placed on the agenda of any meeting of the city council until such fee has been paid. 
(Prior code § 4111.5)  
Chapter 6.24 - DOGS 
Sections: 
 
6.24.010 - License and registration required. 
No person owning, having an interest in, or having control, custody or possession of any dog shall fail, neglect or refuse to license and register such dog if over four months of age, in compliance with the terms of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 4103)  
6.24.020 - Issuance of license tags and certificates. 
A.  A metallic tag and license certificate with corresponding numbers shall be furnished by the city official or one of his authorized agents, to any person required by this chapter to obtain a license upon payment of the appropriate fee prescribed in this chapter. 
B.  The city official shall keep a record of the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the dog or person making payment of the license fee, and to whom a certificate and tag is issued, and the number and date of such certificate. Such metal tag issued for the current license year shall be securely fastened to the collar or harness of the dog and shall be worn by such dog at all times other than those periods when confined to the owner's house, enclosed yard or pen. A duplicate of a lost license tag may be procured from the city official upon proof of loss and payment of the required fee. 
(Prior code § 4103.2)  
6.24.030 - License fee—Requirements. 
A.  Any owner, with the exception herein provided, of a dog four months of age or older in the city shall obtain a dog license and pay an original or renewal license fee (as established by resolution) each year thereafter. 
B.  License fees shall be due and payable within thirty days after any dog is acquired and comes into the care, custody and control of any person in the city. 
(Prior code § 4103.3)  
6.24.040 - License fee—Exemptions. 
No license fee shall be required for the following: 
A.  Seeing-eye dogs; 
B.  Dogs honorably discharged from the Armed Forces of the United States; 
C.  Dogs in the care, custody and control of nonresidents who are traveling through the city, or temporarily staying in the city for a period of not exceeding thirty days or dogs temporarily brought into the city for the exclusive purpose of being entered in a bench show or dog exhibition, provided such dogs are so entered and not kept elsewhere in the city; 
D.  Dogs which are owned by any governmental agency. 
(Prior code § 4103.5)  
6.24.050 - Exhibition of license. 
No person shall fail or refuse to exhibit the registration of any animal required to be licensed by this code when required to do so by the director or any police officer. 
(Prior code § 4103.1)  
6.24.060 - Tag must be shown. 
No person shall fail or refuse to show to the director or any police officer, the license certificate and the tag for any duly registered dog kept or remaining within any home or upon any enclosed premises under his immediate control. 
(Prior code § 4103.6)  
6.24.070 - Failure to obtain license and registration certificate. 
The amount of any license fees imposed by this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city and any person keeping any animal without having obtained a license and registration certificate from the city shall be liable to an action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of the license fees and penalties imposed and required by this chapter to be paid for the privilege of keeping such animal and it shall be the duty of the director to cause a complaint to be filed against any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter. Such action shall be cumulative and shall not be deemed a bar to, or a waiver of, the right of the city to prosecute any person for a violation of this chapter or any other applicable provision of this title. 
(Prior code § 4103.11)  
6.24.080 - Penalty fees. 
A.  Any person who fails to pay the required dog license fee, as set forth in Section 6.24.030 each year thereafter shall pay, in addition to the original license fee, a penalty of fifty percent of the original license fee. 
B.  Any person who fails to obtain an original license within thirty days after his owning any dog or any dog coming into his care, custody and control in this city shall pay, in addition to the original license fee, a penalty fee of fifty percent of the original license fee. 
(Prior code § 4103.4)  
6.24.090 - License transfer. 
No dog license is transferable. 
(Prior code § 4103.9)  
6.24.100 - Unauthorized removal of registration tags. 
No unauthorized person shall remove from any dog, any collar, harness, or other device to which is attached a registration tag for the current year or to remove such tag therefrom. 
(Prior code § 4103.7)  
6.24.110 - Counterfeiting tags. 
No person shall imitate or counterfeit the tags required by this chapter or shall use any imitation or counterfeit of such tag. 
(Prior code § 4103.8)  
6.24.120 - License—Vaccination requirements. 
Every person applying for a dog license must exhibit a certificate issued by a person licensed by the state, or by any state or nation, to practice veterinary medicine, which certificate shall show that the dog for which the license shall be issued, either (1) has been vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.24.130 and 6.24.140, or (2) should not be so vaccinated by reason of age, infirmity or other disability. Such exemption shall be valid for a period of not to exceed one year. A license for any dog shall not be issued unless and until either such certificate is exhibited. The certificate of vaccination must be valid throughout the entire licensing period. 
(Prior code § 4103.10)  
6.24.130 - Initial vaccination requirements. 
A.  Every person keeping, harboring or having a dog over the age of four months in the city shall cause such dog to be vaccinated with a type of rabies vaccine approved by the Los Angeles County health officer within a period of thirty days from the date such dog was harbored, kept or had within the city, or within thirty days from the date the dog attains the age of four months; provided, however, that the aforesaid provision shall not apply so as to require the vaccination of nay dog which has been vaccinated with an approved vaccine by a person licensed by the state, or by any other state or nation, to practice veterinary medicine where such vaccine has been completed within the period of time as hereinafter prescribed in this section. 
B.  If the dog's vaccination was performed at an age under twelve months, it must have been completed within one year prior to the date such dog was first kept, harbored or brought into the city. If the dog was last vaccinated at an age over twelve months, it must have been completed within thirty-six months prior to the date such dog was first kept, harbored or brought into the city. 
(Prior code § 4104)  
6.24.140 - Rabies vaccination requirements. 
Every person keeping, harboring or having in the city a dog which has received its initial rabies vaccination shall cause such dog to be revaccinated twelve months after the initial vaccination with an approved type of rabies vaccine. Such dog who has received vaccination after the initial vaccination or such dog who has received its initial vaccination over twelve months of age shall be revaccinated no sooner than twenty-four months with an approved rabies vaccine. 
(Prior code § 4104.1)  
6.24.150 - Rabies certificate required. 
Every person keeping, harboring in the city any dog required by this chapter to be vaccinated shall at all times while such dog is thus kept, harbored or had, have in his possession a certificate issued by a person licensed by the state, or any other state or nation, to practice veterinary medicine, which certificate shall specify that such dog has been vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of Sections 6.24.130 and 6.24.140. 
(Prior code § 4104.2)  
6.24.160 - Dog feces. 
No owner or person having charge, custody or control of any dog shall permit, either wilfully or through failure to exercise due care to control, any such dog to defecate and to allow such feces thereafter to remain on any public sidewalk or park or any other public property, or on any improved private property other than that of the owner or person who has custody or control of such dog; provided, however, that the foregoing shall not apply to public or private street gutters. 
(Prior code § 4108.1)  
Chapter 6.28 - ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE 
Sections: 
 
6.28.010 - Dogs. 
No person owning, having an interest in, harboring, or having charge, care, control, custody or possession of any dog shall cause or permit such dog to be off the premises of its owner, unless such dog is securely confined by a strong leash of not exceeding six feet, securely and continuously held by a competent person owning, having an interest in, harboring or having charge, care, control, custody or possession of such dog, or unless such dog be confined within an enclosed vehicle. This section shall not apply to any dog being used for law enforcement purposes by any state, county, city or city and county law enforcement agency. 
(Prior code § 4105)  
6.28.020 - Livestock and wild species. 
No person owning or having control of any ox, steer, bull, cow, horse, colt, calf, sheep, goat, or any animal commonly referred to as a "wild species" shall: 
A.  Permit such animal to run at large in the city; 
B.  Cause or permit any such animal to be pastured, herded, staked or tied in any street, lane, alley, park or other public area; 
C.  Tie, stake, pasture or permit the tying, staking or pasturing of any such animal upon any private property within the limits of the city, without the consent of the owner or occupant of such property, or in such a way as to permit any such animal to trespass upon any street or public place or upon any such private property; 
D.  Permit any animals to be or remain during the night time secured by a stake, or secured in any manner other than by enclosing such animal in a pen, corral or barn sufficient and adequate to restrain such animal, or by securely fastening such animal by means of a rope, or chain of sufficient size, strength and weight to effectively restrain such animal; or 
E.  Fail to provide the necessary sustenance, drink, shelter or protection from the weather or otherwise. 
(Prior code § 4105.2)  
6.28.030 - Fowls and rabbits. 
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and no person shall suffer or permit any rabbits and/or permitted birds and/or fowl, owned or controlled by him or it, to run or fly at large or go upon the premises of any other person in the city. 
(Prior code § 4105.3)  
6.28.040 - Primates. 
A.  No person owning or having control of any monkey, ape, chimpanzee, or other animal of the monkey type, shall permit, allow or suffer such animal to be or go upon any street or public place within the city without having such animal securely fastened by an adequate chain or rope, firmly held by or attached to a competent person. 
B.  Such animal shall be deemed and considered as running at large, within the meaning of the expression as herein used, when not confined within an enclosure or when not securely tied or chained. 
(Prior code § 4105.4)  
6.28.050 - Wild or vicious animals. 
A.  No person owning or having charge, custody, control or possession of any animal or reptile known by such person to be vicious or dangerous, or commonly so known, or owning or having charge, custody, control or possession of any elephant, bear, hippopotamus, rhinoceros, lion, tiger, leopard, wolf, monkey, ape, chimpanzee, bobcat, lynx, wildcat, puma, cheetah, or any animal commonly referred to as a "wild species" or any poisonous reptile, shall permit or allow the same to be at large upon any highway, street, lane, alley, court, or other public place or upon any private property other than within the enclosed premises of such person. 
B.  1.  Any dog having a disposition or propensity to attack or bite any person or animal without provocation is defined as a wild or vicious animal. The director shall notify the owner or harborer in writing to keep such animal within a substantial enclosure or securely attached to a chain or any other type of control which is reasonably adequate under the circumstances. If such restraint is impossible or impracticable, such animal shall be impounded until the owner or harborer is able to comply with the director's order. If, upon receiving the written notification, the owner or harborer fails to provide adequate restraint or control of the animal as ordered by the director within a reasonable time, the animal shall be subject to summary destruction. 
2.  Where the official records of the director indicate a dog has bitten any person or persons or animal on two or more separate occasions, it shall be prima facie evidence that the dog is a wild or vicious animal. 
(Prior code § 4105.5)  
6.28.060 - Captured animals—Notification of city—Requirements. 
Any person who captures an animal at large, as defined in Section 6.28.010 shall within twenty-four hours, give notice to the director. Such notice shall include the following: 
A.  The fact that he has such animal in his possession; 
B.  The complete description of such animal; 
C.  The license number of such animal, if any, and by what county or municipal corporation issued. If such animal has no license, such person shall so state; 
D.  The place where such animal is confined and shall thereafter surrender the animal to the director upon request. 
(Prior code § 4105.1)  
Chapter 6.32 - IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS 
Sections: 
 
6.32.010 - Animal shelter to be provided. 
There shall be provided by the city or by the director upon such terms and conditions as shall be named in a contract executed by and between the director and the legislative body of the city, a suitable building or enclosure to keep and safely hold all animals herein enumerated which are subject to be impounded, which shall be known and designated as the "Animal Shelter." 
(Prior code § 4106)  
6.32.020 - Director's duty—When. 
It shall be the duty of the director to take up, impound and safely keep any of the animals enumerated in this title found running at large, staked, tied or being herded or pastured in any street, lane, alley, court, square, park or other place belonging to or under the control of the city, or upon any private property in the city, contrary to the provisions of this title. 
(Prior code § 4106.1)  
6.32.030 - Care of animals. 
When any animal is to be impounded, it shall be provided with proper and sufficient food and water by the director for a period of at least five working days, or such longer period as may be provided hereinafter. 
(Prior code § 4106.2)  
6.32.040 - Owner's right to reclaim animals. 
The owner of any animal impounded shall have the right to reclaim the same at any time prior to the sale thereof upon payment to the director of the costs and charges for impounding and keeping the animal. 
(Prior code § 4106.3)  
6.32.050 - Dogs running at large. 
It shall be the duty of the director to take up all dogs found in violation of Section 6.28.010. When such dog is taken up, it shall be delivered to the director. 
(Prior code § 4106.5)  
6.32.060 - Fee for recovery of dog or cat. 
Subject to the other provisions of this title, any person may make application to the director for the return of any dog or cat, and upon presentation of proof satisfactory to the director that such person is the owner or is rightfully entitled to the possession of such dog or cat, may recover such dog or cat upon the payment of the required fee. 
(Prior code § 4106.6)  
6.32.070 - Dogs—Proof of rabies vaccination required prior to release. 
Prior to the release of any dog from the animal shelter to it's owner, proof of rabies vaccination shall be required. If owner fails to show proof, the veterinarian on duty shall administer such vaccination for such fee as shall be established by the director. 
(Prior code § 4106.7)  
6.32.080 - Dogs—Minimum period of impoundment. 
All licensed dogs impounded at the animal shelter shall be provided with proper and sufficient food and water by the director for a period of at least ten calendar days after written notice is given to the owner, and all unlicensed dogs for a period of at least five working days. Deposit of a letter of impoundment with the United States Postal Service shall constitute written notice. 
(Prior code § 4106.8)  
6.32.090 - Cats—Minimum period of impoundment. 
All cats impounded at the animal shelter shall be provided with proper and sufficient food and water by the director for a period of at least ten days after written notice is given to the owner for cats displaying some type of identification. Cats without identification shall be held for at least five working days after which time these cats may be destroyed, except that cats determined by the director to be wild may be disposed of by the director upon impoundment. 
(Prior code § 4106.9)  
6.32.100 - Sale of unclaimed dogs and cats—Summary destruction. 
Dogs and cats not redeemed may be sold by the director to the person offering to pay the highest cash amount therefor; provided, that the purchaser shall not be given possession of any such dog or cat until he shall have paid to the director the charges prescribed for such dog or cat. If any dog or cat impounded by the director shall not have been redeemed within such periods, and cannot be sold within a reasonable time thereafter, it may be summarily disposed of, for which the director is responsible, in some humane way as prescribed by the policymaking board. The director shall file at the animal shelter a full description of each dog and cat impounded therein, for the period beginning on the day any such dog and cat is taken or delivered into the possession of the director. 
(Prior code § 4106.10)  
6.32.110 - Destruction of impounded unfit animals. 
It shall be the duty of the director to issue and sign a death warrant for and to order the destruction of any animal lawfully taken into custody, which in the opinion of the director is infected with a dangerous or communicable disease, or which is in an incurable crippled condition, or which is adjudged by a written report of a licensed veterinarian to be afflicted with any painful incurable disease. 
(Prior code § 4106.4)  
Chapter 6.36 - RABIES 
Sections: 
 
6.36.010 - Notification required regarding knowledge of rabid animals and incidents. 
It is unlawful for any person having knowledge of the whereabouts of an animal known to have or suspected of having rabies or which has shown symptoms of rabies, to fail, refuse or neglect to immediately notify the director, or to fail, refuse or neglect to allow the director to make an inspection to the satisfaction of the official that such animal has or has not rabies. The director shall likewise be notified of any person bitten by an animal of a species subject to rabies, whether or not the animal is suspected of having rabies. 
(Prior code § 4107)  
6.36.020 - Biting incidents—Reporting requirements. 
Whenever any person having charge, care, control, custody of possession of any dog has knowledge that such dog has bitten any person, the persons having charge, care, control, custody or possession of such dog shall report the fact in writing forthwith to the director. The report shall state the name and address of the person bitten and the time and place such person was bitten. 
(Prior code § 4107.1)  
6.36.030 - Biting incidents—Quarantine of animals. 
Whenever it is shown that any dog or other animal has bitten any person, no owner or person having the custody or possession thereof, upon order of the director, any police officer or health officer, shall fail, refuse or neglect to quarantine such animal and keep it securely confined on a chain or in a closed cage or paddock for a period of ten days, or shall fail, refuse or neglect to allow the director to make an inspection or examination thereof at any time during the period. No such dog or animal shall be removed without written permission of the director, any police officer or health officer or his deputy. 
(Prior code § 4107.2)  
6.36.040 - Biting incidents involving dogs. 
Notwithstanding any other provision in this title, a dog used by any state, county, city or city and county law enforcement agency shall not be quarantined after biting any person if such bite occurred while the dog was being used for any law enforcement purpose. The law enforcement agency shall make the dog available for examination at any reasonable time. The law enforcement agency shall notify the local health officer if the dog exhibits any abnormal behavior. 
(Prior code § 4107.3)  
6.36.050 - Quarantine of guide dog serving blind. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, a guide dog serving a blind master shall not be quarantined, in the absence of evidence that he has been exposed to rabies, unless his master fails: 
A.  To keep him safely confined to the premises of the master; 
B.  To keep him available for examination at all reasonable times. 
(Prior code § 4107.4)  
6.36.060 - Animal bitten by rabid animals—Rules and regulations. 
Whenever it is suspected that any animal has been bitten by another animal having, or suspected of having rabies, all rules and regulations under Section 6.36.030 shall apply where applicable substituting the word "animal" or "dog." 
(Prior code § 4107.5)  
Chapter 6.40 - KENNELS 
Sections: 
 
6.40.010 - Cat or dog breeding permit. 
Any person having control, custody, charge or possession of any cat or dog for breeding purposes shall secure a cat or dog breeders permit from the director. Fee for the cat or dog breeding permit shall be established by the director. Any kitten or puppy sold from a litter for a profit over and above the cost of advertising, if any, shall be a prima facie evidence of cat or dog breeding. 
(Prior code § 4109.2)  
6.40.020 - Dogs kept for breeding. 
No person shall keep or maintain or suffer or permit to be kept or maintained upon any premises owned or controlled by him or it, any dog, male or female, kept mainly for breeding purposes, except within properly zoned property and then only in an approved kennel. 
(Prior code § 4109)  
6.40.030 - Cats kept for breeding. 
No person shall keep or maintain or suffer or permit to be kept or maintained upon any premises owned or controlled by him or it, any cat, male or female, kept mainly for breeding purposes, except within industrially zoned property and then only in an approved kennel. 
(Prior code § 4109.1)  
6.40.040 - Cat kennel. 
In any portion of the city no person shall establish, keep or maintain, or suffer or permit to be established, kept or maintained, upon premises owned or controlled by him in the city, any cat kennel, except within industrially zoned property and then only in an approved kennel. 
(Prior code § 4109.3)  
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapters:  
Chapter 8.04 - COUNTY HEALTH CODE 
Sections: 
 
8.04.010 - Title 11 and Division 1 of Title 8 of county code adopted—Copies on file. 
The "Health and Safety Code of the County of Los Angeles," the same being Title 11 of the Los Angeles County Code, and the "Public Health License Code of the County of Los Angeles," the same being Division 1 of Title 8 of the Los Angeles County Code, as those titles have been amended through and including March 23, 2005, are adopted as the health and safety code for the city (hereinafter referred to as the "health code.") Three copies of the health code are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city. 
(Ord. 2282 § 1, 2005: Ord. 2104 § 1, 1994: prior code § 5100 (A))  
8.04.020 - Definitions. 
Wherever the health code uses the following words or phrases, they, respectively, shall be deemed to have the following meanings ascribed to them: 
A.  "County" or "county of Los Angeles" means the city of Montebello; and 
B.  "Health officer" or "county health officer" means the city manager of the city of Montebello. 
(Ord. 2104 § 2, 1994: prior code § 5100 (B))  
8.04.030 - Section 378.1 (b) amended—Milk. 
Subparagraph (b) of Section 11.12.380 of the health code as adopted by Section 8.04.010 is amended to read as follows: 
B.  EXEMPTIONS: The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  The sale of certified milk or cream; 
(2)  Delivery or sale of milk to wholesalers or to pasteurization plants for purposes of being pasteurized; 
(3)  The sale of market milk which is not pasteurized, providing that the following conditions are met: 
a)  That such milk is labeled in an appropriate manner "not pasteurized"; 
b)  That such sales do not exceed 75 gallons per day; 
c)  That vendor shall have been engaged in the sale of such market milk for a period of not less than 5 years preceding November 1, 1966. 
(Ord. 2104 § 3, 1994: prior code § 5101)  
8.04.032 - Abatement of nuisances. 
Whenever a nuisance endangering the public health shall be ascertained to exist on any premises or other place, such nuisance may be abated as provided by procedures established in Chapter 8.16 and subject to penalties as permitted by law. The city may recover all abatement costs pursuant to Chapters 1.12 and 8.16. 
(Ord. 2104 § 4, 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 6, 1-28-2015)  
8.04.035 - Disposal of medical waste materials. 
A.  No person shall dispose of, leave or discard outside the exterior walls of the building wherein used any container, bottle, syringe, hypodermic needle or hypodermic syringe, or needles, designed for or used in dispensing, giving or injecting medicines, drugs or poisons, or any used bandage, dressing or gauze that has been used in treating or caring for a patient, except as follows: 
1.  By placing the foregoing in metal trash containers which have overlapping, tight fitting and fly-tight lids. The lids shall be secured in place at all times while the container is not being filled or emptied. The containers, except while being filled or emptied under supervision of the authorized persons, shall be sealed by a lid securely fastened with a padlock or similar locking device under the control of such persons; or 
2.  By incineration in an incinerator approved by the Air Quality Management District. 
B.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, bandages, dressings or gauze used in treating or caring for infectious or contagious diseases shall either be incinerated or placed in said containers securely wrapped in heavy paper or plastic bags, the open ends of which have been tied or stapled so as to securely contain the infectious material therein. 
(Ord. 2104 § 6, 1994)  
8.04.037 - Storage of medical test materials. 
A.  All medical test materials must be stored in a secure manner. 
B.  For purposes of this section, "medical test materials" means any materials, including blood, tissue, urine, stool samples, secretions and other similar human or animal materials which: 
1.  Are collected for the purposes of medical, biological or scientific testing; and 
2.  Have yet to be picked up for transfer or actually transferred to the facility at which the test is to occur. 
C.  For purposes of this section, "stored in a secure manner" means: 
1.  Stored inside a hospital, doctor's office, medical facility or similar establishment; or 
2.  Stored in a locked enclosure adjacent to a hospital, doctor's office, medical facility or similar establishment. Any enclosure must be reasonably secure against penetration by the public and must not be easily removable from its location. 
(Ord. 2104 § 7, 1994)  
8.04.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
All violation of the health code, as adopted by the city pursuant to Section 8.04.010 herein, shall be a misdemeanor and subject to the penalty provisions of Chapter 1.12 of the Montebello Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2282 § 2, 2005: Ord. 2104 § 8, 1994: prior code § 5100 (C))  
Chapter 8.08 - COUNTY SOLID WASTE ORDINANCE 
Section: 
 
8.08.010 - Adoption. 
The solid waste ordinance of the county of Los Angeles, the same being Ordinance No. 11,886 of the county, dated March 13, 1979, is adopted as the solid waste ordinance for the city. Three copies of the solid waste Ordinance No. 11,886 are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city. 
(Prior code § 5400 (A))  
8.08.020 - Enforcement agency designated. 
The Los Angeles County health department is designated as the enforcement agency of the solid waste management plan in the city. 
(Prior code § 5400 (B))  
Chapter 8.12 - REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL* 
Sections: 
 
8.12.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be construed as herein set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
"Assignment" of a franchise issued pursuant to this chapter means: 
1.  Any sale, exchange or other transfer of a franchise issued pursuant to this chapter; 
2.  Any sale, exchange or other transfer of substantially all of the franchisee's assets dedicated to service pursuant to this chapter; 
3.  Any sale, exchange or other transfer of thirty percent or more of the outstanding common stock of or partnership interests in the franchisee or by any parent company or corporation of the franchisee; 
4.  Any reorganization, consolidation, merger recapitalization, stock issuance or re-issuance, voting trust, pooling franchise, escrow arrangement, liquidation or other transaction to which the franchisee or any parent company or corporation of the franchisee or any of its shareholders is a party which results in a change of ownership or control of thirty percent or more of the value or voting rights in the stock of or partnership interests in the franchisee or of any parent company or corporation of the franchisee; and 
5.  Any combination of the foregoing (whether or not in related or contemporaneous transactions) which has the effect of any such transfer or change of ownership. 
Assignment does not include the transfer among lineal descendents. 
"Bins" means a container, roll-off box, dumpster or other commercial waste receptacle that is acceptable to the city. 
"CERCLA" means the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, as set forth in 42 U.S.C. Section 9601 et seq. 
"CERCLA liability" means the environmental liability imposed by CERCLA. 
"City" means the city of Montebello. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city of Montebello. 
"Commercial premises" means all retail, professional, wholesale and industrial facilities, and other commercial enterprises offering goods or services to the public. 
"Construction and demolition debris" or "C&D debris" means waste products and recyclables resulting from the construction, remodeling or demolition of building and other structure including, but not limited to, wood, metals, concrete, brick, clay, glass, plastics, dirt, asphalt, cement, lumber, wallboard, roofing material, ceramic tile, plastic pipe, and excluding putrescibles, garbage, and liquid wastes. 
"Director of public works" is the staff member in charge of the city's department of public works. 
"Disposal" means the ultimate disposal of any solid waste collected by a solid waste hauler whether occurring at a transfer facility, permitted landfill or transformation facility, or after subsequent delivery to a different facility. 
"Garbage" means any solid waste which is not a recyclable material or is contaminated and not recyclable. 
"Green waste" means any vegetative matter resulting from normal yard and landscaping maintenance free from contamination. Green waste includes plant debris, such as grass clippings, leaves, pruning, weeds, branches, brush, organic food waste, Christmas trees, and other forms of organic waste and must be generated by and at the service unit wherein the green waste is collected from multi-family residents free of green waste contamination. 
"Franchise" means a non-exclusive franchise issued by the city to a solid waste hauler for the purpose of collecting solid waste generated upon multiple-family residential, industrial or commercial premises, or C&D debris generated upon any premises within the city. 
"Franchisee" means any person who has complied with this chapter by obtaining an non-exclusive franchise from the city and is duly licensed in the city to collect, remove, convey, transport, store, process or dispose of solid waste or C&D debris within the city. For purposes of this chapter, the term "franchisee" shall mean the same as "solid waste hauler." 
"Industrial premises" means any premises used for industrial purposes. 
"Liquid waste" means waste other than solid waste or semi-solid waste. 
"Multiple-family residential premises" means any premises used and zoned for multiple-family residential purposes having four or more units. 
"Person" means an individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever. 
"Public works manager" means the staff member appointed to this position by the director of public works. 
"Putrescibles" means waste which is perishable such as food waste and green waste. 
"Recyclables" means those materials which are capable of being recycled and which would otherwise be processed or disposed of as commercial or multi-family waste. These materials include: newspaper; mixed paper, corrugated cardboard, industrial C&D debris, high grade paper, Kraft brown bags and other brown paper bags, paper, paperboard, paper egg cartons, office ledger paper, and telephone books; glass; aluminum; scrap and cast aluminum; scrap metals, tin, steel, bimetal containers; plastic, inerts, wood, green waste, and organics. 
"Recycle," "recycling," and "recycled" means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace. "Recycling" does not include transformation. 
"Recycler" means a person, duly licensed and adhering to the requirements of this chapter, who collects, removes, conveys, transports, stores, or processes only recyclables generated within the city, does not charge a fee for the recycling service, and does not transport, store, or process any solid waste. 
"Service unit" means a multi-family, commercial or industrial building within the city that subscribes to commercial (non-residential curbside) Solid waste collection services. 
"Single-family residential premises" means any single family residential unit or multiple-family residential premises having less than four units (i.e., duplex or tri-plex). 
"Shall" means that which is mandatory. 
"Solid waste" means all putrescible and non-putrescible solid and semi-solid wastes, including garbage, trash, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, abandoned vehicles and any parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, furniture, tires, carpets, mattresses and similar large items, dewatered, treated, or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous waste, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semi-solid wastes, and other discarded solid and semi-solid wastes. "Solid waste" includes recyclables which have not been separated from other refuse. "Solid waste" does not include any of the following wastes: 
1.  Source-separated recyclable materials and green waste; 
2.  Construction and demolition debris; 
3.  Special wastes that cannot be disposed of in Class III landfills; or 
4.  Hazardous, infectious, radioactive and medical wastes. 
"Solid waste hauler" means any person, duly licensed and in receipt of a non-exclusive franchise pursuant to the requirements of this chapter, who collects, removes, conveys, transports, stores, processes or disposes of solid waste or C&D debris within the city. For purposes of this chapter, the term "solid waste hauler" means the same as "franchisee." 
"Source reduction" means any action which causes a net reduction in the generation of solid waste. Source reduction includes, but is not limited to, reducing the use of non-recyclable materials, replacing disposable materials and products with reusable materials and products, reducing packaging, reducing the amount of yard wastes generated, establishing rate structures with incentives to reduce the amount of wastes that generators produce, and increasing the efficiency of the use of paper, cardboard, glass, metal, plastic, and other materials. "Source-reduction" does not include steps taken after the material becomes solid waste or actions which would impact air or water resources in lieu of land, including, but not limited to, transformation. 
"Special waste" means waste that poses a chronic toxicity hazard to human health or the environment, requiring special collection, treatment, handling, storage or transfer techniques. Special waste includes but are not limited to flammable waste; waste transported in a bulk tanker; liquid waste; sewage sludge; pollution control process waste; residue and debris from the cleanup of a spill or release of chemical substances, commercial products or any other special wastes; contaminated soil, waste, residue, debris and articles from the cleanup of a site or facility formerly used for the generation, storage, treatment, recycling, reclamation, or disposal of any other special wastes; ash, industrial sludge, asbestos, auto shredder waste, auto bodies, dead animals; manure; waste water, explosive substances; and radioactive substances. 
"Third party diversion" means recycling or reuse programs being conducted in businesses in Montebello by parties other than the solid waste hauler. This may include recyclables collected by a recycler, recyclables delivered to a recycling center by employees or other persons not associated with a solid waste hauler. A solid waste hauler may obtain credit for this diversion if, and only if, proper third party documentation is provided to the city. The proper documentation for third party diversion is Part IV 3rd party diversion documentation included with the quarterly report form. The signature of the 3rd party representative is to be a "wet" signature in blue ink only. No other form of documentation is acceptable. 
"Uncontrollable circumstances" mean any acts of God, such as landslides, lightning, fires, storms, floods, pestilence, freezing, and earthquakes; explosions, sabotage, civil disturbances, acts of a public enemy, wars, civil insurrection, blockades, riots, eminent domain, condemnation or other taking, or other events of a similar nature, not caused or maintained by the city or franchisee, which event is not reasonably within the control of the party claiming the excuse from its obligations due to such event, to the extent such event has a material adverse effect on the ability of a party to perform its obligations pursuant to this chapter. Events which could have been prevented by reasonable precautions, including compliance with applicable laws, shall not be considered an uncontrollable circumstance. Labor unrest, including but not limited to strike, work stoppage or slowdown, sick out, picketing, or other concerted job action conducted by the franchisee's employees or directed at the franchisee, or a subcontractor, are not considered uncontrollable circumstances. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.020 - Collection service—Authority to contract—Regulatory licensing. 
Any of the following methods, or any of them in combination, may be used to meet the needs of the citizens of the city for the collection and disposition of solid waste, recyclables and C&D debris: 
A.  The city may use its own forces to collect, carry, convey or transport solid waste, C&D debris, and recyclables from all single-family residential, multiple-family residential, commercial, and industrial premises within the city. 
B.  The city will enter into a non-exclusive franchise ("franchise") with one or more solid waste haulers, which have met the city's solid waste hauler licensing requirements and are duly licensed and permitted to engage in solid waste hauling as of March 31, 2004, to furnish commercial collection services in the city. The initial term of the franchise shall begin on the effective date of the franchise and end in seven years on March 31, 2011. Annually, commencing on April 1, 2005, and on each April 1st thereafter, the franchise term shall be automatically extended for one year, provided the following: (1) that the franchisee has met and complies with all of the provisions of this chapter and the terms and conditions of the franchise; (2) and the city does not issue a notice of intent to terminate or revoke the franchise; (3) the annual extension is approved by majority vote by the Montebello city council at a regularly scheduled city council meeting; and (4) the city does not receive a written notice from the franchisee declining the extension within twenty works days of said April 1st. If any of the above circumstances exist, the franchise shall be subject to immediate termination by the city. 
If either the city or franchisee notifies the other in writing prior to April 1st of any year during the initial or extended term of the franchise that it objects to such an extension, the franchise shall terminate on the last day of the then existing term, or on an earlier date mutually agreed upon by the city and franchisee. 
C.  The city may issue regulatory, non-exclusive franchises to one or more solid waste hauler, for a fixed period, to collect, take, remove and dispose of solid waste and C&D debris in the city, and may limit eligibility to those persons who had current city business licenses and were permitted by the city to collect solid waste as of March 31, 2004. Any person with whom the city has issued such a license is permitted to convey or transport solid waste or C&D debris upon or through any street, alley or public place in the city, provided it obtains a franchise with the city and operates in accord with the terms of this chapter. 
D.  The city may issue business licenses to recyclers. Any person with whom the city has issued such a license is permitted to collect and remove recyclables from all multiple-family residential, commercial, and industrial premises within the city, and to carry, convey or transport such recyclables upon or through any street, alley or public place in the city which shall contain no more than ten percent residual waste, in accord with the terms of the franchise and this chapter. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.030 - Prohibitions. 
A.  No person shall permit the contents of any cesspool, septic tank, water closet, sewer or sewage effluent, excrement, urine, slop water, butcher shop offal, garbage, rubbish, refuse, litter, cans or any dead animal, dead fowl, any greases or oils, or any putrid or offensive animal or vegetable matter or other type of solid waste, to remain or be deposited, or discharged upon the surface of the ground or upon any premises, lot or in any building, basement or in any public street, or into any standing water, stream or excavating or public place. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit the depositing of solid waste in any lawfully permitted solid waste disposal facility. 
B.  No person in possession, charge, or control of any residential, commercial or industrial property within the city, in or from which solid waste, C&D debris, and/or recyclables accumulate or are produced, shall fail to prevent the accumulation of solid waste, C&D debris, and/or recyclables in quantities that are unreasonable or detrimental to the public health or safety. 
C.  No person shall collect, carry, conveyor transport solid waste, C&D debris, or recyclables, upon or through any street, alley or public place in the city, unless such person is franchised under the terms of this chapter to do so. The following persons shall be exempt from this prohibition: 
1.  Landscaping and yard maintenance persons who, as a consequence of their business activity, may generate, transport, and dispose of green waste material that they generate. 
2.  Non-profit organizations collecting recyclable materials for the purposes of fund raising. 
3.  Building contractors may transport and dispose of C&D debris generated in the course of their business activity using roll-off boxes or bins owned or rented by the contractors. 
4.  The generator of the solid waste, C&D debris, or recyclables for the purposes of self-hauling the material to a disposal or recycling facility. 
D.  No person or representative of a business or government office located within the city limits shall contract or arrange for the collection or disposal of solid waste, C&D debris, or recyclables, with any business, firm or person, unless business, firm or such person is franchised under the terms of this chapter to do so, excepting those persons specified in Section 8.12.030(C), herein. 
E.  No person other than the owner of the premises or a person contracted or otherwise authorized by the owner and duly franchised to do so shall interfere in any manner with any solid waste, C&D debris, and recycling receptacle or remove the contents thereof, or remove any such receptacle from the location where the same was placed or by the owner thereof, or remove the contents from any such receptacle. 
F.  No person shall haul, carry or transport any solid waste through the city or along or over any public street or public place in the city, except in industry-standard solid waste collection motor vehicles with watertight compartments constructed and maintained so that the contents thereof shall not leak, be odorous or otherwise offensive. No person shall haul, carry or transport any recyclables, or C&D debris through the city or along or over any public street or public place in the city, except in motor vehicles constructed and maintained so that the contents thereof shall not leak, be odorous or otherwise offensive. All motor vehicles shall be so loaded and operated that none of their contents shall fail or spill therefrom, and every vehicle used for such purposes shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
G.  Any violation of the provisions of this section is a misdemeanor. Each violation hereof shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. This section shall not apply to employees of the city of Montebello. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.040 - Obligation to arrange for disposition. 
Any person collecting or transporting solid waste, recyclables, or C&D debris within the city shall be responsible for arranging for the disposition of any materials collected or transported, and shall arrange for such disposition in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local regulations and laws. The city shall assume no liability that may arise due to the arrangements of persons collecting or transporting solid waste, recyclables, or C&D debris. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.050 - Solid waste haulers. 
A.  A person who, as of March 31, 2004, has held a valid city business license and solid waste hauler license for the purpose of collecting solid waste within the city, shall apply to enter into a non-exclusive franchise with the city, and upon the issuance of such franchise in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, shall be authorized to collect, take, remove and dispose of solid waste from all multiple-family residential, commercial, and industrial premises within the city, except as otherwise provided herein. 
B.  Franchises shall be valid when issued and shall have an initial term of seven years, expiring on March 31, 2011. 
C.  Those holding franchises shall pay annually the standard city business license fee, and all other applicable fees, in accordance with the city code. 
D.  Solid waste haulers with valid franchises shall pay a quarterly solid waste program fee pursuant to this chapter in the amount of ten percent of the gross revenues generated by its solid waste and C&D debris collection services provided within the city. Fees for the collection of recyclables should not be included in the gross receipts for purposes of calculation of the solid waste program fee. The calculation of the solid waste program fee shall include all gross receipts for the collection of solid waste and C&D debris and shall exclude fees for the collection of source separated recyclables. Any additional fees which are levied by the solid waste hauler over and above the basic collection fee (i.e. AB 939 fee, city solid waste fee) shall be included in gross receipts for purposes of this calculation. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.060 - Recyclers. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided herein, any person may provide recycling services to commercial, industrial and multi-family premises within the city without obtaining a franchise, provided that the person has a valid and current business license issued by the city to do so and complies with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  At the sole discretion of the director of public works or his or her designee and upon petition by a recycler, a recycler may be permitted to charge a fee for commercial, industrial or multi-family unit recycling service without obtaining a franchise from the city where it is found that the recycling service is of a unique and desirable nature, that a comparable level of recycling service is not otherwise offered by a solid waste hauler operating in the city, and the economic viability of the unique recycling service is predicated upon charging a fee for such service. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.070 - Construction and demolition debris collection. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, only those persons duly licensed and franchised pursuant to the requirements of this chapter may furnish collection services for C&D debris to any location in the city. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.080 - Non-exclusive franchise—Application. 
To obtain an non-exclusive franchise ("franchise"), an eligible person must currently hold a solid waste hauler license and must submit, in accordance with Section 8.12.330 of this chapter, an application in accord with the following provisions ("application") by no later than February 15, 2004, at five o'clock Pacific Standard time. Applications submitted after this time and/or grossly incomplete applications will not be accepted or processed. 
A.  The initial application for a franchise shall be made on forms provided by the city, and accompanied by the standard business franchise fee. 
B.  Such forms shall require information concerning, but not limited to, the type, capacity, size and range of collection vehicles used in the city; vehicle franchise plates and identification numbers; and the average payload of each type of vehicle accompanied by a certification by the applicant that all information provided is true and accurate, and a description and status of any pending or current civil or criminal litigation against the applicant. 
C.  The application shall be accompanied by a source reduction and recycling plan (SRRP) which shall include, but not be limited to, the following information by account type as defined by the city manager: 
1.  Existing conditions; 
2.  A description of existing source reduction and recycling activities; 
3.  Planned source reduction and recycling programs; 
4.  Implementation plans; 
5.  Materials marketing plan; 
6.  Support and outreach programs; and 
7.  Economic incentives. 
The SRRP shall be provided in a format to be provided by the city. The SRRP shall be submitted and approved prior to issuance of a franchise. The applicant is eligible to request and receive technical assistance from the city in completing the SRRP, if it has made a good faith effort to develop the documentation first and subject to city staff availability. The "good faith effort" is attained when all of the application requirements have been at least addressed. 
D.  An application to renew a franchise shall be submitted no less than forty-five days prior to April 1st of each year and consist of the renewal application form, signed franchise, copies of valid insurance certificates, a copy of a valid performance bond or letter of credit in the amount requested by the city, together with documentation setting forth any proposed changes in the city-approved SRRP, changes in collection equipment types and quantities used in the city, status of any pending or current civil or criminal litigation against the applicant, and any other information previously submitted as part of the initial franchise application, accompanied by the standard business franchise fee. Late submittals will not be accepted or processed. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.090 - Non-exclusive franchise—Grant, grant with conditions or denial. 
A.  Applications for a non exclusive franchise ("franchise") shall be evaluated by the director of public works or his or her designee, for conformity with the requirements of this chapter. The director of public works shall have the authority to grant, grant with conditions, or deny the application. In granting, granting with conditions, or denying an application, the director of public works may take into consideration factors including, but not limited, to the following: 
1.  The ability of the applicant to comply with the solid waste hauling service requirements of this chapter; 
2.  The ability of the applicant to comply with the equipment standards enumerated in this chapter; 
3.  The ability of the applicant to comply with all other applicable city, county, state, and federal laws governing solid waste collection; 
4.  Accuracy of information submitted; 
5.  Current or pending litigation against the applicant; 
6.  Correctness of fees paid, or payment of fees; 
7.  The adequacy of, and the ability of the applicant to implement the SRRP proposed by the applicant pursuant to this chapter; 
8.  Completeness of the application; 
9.  Validity of insurance and performance bonds/ letter of credit. 
B.  Granting of franchise shall be based on a demonstration that the solid waste hauler currently maintains all required licenses with the city and has paid all fees pursuant to this code, is complying with applicable city requirements of this chapter as well as city, county, state, and federal laws governing solid waste collection, transport and disposal, is meeting all other applicable requirements of this chapter, that any proposed changes to the SRRP have been approved by the city, that the SRRP is being implemented in a good faith manner, and that all submitted information is accurate. 
C.  The decision of the director of public works to grant, grant with conditions or deny an application shall be subject to an appeal as provided in Section 8.12.230 of this chapter. 
D.  Before any such franchise is issued or renewed, the solid waste hauler shall execute a non-exclusive franchise agreement as set forth in Section 8.12.080 with the city, agreeing to abide by the terms of this chapter, in a form to be approved by the city attorney. The director of public works is authorized to execute such franchise on behalf of the city. 
E.  Before any such franchise is issued or renewed, the solid waste hauler shall furnish to city and shall file with the city clerk a performance bond, payable to the city, executed by the franchisee as principal and by a corporate surety authorized to issue surety bonds in the state of California satisfactory to the city as surety, in a form acceptable to the city manager. The principal sum of the bond shall be equal to the gross revenues of the solid waste hauler for the two most recent quarters for which such data are available. Alternatively, the solid waste hauler may deposit a letter of credit or open a certificate of deposit in the name of the city. The performance bond shall remain in force for the duration of time the franchise remains in effect. The premium for the bond shall be paid by the solid waste hauler/franchisee. 
F.  If a franchise is not renewed by the city, or an application of renewal is denied by the director of public works, it may not be reinstated and shall be terminated immediately, subject to the appeal process set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.100 - Non-exclusive franchises—Requirements. 
A.  All solid waste haulers holding franchises shall: 
1.  Operate within the guidelines established by the city ("guidelines"). Such guidelines shall include, but will not be limited to, standards for equipment and vehicle maintenance including removal of graffiti, maintaining proper company identification with phone number, maintaining a current valid DMV registration and passing city inspection, use of alternative fuel vehicles, standards for complying with All 939, CERCLA, and any other relevant city, county, state and federal laws, and other guidelines that the city council may deem necessary to impose by city council resolution from time to time. 
2.  Ensure that all solid waste vehicle drivers have a valid California driver's license appropriate for the vehicle driven; maintain minimum collection frequency for all solid waste accounts in accordance with local and state requirements; ensure noise is kept to the minimum necessary to provide collection services to accounts; and ensure vehicles are appropriately registered by the Department of Motor Vehicles. 
3.  All vehicles and equipment used in the city by a solid waste hauler, including but not limited to, trucks, trailers, waste containers and service/cleaning vehicles must be maintained in good working order, uniformly painted and cleaned, emit no residual odors, be covered where necessary for odor, pest control and to prevent spillage and each shall include the hauler's name and phone number painted in lettering a minimum of two-inches in height. All collection vehicles registered for use in the city must pass a yearly truck inspection conducted by the city. 
4.  Work with customer accounts to recycle using pre-collection and post-collection technologies, and to educate customer accounts about recycling and source reduction opportunities. 
5.  Every solid waste hauler may be required, on a quarterly basis, at the request of the city, to perform one community service project. These can include, but not be limited to: alley clean-ups, bulky-item collections, provide roll-offs (if available) for clean-up projects as requested by the city, or provide assistance with city sponsored special events. 
6.  At the request of the city, but no more than once quarterly, include in customer account billings, or otherwise ensure timely distribution of, educational/outreach materials as they may be developed by the city. The city shall provide appropriate quantities of materials for distribution by each solid waste hauler/franchisee. 
7.  Solid waste franchisees may identity for city code enforcement and staff, any alleged unfranchised company or equipment engaged in solid waste hauling operations in the city. The city retains the right to confiscate, or have confiscated, any equipment of any unfranchised company doing business illegally in the city. 
8.  Achieve a total diversion rate from all multiple-family residential, commercial and industrial premises waste generated by accounts serviced by the franchisee, including but not limited to varieties of paper, plastics, glass, as well as wood, food waste and other green waste, manure, and construction and demolition debris, removed from within city limits, as follows: 
a.  No less than fifty percent by weight for the aggregate of the four quarters of 2000 and each year thereafter, and no less than forty percent in any calendar quarter. 
b.  The diversion rate shall be calculated as provided in the revised technical manual prepared by the city manager. 
9.  Comply with the reporting requirements as set forth in Section 8.12.140, indemnification requirements as set forth in Section 8.12.180, and insurance requirements as set forth in Section 8.12.190, herein. 
10.  Comply with all other applicable requirements of this chapter. 
B.  In the event that the California Integrated Waste Management Board issues to the city a temporary extension in the date for compliance with, and/or a temporary reduction in the diversion mandates of Public Resources Code Section 41780 and as amended, the city shall extend similar temporary extension and/or reduction to the solid waste hauler diversion requirements of Section 8.12.100(A)(5) of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.110 - Recyclers—Requirements. 
Every recycler shall: 
A.  Before any business license is issued or renewed for a recycler, execute an "recycling services agreement" with the city, agreeing to abide by the terms of this chapter, in a form to be approved by the city attorney. The city manager is authorized to execute such agreement on behalf of the city. 
B.  Supply recycling containers of appropriate type, number and capacity to customer accounts served. 
C.  Ensure that all vehicle drivers have a valid California driver's license appropriate for the vehicle driven; ensure noise is kept to the minimum necessary to provide collection services to accounts; and ensure vehicles are appropriately registered by the Department of Motor Vehicles, are in good repair and uniformly painted. 
D.  Cooperate in a timely and good faith manner with solid waste hauling franchisees for the preparation of reports pursuant to Section 8.12.140 hereof. 
E.  Comply with the reporting requirements of Section 8.12.150, applicable indemnification requirements of Section 8.12.180, and insurance requirements of Section 8.12.190 hereof. 
F.  Comply with all other relevant requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.120 - Construction and demolition debris collection—Requirements. 
All solid waste haulers providing construction and demolition debris collection services shall to the extent economically feasible, provide construction and demolition waste recycling services to accounts served. All materials, disposed, scavenged or salvaged or in other ways diverted from landfills or solid waste facilities are included in this section. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.130 - Assignment restricted. 
A.  Assignment of franchises issued under the provisions of Section 8.12.090 is prohibited, except as follows: 
1.  In the case of a company holding a franchise is sold in total, liquidated, to another hauling company who does not have a franchise in the city, and who, in order to operate in the city by transfer of the franchise, must demonstrate to the city that they meet all conditions as outlined in the franchise. In such case, an application must be submitted, all fees paid and the company must obtain a city business license. A new franchise would then be issued to that company and the previous franchise in the name of the sold company would be rescinded or terminated. All requirements of performance must be met by the new company. 
B.  Any prohibited assignment of any franchise shall immediately be subject to termination. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.140 - Reporting requirements—Solid waste haulers. 
A.  Within forty-five days after the end of each calendar quarter, and commencing as of the second calendar quarter of 2004, each franchisee shall submit, in accordance with Section 8.12.330 of this chapter, a quarterly report, certified by the owner, including all of the following: 
1.  A statement showing waste collected for disposal and the total revenue received for solid waste and C&D debris collection services from customers located within the city in a format provided by the city. Such statement shall be accompanied by full payment of the required solid waste program fee in the amount of ten percent of the gross revenues generated by its solid waste and C&D debris collection services provided within the city for the reporting quarter. 
2.  A summary of diversion and disposal activity including tons collected for disposal by account type and total tons recycled for the quarter by account type in a format provided by the city; and calculation of diversion rate achieved using calculation methods provided in a technical manual prepared by the director of public works or his or her designee. Depending on the form provided by the city, information may include a description of the number of accounts serviced by the collector in the city, and for each account type in the city, the number of bins by size and frequency served and total cubic yards. The standard conversion factor to be used for assignment of Montebello waste to multi-jurisdictional loads is .0625 tons per cubic yard for commercial waste and .2 tons per cubic yard for C&D debris. 
a.  If a franchisee has cause to believe that there is significant third party recycling or source reduction activity occurring at a specific customer account that is not being reflected in the diversion rate calculation, the franchisee may petition, on a case-by-case basis, the consideration, by the director of public works or his or her designee, of this additional third party recycling or source reduction activity in the diversion calculation. Such petition shall be included in the quarterly report, and consist of documentation clearly substantiating the claim for the quarter in which it is being reported. The documentation must be provided in the format approved by the city with an original signature of an account representative. The director of public works or his or her designee shall, at its sole discretion, accept, conditionally accept, or deny the documentation if it is not complete and submitted as instructed. The city may choose to conduct a site visit or phone verification of the third party diversion. Following the results of such action, the director of public works or his or her designee may choose to deny or reverse credit for the third party recycling or reuse as a result of a subsequent audit or verification by the city. 
3.  Any changes in collection vehicle information as reported in the solid waste hauling franchise application including the type, capacity, size and range of vehicles, vehicle license plate and identification numbers, in a format provided by the city. The party completing the form must sign the form. 
4.  Any related documents requested by the city. These include but are not limited to reports required in response to state integrated waste management policies, mandates or law. 
B.  The last quarterly report for a calendar year shall include a calculation of the annual diversion rate achieved for the calendar year and a status report on the implementation of the solid waste hauling franchisee's SRRP developed pursuant to Section 8.12.080 including, but not limited to, any significant changes to existing or planned services, education and outreach programs, materials marketing or economic incentives, and any barriers encountered in providing source reduction and recycling services. 
C.  Such information shall be provided on quarterly reporting forms provided by the director of public works or his or her designee. Such forms will be transmitted to each franchised solid waste hauler via mail by the end of the calendar quarter for which the report is to be prepared. Each person required reporting pursuant to this section shall bear the cost of preparing and submitting the required reports. 
D.  If a report for the previous quarter has not been received within forty-five days after the end of each quarter, a report will be considered delinquent. The city will make reasonable effort to notify the franchisee of pending delinquency no later than five business days before the delinquency date. Once determined to be delinquent, the city will send the person required reporting written notice of delinquency. In that event, the person required to report shall pay a non-refundable five hundred-dollar processing fee for each overdue report pursuant to Section 8.12.110. 
E.  If a report for the previous quarter has not been received within ninety days after the end of each quarter, the report will be considered negligently late. The city will send the person required to report written notice of negligently late status. A negligently late report shall be grounds for franchise revocation. 
F.  If any report is determined to be negligently late by the director of public works or his or her designee, the solid waste hauling franchise shall be revoked without further action by the city. In such cases, the franchisee shall immediately notify all its accounts within the city and cease all collections activity in the city within ten days of the mailing date of the notice of revocation pursuant to Section 8.12.210 of this chapter. The franchisee may continue to sell their accounts beyond the ten day period until all accounts have been reassigned. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.150 - Reporting requirements—Recyclers. 
A.  Within forty-five days after the end of each calendar quarter, and commencing as of the second calendar quarter of 2004, each recycler licensed pursuant to Section 8.12.060 shall submit to the city a quarterly report, certified by the owner and in a form provided by the city, the following information: 
1.  The total number of accounts served in the city by account type, and the material types and the quantity, by weight, recycled by account type; 
2.  A statement of the recycling facilities used by the recycler, including the address, contacts name and phone number; 
3.  Any related documents requested by the city. These include but are not limited to reports required in response to state integrated waste management policies, mandates or law. 
B.  Such information shall be provided on quarterly reporting forms provided by the director of public works or his or her designee. Such forms will be transmitted to each licensed recycler via mail by the end of the calendar quarter for which the report is to be prepared. Each person required reporting pursuant to this section shall bear the cost of preparing and submitting the required reports. 
C.  If a report for the previous quarter has not been received within forty-five days after the end of each quarter, a report will be considered delinquent. The city will make reasonable effort to notify the franchisee of pending delinquency no later than five business days before the delinquency date. Once determined to be delinquent, the city will send the person required to report written notice of delinquency. In that event, the person required to report shall pay a non-refundable five hundred dollars processing fee for each overdue report. 
D.  If a report for the previous quarter has not been received within ninety days after the end of each quarter, the report will be considered negligently late. The city will send the person required to report written notice of negligently late status. 
E.  If any report is determined to be negligently late by the city manager, the city shall revoke the business franchise without further action. In such cases, the franchisee shall immediately notify all its accounts within the city and cease all collection activity in the city within ten days of the mailing date of the notice of revocation pursuant to Section 8.12.210. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.160 - Hazardous waste screening. 
A.  All franchisees governed by this chapter shall screen, at the point of collection, all loads of solid waste, recyclables, and C&D debris, using appropriate means of inspection, to eliminate, where practicable, the transportation of known or suspected hazardous wastes. Hazardous waste found at the point of collection shall not be collected and the collector shall immediately notify the generator and the city fire prevention bureau. 
B.  In the event that any hazardous waste or suspected hazardous waste is commingled with the collection material, the franchisee shall take immediate and appropriate action to contain and isolate the load and the collector shall immediately notify the generator and the city fire prevention bureau. 
C.  If, in the judgment of the collector, the material presents an imminent threat to public health or safety, the collector shall also immediately call 911 for emergency response. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.170 - Franchisee audit by city. 
A.  The city has the right at all reasonable times to inspect the financial, customer, collection, disposal, and recycling records pertaining to the city of any person franchised under the terms of this chapter. Each such person shall make available to the city upon request and in a timely manner general ledgers, route invoices, route sheets and other records related to, customers, service levels, routes, and fees maintained by the franchisee. All information obtained and documents reviewed shall be kept confidential and will not be provided to any party other than the city employees and the city consultant. City auditors shall sign a confidentiality agreement. 
B.  Upon receipt of the quarterly reports required by Sections 8.12.140 and 8.12.150 of this chapter, the director of public works or his or her designee shall conduct a preliminary review of the report. Based on the results of the review, the director of public works may conduct a more detailed audit of the report and of the person required to report. Such an audit may include a field investigation which may include personnel interviews, field inspections of facilities, equipment and vehicles, records, and waste surveys of selected accounts. The person required to report shall cooperate by making personnel available for interviews, and by making facilities, equipment and vehicles available for inspection. 
C.  The director of public works or his or her designee may retain the services of an outside consultant to conduct an audit. Each person required to report shall make available to the city's consultant upon request and in a timely manner documentation for all reported information including weight tickets and receipts, recycling receipts, general ledgers, route slips and all financial and other records related to waste tonnage's, recyclables, and fees maintained by the franchisee as requested. Failure to provide the documentation requested by the auditor shall constitute a failure to pass the audit. 
D.  If the results of the audit disclose that the person required to report knowingly submitted false information or materially failed to implement the SRRP, or the supporting documentation thus to substantively confirm what was reported by the person required to report or willful (without a reasonable explanation) underpayment by such person of two percent or more of any amount due the city, the person required to report will be responsible for the full cost of the audit, and the franchise may also be subject to revocation. 
E.  The city has the right to recompute in accordance with this chapter, any and all amounts paid under this chapter or pursuant to any franchise granted hereunder. No acceptance of any payment is to be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for further or additional sums payable under this chapter or for the performance of any obligation relating hereto. The person required to report shall pay interest to the city at the rate of ten percent per annum for all under payments of any amount. The city reserves the right to apply this section retroactively for two past consecutive quarters after performing an audit of those quarters. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.180 - Indemnity. 
A.  All franchisees governed by this chapter shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless city, its officers, officials, employees, volunteers, agents and assigns (indemnities) from and against any and all damages (whether special, general or punitive), loss, liability, fines, penalties, forfeitures, claims, demands, actions, proceedings or suits (whether administrative or judicial), in law or in equity, of every kind and description, (including, but not limited to, injury to and death of any person and damage to property, strict liability, product liability, or for contribution or indemnity claimed by third parties) arising or resulting from or in any way connected with: (i) the operation of the franchisee, its agents, employees, contractors, and/or subcontractors, in performing or failing to perform services pursuant to this chapter; (ii) the failure of the franchisee, its agents, employees, contractors and/or subcontractors to comply in all respects with applicable laws, ordinances and regulations, and/or applicable permits and franchises; (iii) the acts of franchisee, its officers, employees, agents, contractors and/or subcontractors in performing services pursuant to this chapter for which strict liability is imposed by law; and (iv) the processing, marketing, and end use of recyclable materials, green waste, or C&D debris. The foregoing indemnity shall apply regardless of whether such loss, liability, penalty, forfeiture, claim, demand, action, proceeding, suit, injury, death or damage is also caused in part by any of the indemnities' negligence. 
B.  All solid waste hauling franchisees governed by this chapter shall indemnify, defend with counsel acceptable to the city, protect and hold harmless the city, its officers, officials, employees, agents, assigns and any successor or successors to the city's interest from and against all claims, damages (including but not limited to special, consequential, natural resources and punitive damages) injuries, response mediation and removal costs, losses, demands, debts, liens, liabilities, causes of action, suits, legal or administrative proceedings, interest, fines, charges, penalties attorney's fees for the adverse party and expenses (including but not limited to attorneys' and expert witness fees and costs incurred in connection with defending against any of the forgoing or in enforcing this indemnity) of any kind whatsoever paid, incurred or suffered by, or asserted against, the city or its officers, officials, employees, agents, assigns, or contractors arising from or attributable to franchisees acts or omissions including but not limited to any repair, cleanup, disposal or detoxification, or preparation and implementation of any removal, remedial, response, closure or other plan (regardless of whether undertaken due to governmental action) concerning any hazardous substance or hazardous wastes at any place where the franchisee transports, stores or disposes of solid waste. The foregoing indemnity is also intended to operate as a franchise pursuant to Section 107(e) of CERCLA, 42 V.S.C. Section 9607(c) and California Health and Safety Code Section 25364, to defend, insure, protect, hold harmless and indemnify the city from liability. 
In the event the city is penalized under any such statute, each solid waste hauler shall indemnify the city in proportion to the amount of waste collected and deposited at the subject landfill(s) and specific to the multiple-family residential, commercial and industrial sectors. 
C.  Each solid waste franchisee shall indemnify, defend, with counsel acceptable to the city, and hold harmless city, its officers, officials, employees, volunteers, agents and assigns (indemnities) from and against any and all damage (whether special, general or punitive), loss, liability, fines, penalties, forfeitures, claims, demands, actions, proceedings or suits (whether administrative or judicial), in law or in equity, of every kind and description, (including, but not limited to, injury to and death of any person and damage to property, strict liability, or for contribution or indemnity claimed by third parties) arising or resulting from the failure of city to comply with the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (Division 30 of the California Public Resources Code), as amended, supplemented, superseded and replaced from time to time (AB 939). The foregoing indemnity shall apply regardless of whether such loss, liability, penalty, forfeiture, claim, demand, action, proceeding, suit, injury, death or damage is also caused in part by any of the indemnities' negligence. The forgoing indemnity will be provided in proportion to the amount of commercial, industrial and multiple-family residential solid waste collected by each solid waste hauler not meeting the diversion requirements of this chapter and the extent of the solid waste haulers failure to meet the diversion requirements of this chapter during the time period for which the loss; liability, penalty, forfeiture, claim, demand, action, proceeding, suit, injury, death or damage occurred. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.190 - Insurance. 
Each franchisee governed under this chapter shall, at its sole expense, obtain and maintain insurance policies for comprehensive general liability, commercial automobile liability, and workers' compensation, in form, content and limit of coverage as set forth below. Except for workers' compensation, the city and its elected and appointed officials, employees, and agents shall be named as additional insured. All such policies of insurance shall be issued by an insurer admitted in the state of California and having a minimum rating of B+ or higher in the most recent edition of Best's Key Rating Guide. Prior to issuance of any franchise under this chapter, and at all times a franchise is held by the franchisee, the franchisee shall maintain on file with the city evidence in writing that all of the policies required by this section are in effect and in the required amounts. All certificates of insurance shall be accompanied by the applicable endorsements of the specific insurance policy. All policies of insurance, and if applicable, all certificates to self-insurance, shall be subject to the approval of the city's risk manager and city attorney. The city manager shall be notified in writing thirty days in advance of policy cancellation. If any policy of insurance or certificate to self-insure specified in this section is not maintained in full force and effect by the franchisee, the city in its sole discretion may either suspend or revoke the solid waste franchise. 
A.  All franchisees shall obtain and maintain a policy or policies of comprehensive general liability insurance providing coverage for any personal injury, death, loss or damage resulting from the wrongful or negligent act of the franchisee including, but not limited to, products and completed operations, with minimum limits of one million dollars per occurrence, combined single limit. If the comprehensive general liability insurance policy includes a general aggregate limit, that limit shall be at least two million dollars. 
B.  All franchisees shall obtain and maintain a policy or policies of commercial automobile liability insurance providing comprehensive vehicle liability coverage including, but not limited to, bodily injury, personal injury, uninsured motorist, medical payments, collision and property damage with a combined single limit of one million dollars per occurrence. In lieu of the above-stated requirements, franchisees may submit the city a certificate to self-insure for comprehensive vehicle liability issued by the appropriate state regulatory agency. Any such certificate shall be subject to the approval of the city's risk manager and the city attorney. 
C.  All franchisees shall obtain and maintain a policy of workers' compensation insurance in accordance with the state workers' compensation laws, and an employer's liability insurance policy with minimum limits of one million dollars per accident. In lieu of the above-stated requirements, contractor may submit to the city a certificate to self-insure issued by the California Director of Industrial Relations. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.200 - Administrative fines. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the franchisee to meet the requirements under this chapter. In the event that a franchisee fails to perform, the city may assess an administrative fine against franchisee. The schedule of administrative fines is attached in Exhibit A herein and incorporated by this reference. 
B.  Procedure for Review of Administrative Fines. The director of public works or his or her designee may assess administrative fines pursuant to this chapter on a quarterly basis. At the end of each quarter, the director of public works or his or her designee shall issue a written notice to the franchisee ("notice of assessment") of the administrative fines assessed and the basis for each assessment. 
C.  The assessment shall become final unless, within ten calendar days of the date of the notice of assessment, franchisee provides a written request for a meeting with the director of public works or his or her designee to present evidence that the assessment should not be made. 
D.  The director of public works or his or her designee shall schedule a meeting with the franchisee as soon as reasonably possible after timely receipt of franchisee's request. The director of public works or his or her designee shall review franchisee's evidence and render a decision sustaining or reversing the administrative charges as soon as reasonably possible after the meeting. 
E.  In the event that the director of public works or his or her designee sustains the decision to impose administrative charges, the charges shall be paid within ten days of receipt of the letter which informs the franchisee of the director of public works or designee's decision. Failure to pay the fees within ten days shall constitute grounds for franchise revocation. As stated in Section 8.12.210, the determination of revocation will be made by the director of public works. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.210 - Revocation of franchise—Grounds. 
The following grounds shall constitute a basis for the revocation of a franchise issued pursuant to this chapter: 
A.  When the continuance of the operation of any franchisee would be contrary to the Public Health and Safety Code peace, welfare or morals, or would be found to constitute a public nuisance. 
B.  When the director of public works has reasonable grounds to believe that the solid waste hauling franchisee has failed to achieve the diversion requirements specified in Section 8.12.100(A)(5) of this chapter, or as such requirements may be temporarily reduced pursuant to Section 8.12.100(B) of this chapter, two calendar quarters in any consecutive four-year period. 
C.  When the director of public works has reasonable grounds to believe that a report pursuant to Sections 8.12.140 and 8.12.150 is negligently late, or that the franchisee has knowingly submitted materially false information, materially failed to implement its SRRP, or failed to pay or willfully underpaid any of the fees or administrative fines required in this chapter. 
D.  Failure to indemnify the city or failure to comply with the insurance requirements of Sections 8.12.180 and 8.12.190. 
E.  Failure to maintain a performance bond in the required form and amount pursuant to Section 8.12.080. 
F.  When the director of public works has reasonable grounds to believe that any franchisee materially breached any provision of this chapter or code. 
G.  Any other good and sufficient cause as determined by the city manager. 
H.  Failure to attain a rating of satisfactory outcome in two consecutive quarterly report audits. 
I.  Failure to implement corrections as directed by the city following an audit. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.220 - Revocation of franchise—Procedure for revocation. 
Any franchise issued under this chapter is subject to revocation in the manner and procedure provided in this section. 
A.  Revocation proceedings shall be instituted upon a written complaint received by the solid waste hauler from the city of Montebello or the city's representative. Complaints against any franchisee seeking a revocation of the franchise shall set forth one or more of the grounds for revocation, except that a written report of the sheriff or any officer or employee of the city disclosing a breach of law by the franchisee or his agents or employees shall be deemed a complaint within the meaning of this section. 
B.  The director of public works shall revoke any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter he or she finds that any of the grounds for revocation exist as stated in Section 8.12.210. The revocation shall become effective ten days after the mailing of written notice thereof to the franchisee by the director of public works, together with a copy of the complaint. Such notice shall state the grounds for revocation. 
C.  Any franchisee whose franchise is revoked will be ineligible for reinstatement unless the matter is appealed timely to the city manager and such appeal has been upheld. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.230 - Appeal of revocation. 
A Franchisee who has been notified that their franchise has been revoked shall have the right to an appeal hearing before the city manager. The franchisee must request such an appeal no later than ten days from receipt of the revocation letter. The decision of the city manager shall be final, and no further action of the city council is required. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.240 - Breach of franchise agreement. 
If franchisee fails or refuses to perform any of its obligations hereunder; the city notifies the franchisee that a specific failure or refusal has occurred which will, unless corrected, in its opinion, give the city a right to terminate the franchise in accordance with this chapter; and the franchisee does not correct such breach within twenty days of receiving the city's notice thereof; provided that if such breach is not capable of cure within said twenty days, the franchisee shall promptly provide the city written notice explaining why the franchisee believes it needs additional time to effectuate a cure together with a schedule, whereupon the director of public works, in its sole discretion, may accept the franchisees schedule of cure; make a written demand that the franchisee cure the default within an alternative time period set by the city, or terminate the franchise at the end of the twenty day period; 
A.  Criminal Activity. The occurrence of any criminal activity related to franchisee's ability to perform in accordance with their franchise. 
B.  Failure to Comply With Franchise Requirements. The franchisee thus to meet the diversion goals and any other requirements as set forth in Section 8.12.100. 
C.  Failure to Pass a Quarterly Report Audit. The franchisee this to have a "satisfactory outcome" audit rating in two or more audits. 
D.  Failure to Provide Performance Bond, etc. The franchisee fails to provide insurance, performance bond or letter of credit or other failure as described in Section 8.12.210. 
E.  Sale, Transfer, Assignment. The franchisee transfers or assigns its stock, assets and/or the franchise without city approval; 
F.  Seizure, Attachment. Any service asset is seized, attached, or levied upon (other than a pre-judgment attachment) so as to substantially impair the franchisee's ability to timely and fully perform services, and which cannot be released, bonded, or otherwise lifted within forty-eight hours, excepting weekends and holidays; 
G.  Insolvency, Bankruptcy, Liquidation. The franchisee files a voluntary claim for debt relief under any applicable bankruptcy, insolvency, debtor relief, or other similar law now or hereafter in effect, or shall consent to the appointment of or taking of possession by a receiver, liquidation, assignee (other than as a part of a transfer of service assets no longer used to provide services or backup services), trustee (other than as security of an obligation under a deed of trust), custodian, sequestrator, or administrator (or similar official) of the franchisee for any part of the franchisee's operating assets or any substantial part of the franchisee's property, or shall make any general assignment for the benefit of the franchisee's creditors, or shall fail generally to pay the franchisee's debts as they become due or shall take any action in furtherance of any of the foregoing; 
A court having jurisdiction enters a decree or order for relief in respect of the franchise, in any involuntary case brought under any bankruptcy, insolvency, debtor relief, or similar law now or hereafter in effect, or the franchisee consents to or fails to oppose any such proceeding, or any such court enters a decree or order appointing a receiver, liquidation, assignee, custodian, trustee, sequestrator, or administrator (or similar official) of the franchisee or for any part of the franchisee's operating equipment or assets, or orders the conclusion or liquidation of the affairs of the franchisee. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.250 - Ownership and right to donate or sell recyclables. 
It is expressly understood that all solid waste, recyclables, and C&D debris collected pursuant to this chapter becomes the property of the person contracted or otherwise designated by the generator of the material to serve such location at the time the material is set out for collection. 
Nothing in this chapter shall limit the right of an individual person, organization, or other entity to donate, sell, or otherwise dispose of recyclables which are the property of such individual person, organization, or other entity, provided that any such disposal does not violate any provisions of the chapter, or applicable state or federal law. For such purposes, generators of recyclable materials may carry, convey or transport recyclables upon and through any street, alley or public place in the city. 
Nothing in this chapter precludes the city from using regular full-time employees to enforce the section. This authority is in addition to the authority granted to police and code enforcement officers. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit the right of the person permitted by this chapter to collect recyclables to bring a civil action against any person who violates the provisions of this section, nor shall a conviction for such violation exempt any person from a civil action brought by such person. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.260 - Solid waste and recycling—Receptacles. 
Solid waste receptacles shall be provided to each multiple-family residential, commercial and industrial premises located in the city. Recycling receptacles may be provided to multiple-family residential, commercial and industrial premises located in the city. All receptacles must be in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
A.  Solid waste and recycling receptacles for multiple-family residential premises which utilize curbside or alley collection services shall be of industry-standard type, of durable material and not weigh more than twenty pounds empty, nor more than seventy-five pounds loaded. 
B.  Solid waste and recycling receptacles for multiple-family residential premises which do not utilize curbside or alley collection services provided by the city and for commercial and industrial premises shall be industry-standard metal bins clearly marked with name and telephone number of the franchisee providing the service and clearly indicate materials to be stored in the container for collection. All bins must be watertight, have tight fitting lids, prevent the leakage of liquids, and be appropriate for the intended usage. 
C.  Other types of receptacles for multiple-family residential premises not using curbside or alley collection services may be utilized upon approval by the city if the city finds that the use of bins would constitute a hardship due to topographic features, lack of available space, or other good and sufficient cause, and upon compliance with other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
D.  All solid waste receptacles shall utilize tight fitting lids in accordance with industry standards. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.270 - Solid waste and recycling receptacles—Storage—Placement for collection. 
Solid waste and recycling receptacles shall be kept at all times upon private premises out of sight from the street, except when placed at designated locations for collection. 
A.  For all multiple-family residential premises which are served by an alley, solid waste and recycling receptacles shall be placed for collection on the premises, not to exceed five feet of the right-of-way line of such alley. 
B.  For all multiple-family residential premises which are served from the curb, solid waste and recycling receptacles shall be placed within the parkway, or within five feet of the curb or the edge of the pavement. 
C.  Bin-type solid waste and recycling receptacles shall not be placed, for collection or any other purpose, adjacent to any street or alley right-of-way. Such receptacles shall be located on private property, not in excess of one hundred feet from a street or alley. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.280 - Curb and alley collection procedures. 
The owners or tenants of multiple-family residential premises which utilize curbside or alley collection services, shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  Tree, shrub and vine trimmings larger than ten inches in diameter shall be cut into lengths of not more than four feet, and tied securely in bundles not exceeding twelve inches in diameter. 
B.  Crating shall be broken and bundled into lengths not exceeding four feet, and securely tied in bundles not exceeding twelve inches in diameter. 
C.  Cardboard containers and papers to be disposed of shall either be placed in a receptacle, or flattened and securely tied in bundles, not exceeding fifty pounds in weight. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.290 - Solid waste and recycling collection fees. 
A.  The charges for multiple-family residential, commercial or industrial services provided pursuant to this chapter shall be established by service agreement between the owner or his agent and a franchisee permitted by this chapter to do so. The charges shall be charged, billed and collected in the manner fixed in the service agreement. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.300 - Fees. 
A.  In consideration for the grant of the franchise, all franchisees must pay a franchise fee to the city in the amount prescribed by resolution of the city council in addition to other business license or other city fees. Such franchise fee shall not exceed the estimated reasonable costs of processing, evaluating, issuing and administering the franchise agreements, monitoring and auditing the performance of solid waste haulers, and enforcing the provisions of this chapter, including the costs of administering the program. The franchise fee may be a fixed amount for each franchisee, based on tonnage hauled, number of collection vehicles used by each franchisee in the city, or on any other basis the city council determines to be fair and reasonable. 
B.  The solid waste program tee is hereby fixed in the amount of ten percent of the gross revenues generated by its solid waste and C&D debris collection services provided within the city for the reporting quarter, and may be modified by resolution of the city council. Such fee shall not exceed the estimated reasonable costs of the city's solid waste reduction and recycling program including, but not limited to: developing and supporting the implementation of waste diversion programs, administration providing technical assistance to haulers and waste generators, conducting waste audits, preparing and supporting the implementation of public education and outreach programs, and studying and reporting concerning solid waste reduction and recycling. Any solid waste program fee funds remaining alter payment of current costs shall be a reserve against the city's potential liabilities, including CERCLA liability, arising out of the disposal of solid waste. The solid waste program fee may be a fixed amount for each franchisee, based on tonnage hauled, based upon gross revenues of the franchisee, or on any other basis the city council determines to be fair and reasonable. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.310 - Fees—Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to prevent any person who is the owner of any lot within the city zoned for single-family residential use, which is used for multiple-family, commercial, or industrial uses to arrange for the removal of his own solid waste, recyclables, green waste or C&D debris by agreement with a franchisee permitted by this chapter to do so, provided that if such owner does not file a letter prior to July 1, 2004, and July 1st thereafter in succeeding fiscal years, in the form prescribed by the director of finance, with the officer, such owner shall be responsible for the charges imposed by this chapter, and such charges are non-refundable, whether or not the city's services are actually utilized by such owner. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.320 - Protection of trade secrets. 
A.  Upon the request of any person furnishing any report, application, or other document required by this chapter, the city shall not make available for inspection by the public any portion of the report, application, or other document that contains a trade secret, as defined in subdivision (d) of Section 3426.1 of the California Civil Code, in accord with subsections C and D of this section. 
B.  Any person furnishing information, as described in subsection 8.12.320(A), to the city pursuant to this chapter shall, at the time of submission, identify all information which the person believes is a trade secret, by stamping that portion of the report, application, or other document with the words "trade secret" in red ink. Any information not identified by the person as a trade secret shall be made available to the public, unless exempted from disclosure by another provision of law. 
C.  With regard to information that has been identified as a trade secret pursuant to subsection 8.12.320(b), the city, upon its own initiative, or upon receipt of a request for public information, shall determine whether any or all of the information has been properly identified as a trade secret. 
1.  If the city determines that the information is not a trade secret, the city shall notify the person who furnished the information by certified mail at the address of that person shown in city records. 
2.  The person who furnished the information shall have thirty days from the date of receipt of the notice required by subsection 8.12.320(C)(1) to provide the city with a complete justification and statement of the grounds on which the trade secret privilege is claimed. The justification and statement shall be submitted to the city by certified mail. 
3.  The city shall determine whether the information is protected as a trade secret within fifteen days from the date of receipt of the justification and statement or, if no justification and statement is filed, within forty-five days from the date of the notice required by subsection 8.12.320(C)(1). The city shall notify the person who furnished the information and any party who has requested the information of that determination by certified mail. If the city has determined that the information is not protected as a trade secret, this final notice shall also specify a date, not sooner than fifteen days from the date of the date of mailing of the final notice, when the information shall be available to the public. 
4.  Should any person bring action against the city claiming that any information furnished pursuant to this section was improperly designated and determined to be a trade secret, the person furnishing such information shall indemnify and defend the city in such action. 
D.  Except as provided in subsection 8.12.320(C), the city may release information submitted and designated as a trade secret only to other following public agencies for enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the information or for use in making reports. 
E.  For the purpose of implementing this section, the disclosure of information shall be consistent with Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 6250) of Division 7 of Title 1 of the California Government Code. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.330 - Notice. 
Quarterly reports, notices, and other submittals required of the franchisee and by this chapter shall be transmitted via certified mail to the following address: 
Public Works Manager 
City of Montebello 
311 S. Greenwood 
Montebello, CA 90640 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.12.340 - Excuse from performance 
A.  A franchisee or the city may be excused from performing their obligations pursuant to this chapter in the event they are prevented from so performing by uncontrollable circumstances, as defined in Section 8.12.010, beyond the control of, and not the fault of, the party claiming excuse from performance. 
B.  A franchisee claiming excuse from performance shall, within two days after the franchisee has notice of such cause, give the city notice of the facts constituting such cause, efforts undertaken by the franchisee to attempt to perform its obligations under this chapter, the proposed timelines for such performance, and asserting its claim to excuse under this section. The director of public works or his or her designee shall consider such notice from the franchisee, and at the director of public works or designee's sole discretion, approve, conditionally approve, or deny such notice. 
(Ord. 2267 § 1 (part), 2003)  
Exhibit A 
Commercial Solid Waste Ordinance 
Exhibit A 
a. 	Failure to submit a Quarter Report within 45 days of the end of the quarter. 	$500.00 per incident 
b. 	Failure to submit a portion of a Quarter Report within 45 days of the end of the quarter. 	$500.00 per incident 
c. 	Failure to pass the City collection vehicle inspection. 	$100.00 per vehicle per inspection (includes re-inspection) 
d. 	Failure to license and pay a fee for a collection vehicle used for more than 30 days in the City. 	$250.00 per incident 
e. 	Failure to display Licensee name and phone number on collection vehicles. 	$200.00 per incident per day 
f. 	Failure to pass a Quarter Report audit. 	$200.00 per incident 
g. 	Failure to truthfully report Montebello disposal tonnage at a disposal site. 	$500.00 per quarter per disposal site 
h. 	Submitting falsified third party diversion documentation. 	$500.00 per incident 
i. 	Hauling illegally within the City boundaries. 	$1000.00 per incident 
  
Chapter 8.16 - NUISANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2365, § 5, adopted Jan. 28, 2015, amended ch. 8.16 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 8.16, §§ 8.6.010—8.16.180, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from prior code §§ 3540—3540.16, 5152; Ord. 2064, § 1, adopted 1992; Ord. 2103, §§ 1—17, adopted 1994; Ord. 2139, §§ 1—8, adopted 1996; Ord. 2285, § 4, adopted 2005. 
 
8.16.010 - Designated. 
The following acts and conditions, when caused, permitted to exist or maintained upon any lot, piece or parcel of land within the city by any person or entity owning, leasing, occupying or having charge thereof are defined as and declared to be public nuisances. 
A.  Property: 
1.  Property, the topography or configuration of which, whether a natural state or as a result of grading operations, causes or will cause erosion, subsidence or surface water runoff problems which will or may be injurious to the public health, safety and welfare or damaging to adjacent or nearby properties; 
2.  a.  Overgrown vegetation, 
b.  Dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees, 
c.  Weeds, 
d.  Other vegetation likely to harbor rats, vermin or nuisances or which may be a fire hazard; 
3.  Parking or allowing to stand any abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles. "Vehicle" as used in this chapter shall be defined as set forth in Section 670 of the Vehicle Code of the state of California. Any vehicle which is abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative, or any part thereof, located on any private property, or public property, excluding highways, in the city is declared to be a public nuisance. For the purposes of this definition, the term "vehicle" shall not include: 
a.  A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner, where the same is not visible from the street or other public or private property, and/or 
b.  A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in conjunction with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard; provided, however, that this latter exception shall not authorize the maintenance of any premises contrary to the provisions of this code; 
4.  Storing, discharging, holding, handling, maintaining, using or otherwise dealing with hazardous substances, as defined by applicable state or federal laws or regulations: 
a.  In violation of federal, state or local laws or regulations, 
b.  In such a manner to affect in any way air or water quality, or 
c.  In such a manner as to create a risk of accidental release of the substances, which release might adversely affect the health or safety of persons, damage property, or adversely affect air or water quality; 
5.  Keeping any animal, reptile, or insects in such a manner as to pose a threat, disturbance, danger or menace to persons or property of another or in a public right-of-way; 
6.  Storage of any of the following in view of the public or any other property: 
a.  Debris, rubbish and trash, 
b.  Broken or discarded household furnishings, appliances, boxes and cartons, lawn maintenance equipment, play equipment, toys and similar materials, 
c.  Discarded or broken building materials, 
d.  Discarded, wrecked or inoperable appliances, equipment, machines, tools and similar materials, 
e.  Materials or items of any nature stored on rooftops when visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring property; 
7.  Attractive nuisances (those objects which, by their nature, may attract children or other curious individuals) including, but not limited to, unprotected and/or hazardous pools, ponds, iceboxes, refrigerators or excavations; 
8.  Clothes lines in front yard or areas other than on the ground floor level and within the area to the rear of the rearmost main building; 
9.  a.  Garbage or trash cans or containers stored in front or side yards and visible from public streets, or 
b.  Garbage or trash cans or containers which cause offensive odors to neighbors; 
10.  Keeping, operating or maintaining any machinery which by reason of its dust, exhaust or fumes creates a health or safety hazard; 
11.  Allowing any unlawful condition or activity to exist on any property; 
12.  Permitting sewage or grease to overflow from clogged sewer lines and/or building drain lines; 
13.  Conducting an activity or event without an entertainment permit that requires an entertainment permit pursuant to this code; 
14.  Failing to satisfy or violating any condition associated with or imposed in connection with an approval relating to land, while making use of the special entitlement granted by such permit, including, but not limited to, variances, conditional use permits, subdivisions and site plans. 
15.  a.  Maintenance of premises in such manner as to constitute a danger to public health as defined by sections 8.04.010 et seq. 
b.  "Premises" as used herein, means and includes, property, landscaping, planting trees, bushes, fences, buildings, structures, improvements, fixtures and the outside storage of personal property, equipment or supplies; 
B.  Structures or buildings, both permanent and temporary, or other lot improvements, which are subject to any of the following conditions: 
1.  Are structurally or otherwise unsafe, either entirely or in part; 
2.  Constitute a fire hazard; 
3.  Have faulty weather protection including, but not limited to, crumbling, cracked, missing, broken, or loose exterior plaster or other siding, roofs, foundations or floors (including lack of paint or other protective finish), broken or missing windows, doors or window screens; 
4.  A building or structure which is not completed within a reasonable time or for which the permit for such construction has expired; 
5.  Unoccupied or abandoned buildings which have been left unlocked or otherwise open or unsecured from intrusion by persons, animals or the elements; 
6.  Fences or walls which violate zoning regulations regarding height, or which are in a hazardous condition, or which are in disrepair, or which hinder free access to public sidewalks; 
7.  Signs, both on-site and off-site (billboards), which are otherwise lawful but maintained in a deteriorated condition; 
8.  A building or structure that is marked or defaced with spray paint, dye or like substance in a manner commonly described as graffiti, for an unreasonable period of time; 
9.  Any unlawful condition or activity in a structure; 
10.  Maintenance of premises so out of harmony or conformity with the maintenance standards of adjacent properties as to cause diminution of the enjoyment, use or property values of such adjacent properties; 
11.  Property maintained (in relation to others) so as to establish a prevalence of depreciated values, impaired investments, and social and economic maladjustments to such an extent that the capacity to pay taxes is reduced and tax receipts from such particular area are inadequate for the cost of public services rendered therein. 
C.  Any condition or use existing on any property, building or structure that violates this code, provisions of state or federal law that may be enforced by the city, or any rules, regulations, permits or approvals issued by or applicable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 5, 1-28-2015)  
8.16.020 - Duty to abate and prevent public nuisances. 
It shall be and remain the duty of the owner or any person or entity in control of any property within the city to prevent and abate public nuisances on such property. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 5, 1-28-2015)  
8.16.030 - Investigation and abatement. 
City staff is authorized to investigate any public nuisance, the property on which it is located, the identity of the owner or person or entity in control of such property, or the identity of the person or entity, or agent thereof, and cause such nuisance to be abated. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 5, 1-28-2015)  
8.16.040 - Notice to abate. 
A.  Upon the determination that a public nuisance exists on a property, the city manager or designee is authorized to issue a written notice to abate. Any person or entity that permits, allows, creates, maintains, or authorizes the creation or maintenance of any public nuisance shall be notified of said public nuisance by the city and shall be given a reasonable time to abate said public nuisance. Such notice shall be given in substantially the following form, although failure to follow such form shall not invalidate the city's notice or enforcement action: 
"NOTICE AND DEMAND FOR ABATEMENT 
Please take notice that the City of Montebello has determined the following public nuisance(s) exists at (address or property description) in violation of (citation): (description of public nuisance). The City requires you to abate the public nuisance. 
If you fail to completely abate said public nuisance within (time) calendar days from the date of this notice, the City shall proceed to take enforcement action or cause abatement of said public nuisance(s) and require you to pay the costs of the abatement. The City may cause such costs to become a lien or special assessment against your property, and will recover from you the costs for recording and collecting the same. 
This notice is given without prejudice to any other right or remedy of the City." 
B.  A similar notice shall be sent to the owner(s) of any vehicle described in section 8.16.010(A)(3) and as shown on the last registration of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notice shall describe the vehicle involved, including but not limited to the identification number and license number thereof, if known, and the property wherein the same is located. 
C.  The recipient of the notice to abate, or the owner of the property on which the nuisance is located, may request a hearing on the notice to abate by filing a written request with the city manager or designee within ten days of the date of the notice to abate. The appeal shall state the reasons why the notice to abate is incorrect. 
D.  If a request for hearing is timely and properly filed, a hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Section 8.16.130 of this chapter. 
E.  If a request for hearing is not timely and properly filed, or if a hearing is held and a nuisance is confirmed, city personnel or contractors may enter the property, subject to requirements of law, to abate the nuisance. 
F.  Failure to timely and properly appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 5, 1-28-2015)  
8.16.050 - Service of notice. 
Any notice issued pursuant to this chapter may be served in any of the following manners: 
A.  By personal service; or 
B.  By certified mail to the last known address or address as shown on the County's assessor's most recent tax rolls. Service shall be completed at the time of deposit in the U.S. mail. 
C.  Where the public nuisance is located on or abutting the public right-of-way, by posting at a conspicuous place on the property where the public nuisance is located for a period of ten calendar days and, if feasible, by insertion of an advertisement at least once a week for a period of two weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 5, 1-28-2015)  
8.16.060 - Voluntary abatement of nuisances by property owner or tenant. 
The owner or tenant of any building, structure or property found to be a nuisance under the provisions of this chapter may abate the nuisance at any time within the abatement period by rehabilitation, repair, removal or demolition, subject to obtaining any required permits or approvals from the city. The planning department shall be advised of the abatement and may inspect the premises to ensure that the nuisance has in fact been completely abated. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 5, 1-28-2015)  
8.16.070 - Failure to voluntarily abate a nuisance. 
If a nuisance is not properly and completely abated within the period established by notice to abate, the city shall be entitled to take any enforcement action allowed by law to cause abatement of said nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 5, 1-28-2015)  
8.16.080 - Procedures for abatement of imminently dangerous public nuisances. 
Whenever the city manager or designee determines that a public nuisance is so imminently dangerous to life or property that such condition must be immediately removed, abated, repaired or isolated, the following procedures may be followed: 
A.  Notice. The city manager or designee shall attempt to make contact through a personal interview, or by telephone, with the owner of the property or the person, if any, occupying or otherwise in real or apparent charge and control thereof. In the event such contact is made, the city manager or designee shall notify such person, or persons, of the danger involved and require that such condition be immediately removed, repaired or isolated so as to preclude harm to any person or property. 
B.  Abatement. If the city manager or designee is unable to make contact as hereinabove noted, or if the appropriate persons after notification do not take action within such time as may be specified, then the city manager or designee may take all actions deemed necessary to remove, repair or isolate such imminently dangerous condition or conditions, with the use of city forces or a contractor engaged by the city. 
C.  Costs. The city manager shall keep an itemized account of the costs incurred by the city. All abatement costs incurred by the city may be recovered pursuant to procedures set forth in this chapter. 
D.  Hearing. After the city conducts an abatement of an imminently dangerous public nuisance, the city shall serve on the occupant of the property and the property owner, if different, a notice of said emergency abatement and an opportunity to request a hearing on the same. Service of the notice shall be in accordance with Section 8.16.050, the appeal and hearing procedures shall be governed by Section 8.16.130. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 5, 1-28-2015)  
8.16.090 - Abatement by property owners of certain nuisances. 
A.  Open or Vacant Lots. No person or entity owning or having charge, control or occupancy of any lot, parcel or tract of land, improved or unimproved, shall permit to be or to remain upon said lots, any litter consisting of garbage, refuse, or refuse as defined in Section 8.12.010, and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
B.  Sidewalk and Parkway. No person or entity, owning or having charge or control or occupancy of any lot or private premises, shall allow weeds or overgrown grass to accumulate or grow upon a portion of the lot that is visible and open to the public or on any abutting paved sidewalk area above its established grade or upon any part of the parkway area; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to require the removal from the lot or the borders of any sidewalk of any ornamental plant, lawn, shrub or trees of reasonable growth, provided that the same are not, in the opinion of the city officer, obstructions to the free use of such sidewalk by pedestrians. 
C.  Sweeping Litter Into Gutters Prohibited. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, or other public place, the accumulation of litter from any building or lot, or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter, weeds and graffiti. 
D.  The city manager or designee is authorized and empowered to notify the owner, or person shown as the owner upon the last equalized tax assessment roll, of any open or vacant private property, or the agent of such owner, or the person having control or occupancy of said property, to properly dispose of litter, weeds, overgrown grass, or graffiti located on such owner's property. Such notice shall be served in accordance with Section 8.16.050. 
E.  Action Upon Noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner, person or agent so notified to properly dispose of such litter, weeds or graffiti within the time required by the notice, the city manager or designee is authorized and empowered to order the disposing of such litter, weeds, overgrown grass, or graffiti by the city. Thereafter, proceedings for the collection of the cost thereof shall be in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 5, 1-28-2015)  
8.16.100 - Alternate actions. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city from commencing any appropriate criminal, civil, administrative or other action to abate a nuisance in addition to, as an alternative to, or in conjunction with the proceedings set forth in this chapter. These remedies are intended to be cumulative of each other. 
B.  If the city commences any action to abate a nuisance, the city may recover its costs and attorney's fees as part of the judgment which may be recorded as a lien or special assessment against the property and constitute a lien thereon. This section grants specific authority to any court of competent jurisdiction to grant an award of costs pursuant to law, and award attorney's fees pursuant to Section 1.12.050 of this code. Failure of a court to award attorney's fees as part of a judgment or enforcement action does not preclude the city from placing a lien or assessing costs against the property pursuant to procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 5, 1-28-2015)  
8.16.110 - Civil penalty. 
In addition to any other penalty and enforcement authority provided in this code, every violation of a provision of this code shall be subject to a civil penalty not exceeding one thousand dollars. A penalty may be imposed for each violation of this code and each day the violation exists. Such penalty may be imposed against any person or entity causing, permitting, allowing, or maintaining any violations of this code, and may be recovered in any civil action to enforce any provision of this code, adopted code or state law that the city is authorized to enforce. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 5, 1-28-2015)  
8.16.120 - Abatement costs. 
A.  The city manager or designee shall keep an itemized accounting of all costs incurred by the city to abate a public nuisance. The term "costs" includes, but is not limited to, those incurred in: 
1.  Preparation of notices, specifications and contracts; 
2.  Inspection and other staff enforcement activities; 
3.  Printings and mailings; 
4.  Recordings and court costs; 
5.  Hearings; 
6.  Actual costs of abatement; and 
7.  Attorney's fees, whether through civil, criminal or administrative action, or otherwise. 
The term "abate" or "abatement," for purposes of this code, includes, but is not limited to, any action by the city to cause or compel compliance with any provision of this code, adopted codes, or applicable state or federal laws. This specifically includes any civil or criminal action, inspection or abatement warrant, appeal from a city notice or enforcement action, any public nuisance hearing, administrative citation or appeal(s) therefrom, revocation of permits by the city, or cost recovery hearing. 
B.  Costs shall begin to accrue at the time the city first receives a complaint regarding a nuisance and may be recovered by the city even if the nuisance is voluntarily abated, in which case the city shall be deemed the prevailing party. 
C.  Costs shall be assessed at the conclusion of the abatement; provided, however, if an abatement by any method takes more than six months, costs may be assessed at any time after six months, but not more than two times a year. 
D.  The city manager or designee shall serve the person who or entity that created, caused, permitted or maintained the public nuisance, as well as the record property owner, with a statement of costs of abatement. 
E.  The person receiving the statement of costs of abatement, and the owner of the property on which the nuisance existed, if different, may file with the city manager or designee an appeal of said costs within ten calendar days of the date of the statement. Failure to timely appeal shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. 
F.  Service of the statement of costs of abatement shall be made by sending a copy of the statement of costs via certified mail to the property owner and, if different, to the address of the person who or entity that created, caused, permitted or maintained the public nuisance. Notice shall be deemed complete regardless of actual receipt. 
G.  Payment of the costs of abatement shall be due on the date of the statement of costs, unless timely and properly appealed, in which case said costs shall be stayed until the hearing officer's written decision is made, but shall not be stayed pending any subsequent appeal. 
H.  Costs shall become a debt against the property upon which the nuisance existed, as well as a debt in favor of the city, and jointly and severally, against each person who or entity that created, caused, permitted or maintained the public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 5, 1-28-2015)  
8.16.130 - Appeal of abatement costs—Hearing procedures. 
A.  If, pursuant to Section 8.16.120, an appeal is timely and properly filed, the city manager or designee shall set a hearing not more than thirty business days from receipt of the written appeal. The failure to file a timely appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. In such case, the statement of abatement costs shall be deemed final. 
B.  The city manager or designee shall notify the party of the date of hearing pursuant to Section 8.16.050. 
C.  At the hearing, a hearing officer designated by the city shall consider all relevant evidence, including but not limited to applicable staff reports and any objections or protests raised by any of the persons liable to be assessed for abatement costs. Thereupon, the hearing officer shall approve or modify the statement of abatement costs, and such decision shall be final and conclusive, except for judicial review. The rules of evidence shall not apply to this hearing. 
D.  The hearing officer shall, within ten days of the hearing, send a copy of the written notice of decision pursuant to Section 8.16.050. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 5, 1-28-2015)  
8.16.140 - Collection of abatement costs. 
The city may collect the debts owed pursuant to this chapter by any means authorized by law, including but not limited to, the procedures set forth in this chapter, or filing an action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 5, 1-28-2015)  
8.16.150 - Nuisance abatement lien. 
A.  If abatement costs are not paid when due, the city shall notify the owner of record of the parcel of land on which the nuisance is maintained, based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, that a nuisance abatement lien will be recorded. The notice shall specify the amount of the lien, the name of the city, the date of the abatement order, if any, the street address, the legal description and the assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel. The notice shall be served in accordance with Section 8.16.050. 
B.  After notice is given in accordance with this section, the notice of lien shall be recorded in the Los Angeles County recorder's office and shall thereafter constitute a lien on the real property for the expense of the abatement, the related administrative costs and any applicable interest charges. 
C.  In the event the lien is discharged, released or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the same information as the notice of lien shall be recorded in the Los Angeles County recorder's office. 
D.  The city may foreclose on the nuisance abatement lien by an action for a money judgment. 
E.  Such notice of lien for recordation shall be in the form substantially as follows: 
NOTICE OF LIEN 
(Claim of City of Montebello) 
Pursuant to Chapter 8.16 of the Montebello Municipal Code, the City manager of the City of Montebello, on or about the _____ day of _______, 20___, took abatement action in order to abate a public nuisance thereon. The City has assessed the cost of such abatement upon said real property and the same has not been fully paid. The 
City of Montebello hereby claims a lien in the amount of $_______ and the same shall be a lien upon said real property until the same has been paid in full and discharged of record. 
The real property hereinbefore mentioned, and upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain parcel of land lying and being in the City of Montebello, County of Los Angeles, State of California, and particularly described as follows: 
(DESCRIPTION) 
DATED: This _____ day of _______, 20___. 
___________ 
City manager 
City of Montebello, California 
(ACKNOWLEDGEMENT) 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 5, 1-28-2015)  
8.16.160 - Assessment of abatement costs against property. 
A.  As an alternative to the procedure set forth in Section 8.16.150, the city may use a special assessment procedure to collect the abatement costs. The total cost for abating such nuisance, shall constitute a special assessment against the respective parcel of land to which it relates, and upon recordation in the office of the county recorder of a notice of lien, as so made and confirmed, shall constitute a lien on said property for the amount of such assessment. 
B.  The city shall notify the owner of record of the parcel of land on which the nuisance is maintained, based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, of the special assessment. The notice shall specify the amount of the assessment, the name of the city, the date of the abatement order, if any, the street address, the legal description and the assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the assessment is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel. The notice shall specify that the property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for the unpaid delinquent assessments. The notice shall be served by certified mail to the property owner, if the owner's identity can be determined from the county assessor's or county recorder's records. 
C.  After recordation, a copy may be turned over to the tax collector for the county, whereupon it shall be the duty of the tax collector to add the amounts of the respective assessments to the next regular tax bills levied against said respective lots and parcels of land for municipal purposes, and thereafter said amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. 
D.  After such recordation, such lien may be foreclosed in the manner and means provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 5, 1-28-2015)  
8.16.170 - Owner's personal obligation. 
A.  The confirmed cost of abatement of a nuisance upon any lot or parcel of land shall constitute a personal obligation of the property owner and the city is authorized to commence an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to collect the cost of abatement from the property owner. 
B.  Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a condition that may be abated in accordance with this chapter, except for conditions abated pursuant to Section 17980 of the California Health and Safety Code, the court may order the owner to pay treble the costs of the abatement. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 5, 1-28-2015)  
8.16.180 - Additional violations. 
A.  Any occupant or lessee in possession of any such building or structure who fails to vacate the building or structure in accordance with a notice given as provided in this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
B.  Any person who removes any notice or order posted pursuant in this chapter without authorization from the city is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
C.  Any person who obstructs, impedes or interferes with any representative of the city in carrying out a lawful inspection, abatement or enforcement activity pursuant to this code, adopted code or state law, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 5, 1-28-2015)  
Chapter 8.20 - FIREWORKS* 
Sections: 
 
8.20.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall be defined as follows: 
"Dangerous fireworks" shall be defined as set forth in Section 12505 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California. 
"Fireworks" shall be defined as set forth in Section 12511 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California. 
"Fireworks stands" means temporary structures to be used exclusively for the sale of safe and sane fireworks, operated by qualified organizations having a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
"Organization" means any nonprofit organization, corporation, or association, organized primarily for veteran, patriotic, welfare, civic betterment, religious or charitable purposes, which has its principal and permanent meeting place, office, or place of worship within the city, and shall have been organized and established in the city for a minimum period of one year continuously, preceding the filing of an application for permit under this chapter. 
"Permit" means a validly issued permit allowing a qualified organization to conduct the sale, to the members of the general public, of safe and sane fireworks. 
"Safe and sane fireworks" shall be defined as set forth in Section 12529 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2006)  
8.20.020 - Sale—Permit—Required. 
No person shall sell or offer to sell any safe and sane fireworks, without first obtaining a permit from the city, in the manner hereinafter set forth in this chapter. It is unlawful for any person to store any fireworks or to offer for sale, display for sale, or sell at retail any fireworks within the city without a valid permit. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2006)  
8.20.030 - Sale—Permit—Application. 
Applications for permits shall be accepted only from qualified organizations, as defined in Section 8.20.010 of this chapter, and shall be in writing, upon the form prescribed by the license collector of the city. The application shall be submitted to the license collector between May 1st—15th of any calendar year. The application shall contain the following information: 
A.  The exact location of the stand, as proposed, together with the written permission of the owner of the property, if the property is not owned by the applicant; 
B.  The name and location of the principal place of business of the organization and the principals thereof; and 
C.  Such other information as may be required by the license collector. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2006)  
8.20.040 - Eligibility for permit violators. 
Applicants issued a citation for violations of this chapter or any fireworks-related code provision in the previous five years shall not be eligible to apply or receive a fireworks sales permit. Unless a citation is contested it is presumed to be valid for purposes of this section and triggers the five-year ban from eligibility. If a citation is contested and found to be valid, the finding triggers the five-year ban from eligibility. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2006)  
8.20.050 - Number of permits—Fees. 
Each application shall be accompanied by a fee, in the form of a cashier's check or cash, in the amount established by separate resolution of the city council which amount may be adjusted by further resolution of the city council. Not more than twenty permits for fireworks stands shall be issued at any one time, nor shall more than one such permits be issued to any one organization. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2006)  
8.20.060 - Insurance. 
Prior to the issuance of any fireworks stand permit, the applicant shall file with the license collector evidence of the following type of insurance: 
The amount of the insurance shall be one million dollars which amount may be adjusted by resolution of the city council. 
1.  Public liability insurance, combined single limit, bodily injury property damage, each occurrence; 
2.  Premises/operation liability; 
3.  Contractual liability; and 
4.  Products liability, including completed operations liability. 
Such policy or policies shall name the city of Montebello, its officers and employees as additional insured. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2006)  
8.20.070 - Permit applications—Processing. 
All applications for fireworks stands and public fireworks displays shall be subject to an on-site inspection to determine compliance with the Montebello Municipal Code as prescribed herein. All applications shall be referred to the city manager for approval, conditional approval or denial. The city manager shall deny any fireworks stand permit if it is found that the public safety is, or would be, jeopardized by the issuance thereof. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2006)  
8.20.080 - Permit applications filed after the first day of May. 
Any application filed after the first day of May of any calendar year shall be processed for inspection by the city to determine compliance with the Montebello Municipal Code. After the initial inspection, the application shall be referred to the city council for approval, conditional approval or denial, unless approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2006)  
8.20.090 - Appeals. 
A.  Any person aggrieved by any decision, determination or action taken by the city manager in connection with a permit, shall have the right to immediate appeal, within ten consecutive calendar days after the service of a written notice of the city's action. Such appeal shall be in writing, briefly stating therein the basis for such appeal, and shall be filed with the city clerk. Upon receipt of an appeal, the city clerk shall notify the city manager, and shall immediately set the matter on the city council agenda for its next regularly scheduled meeting. The city clerk shall give the party appealing, and any other party requesting same, at least five consecutive calendar days' written notice of the time and place of such meeting. 
B.  The applicant or appellant shall have the burden of proof to show that the action of the city manager was unreasonable, arbitrary, and capricious or in excess of his or her authority. At the time of hearing, the applicant shall have the right to present any relevant written or oral evidence. 
C.  The city council shall consider such evidence together with appropriate staff reports and other information deemed by it to be relevant, and shall determine whether the decision appealed from was justified. The determination of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2006)  
8.20.100 - Operation of stand. 
It is unlawful for any person or group to operate a fireworks stand without complying with all of the following: 
A.  No person other than the permittee organization shall operate the stand for which the permit is issued or share or otherwise participate in the profits of the operation of the stand. 
B.  Fireworks may only be sold at approved stands. 
C.  No person other than the individuals who are adult members of the permittee organization shall participate in the operation of the stand. If the permittee organization members are physically incapable of carrying on sales activities, such activities may be performed by volunteers approved by the fire chief. 
D.  All persons engaged in the selling of fireworks shall be eighteen years or older. 
E.  No fireworks shall be sold to any person under the age of eighteen years. 
F.  No person shall be paid any compensation for selling or otherwise participating in the sale of fireworks at such stands, except the hiring of a night watchman. 
G.  No person shall be allowed in the interior of the stands, except those directly employed in the sales of fireworks or those conducting bona fide business within. 
H.  All stands shall be erected according to the provisions of all applicable city codes and laws, except that all such stands shall be erected under the supervision of the building inspector, who shall require that the stand be constructed out of metal or synthetic materials of demonstrated low flammability in a manner which will reasonably insure the safety of the attendants and patrons thereof and shall be approved by the fire marshall. All stands will be inspected by the fire department and/or the building department and shall be approved before any sales transactions may occur. 
I.  No stand shall have a floor area in excess of two hundred fifty square feet. 
J.  Each stand shall have at least two usable exits. Each stand in excess of forty square feet in length shall have at least three usable exits. In no case shall the distance between the exits exceed twenty feet. 
K.  Fireworks stands shall be provided with two fire extinguishers of a type and size approved by the fire chief. 
L.  All weeds and combustible materials shall be cleared from the location of the stand, including a distance of at least twenty-five feet surrounding the stand. 
M.  "NO SMOKING" signs shall be prominently displayed on the exterior of each fireworks stand. 
N.  Each stand shall have an adult in charge thereof, at all times when the stand is open for the sale of fireworks. 
O.  Fireworks shall not be sold prior to ten a.m. on the first day of July, and such sales shall cease at eight p.m. on the fourth day of July each calendar year. The starting date may be changed only at the discretion of the fire chief who shall be permitted to authorize sales commencing not earlier than ten a.m. on June 28th. 
P.  Unless the fire chief permits sales on June 28th pursuant to this section, the sale of fireworks shall only be allowed between the hours of ten a.m. and ten p.m. on July 1st, 2nd, and 3rd, and ten a.m. and eight p.m. on July 4th. 
Q.  All unsold stock and accompanying litter shall be removed from the stand and from the city limits by twelve noon on the fifth day of July of each calendar year. 
R.  Each fireworks stand shall be removed from its temporary location not later than twelve noon on the eleventh day of July of each calendar year, and all accompanying litter shall be cleared from the location by the time and date. 
S.  To ensure compliance with subsections Q and R of this section, prior to the issuance of any permit, the applicant shall deposit a cashier's check, or cash, with the license collector in an amount established by resolution of the city council, which amount may be further adjusted by resolution of the city council. Such deposit shall be refunded upon such compliance. 
T.  Each fireworks stand shall provide temporary sanitary facilities or obtain permission to use either private or public facilities during the days and hours that fireworks sales are permitted. Proof of sanitation facilities shall be documented in written form. 
U.  The use of portable signs is prohibited either on-site or off-site. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2006)  
8.20.110 - Approval of location of sales stands. 
Prior to the installation of any stand for which a permit has been requested, the chief of police and/or the fire marshall shall have the authority to disapprove the location if, in his/her opinion, a traffic or fire hazard will be created. Further, the city planner shall have the authority to disapprove if the location is in conflict with any zoning provision of the city's code. 
The following location restrictions shall also apply: 
A.  No stand shall be located within twenty-five feet of any building or within one hundred feet of any gasoline service station, or other use which involves the use or storage of any flammable liquid or material. 
B.  Fireworks stands shall be located not less than five hundred feet apart. This distance requirement may be waived if the stands are located on opposite sides of major arterial highways. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2006)  
8.20.120 - Smoking near stands. 
No person shall light or cause to be lighted, or permit to be lighted, any fireworks or other combustible material, nor shall any person smoke within such stand or other places of sale or within twenty-five feet thereof. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2006)  
8.20.130 - Dangerous fireworks prohibited. 
No person shall sell, offer to sell, or have in his or her possession, any dangerous fireworks within the city. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2006)  
8.20.140 - Fireworks—Time restrictions. 
"Fireworks" as the word is defined in the State Fireworks Law shall only be discharged within the city boundaries between twelve noon and ten p.m. on July 4th. The provisions of this section shall not prevent the use of "safe and sane fireworks," as defined in such law during the hours specified by this section. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2006)  
8.20.150 - Discharging—Minimum distance from structures. 
No person shall discharge any firework permitted in this chapter within ten feet of any building, structure or place of habitation. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2006)  
8.20.160 - Use. 
The discharge of "safe and sane" fireworks shall be conducted in the presence of a responsible adult (minimum age eighteen). Possession of any fireworks by anyone under the age of eighteen shall be a violation of this code. The transfer or sale of fireworks from unlicensed or nonauthorized vendors is strictly prohibited. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2006)  
8.20.170 - Misuse. 
A.  Anyone found in possession or to be discharging fireworks deemed dangerous as defined in Section 12505 of the California Health and Safety Code shall be in violation of this code. 
B.  Anyone found in possession or discharging altered "safe and sane" fireworks, as defined in Section 12529 of the California Health and Safety Code, in a manner contrary to their intended use within the city shall be in violation of this code. 
C.  Any fireworks in violation of subsection A or B of this section shall be confiscated and properly disposed of by the fire department. The fire department is authorized to recover costs associated with the disposal of the confiscated contraband by any legal means. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2006)  
8.20.180 - Violations—Administrative fines. 
In addition to other penalties that may be imposed by the city pursuant to Chapter 1.12 of this code, violations of this chapter shall also be subject to administrative fines pursuant to Chapter 1.14 of this code. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2006)  
Chapter 8.24 - BURGLAR ALARMS 
Sections: 
 
8.24.010 - Title. 
This chapter may be known as the "burglary and robbery alarm permit ordinance." 
(Prior code § 8150)  
8.24.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth regulations governing burglary and robbery alarm systems, and alarm company operators within the city, require permits therefor, establish fees, and provide for punishment of violations of provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8151)  
8.24.030 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be construed herein as set forth in this section, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
"Alarm company operator" means any person required to be licensed as such by the Alarm Company Act of the state of California, as amended. 
"Alarm subscriber" means a person who owns, leases, rents, uses or makes available for use by his or her agents, employees, representatives or family, any alarm system. 
"Alarm system" means an assembly of equipment and devices arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which the police are expected to respond. 
"Applicant" means a person, firm or corporation who, or which files an application for a new, renewal or reinstated permit as provided in this chapter. 
"Audible alarm" means an alarm system which generates an audible sound on the premises when it is actuated. 
"City" means city of Montebello. 
"Day" means calendar day. 
"Direct-dial service" means an alarm system which is connected to a telephone line and which, upon activation, automatically transmits a message or signal over the telephone lines. 
"False alarm" means an alarm signal activated by causes other than the hazard which the alarm system is arranged to detect. 
"Finance department" means the finance department of the city of Montebello. 
"Nonemergency response status" means that category in which an alarm is placed as a result of permit revocation, whereas any subsequent activations shall be reduced to the lowest response status of the police department's calls for service. This condition shall remain until the false alarm problem has been resolved. 
"Notice" means written notice, given by personal service upon the addressee, or given by the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his last known address. Service of such notice shall be effective upon the completion of personal service, or upon deposit of the notice in the United States mail. 
"Permittee" means any person who shall be granted a permit as provided herein, and it agents and representatives. 
"Person" means natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation. 
"Police chief" means the police chief of the city of Montebello. 
"Police department" means the police department of the city of Montebello. 
"Proprietor alarm" means an alarm which is not serviced by an alarm company operator. 
"Residence" means the premises occupied by a person or persons as a regular place of abode. 
"Subscriber" means any person who purchases, leases, contracts for or otherwise obtains an alarm system or for the servicing maintenance of an alarm system from an alarm business. 
(Prior code § 8152)  
8.24.040 - Applicability. 
Any person who, on the effective date of this chapter, possesses, has installed, or uses an alarm system which requires a permit under the provisions thereof, shall apply for a permit as provided herein within ninety days after the effective date of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8155)  
8.24.050 - Exemptions of automobile alarms. 
The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to audible alarms affixed to automobiles. 
(Prior code § 8156)  
8.24.060 - Exemptions of governmental agencies. 
The United States Government, the state of California, counties, municipal corporations, departments thereof and other governmental entities are exempt in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8167)  
8.24.070 - Registration of alarm company operators. 
No person shall engage in business, manage, conduct or operate as an alarm company operator in the city without first registering with the city license division on appropriate forms and obtaining a business license therefor by providing the following information: 
A.  Name of the business, and if a corporation, its name, date and place of incorporation, and address of its principal place of incorporation, and address of its principal place of business, together with the name and business telephone number of the owner or manager and its state Alarm Company Act license number; 
B.  A list of the addresses, business and emergency telephone numbers of all central stations handling such person's accounts in the city; 
C.  Payment of the annual business license fee in the amount provided by resolution. 
(Prior code § 8153)  
8.24.080 - Alarm system U.C. permit. 
No person shall possess or use an alarm system without first applying for and receiving an alarm permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8154)  
8.24.090 - Permit—Application—Forms. 
Applications for all permits hereunder shall be filed with the finance department and shall be accompanied by the requisite fee. The fee is established to cover the cost of investigating and processing the applications and permits and is not refundable. The finance department shall prescribe the form of the application and request such information as is necessary to evaluate and act upon the permit application. The application for alarm systems shall specify the type of alarm system installed. 
(Prior code § 8163)  
8.24.100 - Permit—Issuing and approving authorities designated. 
The issuing authority shall be the finance department. The approving authority shall be the police chief. 
(Prior code § 8172)  
8.24.110 - Permit—Reasons for denial—Issuance. 
The alarm system permit shall be denied by the police chief if the alarm system does not comply with standards and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. The permit shall be issued to the person or subscriber using or possessing the alarm system at the installation premises. 
(Prior code § 8164)  
8.24.120 - Permit—Appeal from denial. 
Any appeal of a decision by the police chief shall be filed with the city clerk within fifteen days after the date denial takes effect per this chapter. The appeal procedure will follow guidelines set forth in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8165)  
8.24.130 - Permit—Renewal. 
The fee for an alarm system permit shall be established by resolution, shall be renewable annually and shall not be prorated. No fees paid by the applicant shall be refundable. 
(Prior code § 8166 (a))  
8.24.140 - Permit—Transfer. 
An alarm permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not be assignable or transferable. 
(Prior code § 8173)  
8.24.150 - Permit—Display—Collection of fees. 
The permit shall be kept on the premises where the alarm system is located. The finance department may issue an appropriate identification tag and establish requirements for its posting. Each permit shall be given a unique number. The finance department shall collect the permit application fee as provided in this chapter. No permit shall be issued or reinstated for any person until all alarm system permit fees due and owing are paid. 
(Prior code § 8168)  
8.24.160 - Notice of permit application information change. 
Whenever any change occurs relating to the written information required by this chapter, the applicant or permittee shall give written notice thereof to the finance department within five days after such change. 
(Prior code § 8169)  
8.24.170 - Permit—Revocation—Grounds. 
An alarm system permit may be revoked by the chief of police for any of the following reasons: 
A.  For the failure to observe any of the regulations or other provisions of this chapter; 
B.  If the alarm system for which the alarm system permit is issued emits more than six false alarms during any consecutive three hundred and sixty-five day period; 
C.  Where the applicant or permittee, his employee or agent has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit, or in any report or record to be filed with any city agency; 
D.  Any four false alarms indicating a violation of California Penal Code Section 211 within any consecutive three hundred sixty-five day period. 
(Prior code § 8177)  
8.24.180 - Revocation—Authority. 
Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked by the chief of police on the grounds set forth herein. 
(Prior code § 8174)  
8.24.190 - Warning permit—Revocation. 
The police department shall give written notice to the permittee and any alarm company operator indicated on the permit issued pursuant to this chapter within seventy-two hours after the fifth false alarm within a consecutive twelve-month period advising of the possible revocation of the permit pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8175)  
8.24.200 - Permit—Revocation—Proceedings. 
Upon evidence that any grounds for revocation exist, the chief of police shall give notice thereof to the permittee. The permit shall be revoked fifteen days following service of such notice unless, within that period, the permittee files an appeal to the city council as provided herein. In any event that such an appeal is filed, the alarm system will be placed on nonemergency response status until the city council has determined the matter. 
(Prior code § 8176)  
8.24.210 - Permit revocation—Appeal. 
A.  In the event a notice of revocation has been given or reinstatement denied, the permittee may appeal to the city council by filing with the city clerk a statement, setting forth the facts and circumstances regarding the actions of the chief of police; provided, however, that such appeal shall be filed prior to the expiration of the fifteen-day period following the service of the notice of revocation. 
B.  The city clerk shall cause the appeal to be placed on the next available city council agenda and notify the permittee. The city council shall consider the appeal and may affirm, overrule, or modify the decision of the police chief. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
C.  A filing and processing fee in an amount to be set by resolution of the city council shall be required. All fees paid by permittee shall be nonrefundable. 
(Prior code § 8179)  
8.24.220 - Permit—Revocation—Surrender. 
If any permit is revoked pursuant to this chapter, the permittee shall surrender the permit to the license division of the finance department. 
(Prior code § 8180)  
8.24.230 - Permit—Reinstatement—Conditions. 
A.  When a permit is revoked pursuant to this chapter, the permittee may have the permit reinstated and the alarm system taken off nonemergency response status six months after the effective date thereof upon presenting evidence to the chief of police that he has taken steps which should eliminate false alarms and payment of the application fee, the chief of police may reinstate permits upon conditions, including requiring that the permittee maintain a repair and maintenance agreement, which will in his judgment eliminate false alarms. 
B.  A reinstatement fee of ten dollars, will be due and payable to the finance department, prior to reinstatement. 
(Prior code § 8178)  
8.24.240 - Permit—Reinstatement fee. 
In the event of an alarm permit revocation, a reinstatement fee of ten dollars will be due and payable to the finance department, prior to reinstatement. 
(Prior code § 8166 (b))  
8.24.250 - Additional duties of permittee. 
A.  The premises shall display the street address at or near the front of the premises and at other places where access is available, such as, from an alley or parking lot. The street address shall be clearly visible. 
B.  The permittee or permittee's designee shall respond to a premises following activation of an alarm constituting part or an alarm system for which a permit at the location has been issued hereunder. The response shall be made within a reasonable time and, in any event, within one hour after being requested to do so by the police department. 
(Prior code § 8171)  
8.24.260 - Operation of defective systems prohibited. 
No person shall operate an alarm system which generates more than six false alarms in any twelve-month period. Multiple activations of an alarm system within a forty-eight hour period shall count as only one false alarm for the purpose of this chapter if the multiple activations are a result of the same mechanism defect in the system and the alarm subscriber submits written confirmation that the mechanical defect has been repaired or replaced within ten days of the activations. 
(Prior code § 8158)  
8.24.270 - Impermissible systems and uses. 
A.  No person shall operate or use any alarm system that emits a sound similar to that of a civil defense warming system. 
B.  No person shall operate an audible alarm which is not arranged so as to terminate emitting sound within thirty minutes of its being activated. 
C.  No person shall install, maintain or use a direct-dial service which is arranged in such a way as to dial any telephone number maintained by the city. 
D.  No person shall operate or use an alarm system designed to report a violation of Penal Code Section 211 for any purpose other than reporting robberies or other crimes involving potential bodily injury or death. 
E.  No person shall operate or use an alarm system for any purpose other than detecting and reporting an unauthorized entry upon the premises protected by such a system. 
(Prior code § 8159)  
8.24.280 - Causing a false alarm. 
No person shall knowingly cause a false alarm. This section does not prohibit a test of an alarm system if permitted in advance by the police department. 
(Prior code § 8157)  
8.24.290 - False alarms—Determination—Proceedings. 
If the police department determines that a false alarm has occurred, the police officer who responded to the alarm shall leave at the premises of the alarm subscriber a notice which shall include the date and time of the response and a statement that the responding officer determined that the alarm was a false alarm, and the alarm subscriber should take action to correct any causative problems with the alarm system, and a warning of six false alarms in any twelve-month period shall result in the alarm system being placed on nonemergency response status. A copy of this notice shall be delivered to the issuing authority and filed with the alarm owner's permit. The alarm subscriber shall contest the determination of a false alarm by contacting the chief of police of the city, within five days of notification of permit revocation and the determination of the chief of police shall be final unless further procedures are available to the permittee under the procedures of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8160 (a))  
8.24.300 - False alarm—Service fee. 
The third and any subsequent false alarm originating from the any premises within any three hundred sixty-five day period will result in service fee being imposed on the alarm user, which must be paid within thirty days after billing. The service fee shall be imposed in accordance with the amount(s) set by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 8160 (b))  
8.24.310 - False alarms—Submission of action plan. 
After any false alarm, the alarm subscriber shall, upon request by the police department, submit a written report to the police department describing actions taken or to be taken to eliminate the cause of the false alarm. This report shall be submitted within ten days of the date of request by the police department. 
(Prior code § 8161)  
8.24.320 - False alarms—Adjustment period. 
A thirty-day adjustment to correct mechanical problems will be allowed for any new, improved or replaced alarm system before the false alarm provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to such system if the permittee shows that any false alarm was the result of conditions beyond his control and not the result of his negligence or that of his agents or employees; provided, further, that the permittee can demonstrate that he neither knew of the defect in the alarm system, nor in the exercise of due care, should have known of such defect, such alarm shall not be deemed a false alarm within the meaning of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8162)  
8.24.330 - Confidentiality. 
The information furnished and secured pursuant to this chapter shall be confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection, and shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not be known except to persons charged with the administration of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8170)  
8.24.340 - Administration and enforcement. 
The police department is directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8181)  
8.24.350 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Any person who violates or wilfully fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars and each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted. 
B.  The conviction or punishment of any person for violation of the provisions of this chapter or for failing to secure a permit as required by this chapter shall not relieve the person from paying the permit fee due and unpaid at the time of the conviction, nor shall payment of any permit fee prevent criminal prosecution for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. All remedies shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. The amount of any permit fee shall be deemed a debt to the city. 
C.  Notwithstanding any penalty provision provided in this chapter, any person violating any such provision in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; provided, that where the city attorney or city prosecutor (or in the case of a notice to appear, the citing official) determines that such action would be in the interests of justice, the city attorney or city prosecutor may prosecute any such offense as an infraction. In the event a notice to appear is prepared as a misdemeanor, the city attorney or city prosecutor may nonetheless prosecute any such offense as an infraction. 
(Ord. 2285 § 5, 2005; prior code §§ 8182 and 8183)  
Chapter 8.28 - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2333, § 2, adopted July 22, 2009, repealed Ch. 8.28, §§ 8.28.010—8.28.110, which pertained to Mandatory Water Conservation and derived from Ord. No. 2048, §§ 1—4, 1991; Ord. No. 2041, § 1 (part), 1991; prior code §§ 2983—2993. The user is directed to Ch. 8.29, Water Conservation and Water Supply Shortage Program.  
Chapter 8.29 - WATER CONSERVATION AND WATER SUPPLY SHORTAGE PROGRAM 
Sections: 
 
8.29.010 - Introduction. 
This chapter will be known as the "City of Montebello Water Conservation and Water Supply Shortage Program." By adoption of this program by the city council, existing Chapter 8.28 of the Montebello Municipal Code known as the Mandatory Water Conservation Ordinance is hereby rescinded. 
(Ord. No. 2333, § 1, 7-22-2009)  
8.29.020 - Findings. 
A.  A reliable minimum supply of potable water is essential to the public health, safety and welfare of the people and economy of the Southern California region and of the City of Montebello. 
B.  Southern California is a semi-arid region and is largely dependent upon imported water supplies. A growing population, climate change, environmental concerns, and other factors in other parts of the state and western United States, make the region highly susceptible to water supply reliability issues. 
C.  Careful water management that includes active water conservation measures not only in times of drought, but at all times, is essential to ensure a reliable minimum supply of water to meet current and future water supply needs. 
D.  Article X, Section 2 of the California Constitution declares that the general welfare requires that water resources be put to beneficial use, waste or unreasonable use or unreasonable method of use of water are to be prevented, and conservation of water is to be fully exercised with a view to the reasonable and beneficial use of available water supplies. 
E.  Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution declares that a city or county may make and enforce within its limits all local, police, sanitary, and other ordinances and regulations not in conflict with general laws. 
F.  California Water Code section 375 authorizes water suppliers to adopt and enforce a comprehensive water conservation program to reduce water consumption and conserve supplies. 
G.  The adoption and enforcement of a water conservation and supply shortage program is necessary to manage the City of Montebello's potable water supply in the short and long-term and to avoid or minimize the effects of drought and shortage within the City of Montebello. Such a program is essential to ensure a reliable and sustainable minimum supply of water for the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2333, § 1, 7-22-2009)  
8.29.030 - Declaration of purpose and intent. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to replace Chapter 8.28 and to establish a water conservation and supply shortage program that will reduce water consumption within the City of Montebello through conservation, enable effective water supply planning, assure reasonable and beneficial use of water, prevent waste of water, and maximize the efficient use of water within the City of Montebello to avoid and minimize the effect and hardship of water shortage to the greatest extent possible. 
B.  This chapter establishes permanent water conservation standards intended to alter behavior related to water use efficiency at all times and further establishes three levels of water supply shortage response actions to be implemented during times of declared water shortage or declared water shortage emergency, with increasing restrictions on water use in response to worsening drought or emergency conditions and decreasing supplies. 
(Ord. No. 2333, § 1, 7-22-2009)  
8.29.040 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter have the meaning defined in this section: 
"Billing unit" means the unit of water used to apply water rates for purposes of calculating water charges for a person's water usage. 
"Building department" means the building official and personnel of the building department of the city, which serve the city. 
"City" means City of Montebello and all of its departments. 
"City council" means the City Council of the City of Montebello. 
"Engineering department/city engineer" means an established department of [the] city and a city-designated official. 
"Fire department" means the Fire Department of the City of Montebello which serves the city. 
"Health department" means the County of Los Angeles Health Services Department, which serves the city and the State of California Department of Health Services, which oversees by permit the operations of potable water systems in the city. 
"Hot line" means a telephone, facsimile and/or electronic mail service that is to be installed in the engineering department and maintained by the engineering department under the direction of the city engineer for citizens to report apparent violations of this city ordinance. All information received on the hot line shall be reviewed by the city engineer or his/her designee. Information may be placed on the hot line by citizens anonymously. 
"Landscape irrigation system" means an irrigation system with pipes, hoses, spray heads, or sprinkling devices that are operated by hand or through an automated system. 
"Large landscape areas" means a lawn, landscape, or other vegetated area, or combination thereof, equal to more than three thousand square feet of irrigable land. 
"MWD" means the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California. 
"Person" means any natural person or persons, corporation, public or private entity, governmental agency or institution, including all agencies and departments of the city, or any other user of water provided within the city. 
"Potable water" means water which is suitable for drinking. 
"Recycled water" means the reclamation and reuse of non-potable water for beneficial use as defined in Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations. 
"Section" means a section of this chapter unless some other city ordinance is specifically mentioned. 
"Single pass cooling systems" means equipment where water is circulated only once to cool equipment before being disposed. 
"Station" means a group of irrigation sprinkler spray heads which are controlled through a valve that opens and closes based on a preset time period of an automated time clock or hand operation of a valve. 
"Water purveyor" means the city and any other provider of potable water service in the City of Montebello. 
"Water user" means the owner of a property or the tenant of the property which uses potable water provided by a potable water purveyor in the city. A user includes a person or contractor retained by the property owner or tenant to provide landscape maintenance/irrigation services to the property. 
(Ord. No. 2333, § 1, 7-22-2009)  
8.29.050 - Application. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter apply to any person using any potable water provided by a potable water purveyor in the city. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter do not apply to uses of water necessary to protect public health and safety or for essential government services, such as police, fire and other similar emergency services. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the use of recycled water, with the exception of Section 8.29.060(A). 
D.  The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the use of water by commercial nurseries and commercial growers to sustain plants, trees, shrubs, crops or other vegetation intended for commercial sale. 
E.  This chapter is intended solely to further the conservation of water. It is not intended to implement any provision of federal, state, or local statutes, ordinances, or regulations relating to protection of water quality or control of drainage or runoff from various sources including rain storms. Refer to the city engineer or to the State of California Regional Water Quality Control Board for information on any stormwater regulations and stormwater management plans. 
F.  The city building department, in reviewing applications for building permits for development or redevelopment of property, may require the developer to incorporate in his or her development the use of recycled water at such time as it becomes available to the area of the city in lieu of the use of potable water for construction water and/or potable water for the permanent development. The building department and the city planning department may require the use of water use efficient equipment and designs for development or redevelopment properties. 
(Ord. No. 2333, § 1, 7-22-2009)  
8.29.060 - Permanent water conservation requirements—Prohibition against waste. 
The following water conservation requirements are effective at all times and are permanent. Violations of this section will be considered waste and an unreasonable use of water. 
A.  Limits on Watering Hours. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is prohibited between the hours of ten a.m. and one hour before sunset Pacific Standard Time on any day, except by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system. Lawns or other irrigated areas shall not be watered more frequently than every other day. Odd-numbered street-addressed properties may water on odd-numbered dates. Even-numbered street-addressed properties may only do so on even-numbered dates. All irrigated areas may be watered on the 29th day of the month of February every fourth year or the 31st day of the month having thirty days. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to restrict watering of newly seeded or reseeded lawns once a year, nor to prohibit drip irrigation systems. 
B.  Limit on Watering Duration. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water using a landscape irrigation system or a watering device that is not continuously attended is limited to no more than fifteen minutes watering per day per station. This subsection does not apply to landscape irrigation systems that exclusively use very low-flow drip type irrigation systems when no emitter produces more than two gallons of water per hour or weather based controllers or stream rotor sprinklers that meet a seventy percent efficiency standard. 
C.  No Excessive Water Flow or Runoff. Watering or irrigating of any lawn, landscape or other vegetated area in a manner that causes or allows excessive water flow or runoff onto an adjoining property, or non-landscaped areas such as sidewalks, driveways, streets, alleys, gutters or ditches is prohibited. 
D.  No Washing Down Hard or Paved Surfaces. Washing down hard or paved surfaces, including but not limited to sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios or alleys, is prohibited except when necessary to alleviate safety or sanitary hazards, and then only by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off device, a low-volume, high-pressure cleaning machine equipped to recycle any water used, or a low-volume high-pressure water broom. Should the use of water for wash-down have to do with an immediate fire or sanitation hazard, written permission shall have been obtained from the fire department, the health department or the building department. 
E.  Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks or Malfunctions. Excessive use, loss or escape of water through breaks, leaks or other malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or distribution system for any period of time after such escape of water should have reasonably been discovered and corrected and in no event more than seven days of receiving notice from the city, is prohibited. This section also applies to all water purveyors in the city. 
F.  Recirculating Water Required for Water Fountains and Decorative Water Features. Operating a water fountain or other decorative water feature that does not use recirculated water is prohibited. 
G.  Limits on Washing Vehicles. Using water to wash or clean a vehicle, including but not limited to any automobile, truck, van, bus, motorcycle, boat or trailer, whether motorized or not is prohibited, except by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device. This subsection does not apply to any commercial car washing facility with an on-site water recycling system. Commercial vehicle washing establishments that do not have on-site water recycling for reuse systems shall meet with city staff within two months of the adoption of this chapter to work out a satisfactory schedule for the installation of such a system or the issuance of a waiver under this chapter. 
H.  Drinking Water Served Upon Request Only. Eating or drinking establishments, including but not limited to restaurants, hotels, cafes, cafeterias, bars, or other public places where food or drinks are sold, served, or offered for sale, are prohibited from providing drinking water to any person unless expressly requested by that person or that person's guardian or custodian of care therefor. 
I.  Commercial Lodging Establishments Must Provide Guests Option to Decline Daily Linen Services. Hotels, motels and other commercial lodging establishments must provide customers the option of not having towels and linen laundered daily. Commercial lodging establishments must prominently display notice of this option in each bathroom using clear and easily understood English and Spanish languages and any other language commonly used by users of such establishments. 
J.  No Installation of Single Pass Cooling Systems. Installation of single pass cooling systems is prohibited in buildings requesting new water service. 
K.  No Installation of Non-recirculating Water Systems in Commercial Car Wash and Laundry Systems. Installation of non-recirculating water systems is prohibited in premises with new commercial conveyor car wash or new commercial laundry systems. 
L.  Restaurants Required to Use Water Conserving Dish Wash Spray Valves. Food preparation establishments, such as restaurants or cafes, are prohibited from using non-water conserving dish wash spray valves. 
M.  Commercial Car Wash Systems. Effective on January 1, 2011, all commercial car wash systems must have installed operational recirculating water systems, or must have secured a waiver of this requirement and/or an extension of time for installation from the city. 
N.  Construction meters used for landscape irrigation shall not be used between ten a.m. and one hour before sunset. 
O.  Filling or refilling of private swimming pools, spas, ponds and artificial lakes is prohibited between ten a.m. and one hour before sunset. Swimming pools and spas shall be equipped with covers to minimize evaporation and such covers shall be used not less than five days a week unless the facility is in use. 
(Ord. No. 2333, § 1, 7-22-2009)  
8.29.070 - Level 1 water supply shortage. 
A.  A level 1 water supply shortage exists when the city determines, in its sole discretion, that due to drought or other water supply conditions, a water supply shortage or threatened shortage exists and a consumer demand reduction is necessary to make more efficient use of water and appropriately respond to existing water conditions. Upon the declaration by the city of a level 1 water supply shortage condition, the city will implement the mandatory level 1 conservation measures identified in this section. 
B.  Additional Water Conservation Measures. In addition to the prohibited uses of water identified in Section 8.29.060, the following water conservation requirements apply during a declared level 1 water supply shortage: 
1.  Limits on Watering Days. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to not to exceed three days per week on a schedule established and posted by the city. During the months of November through March, watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to no more than one day per week on a schedule established and posted by the city. This provision does not apply to landscape irrigation zones that exclusively use very low flow drip type irrigation systems when no emitter produces more than two gallons of water per hour. This provision also does not apply to watering or irrigating by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system. 
2.  Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks or Malfunctions. All leaks, breaks; or other malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or distribution system must be repaired within seventy-two hours of receipt of written notification by the city unless other arrangements are made with the city. All leaks, breaks or malfunctions in the water purveyor's water system shall be repaired within seventy-two hours of the water purveyor becoming aware thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2333, § 1, 7-22-2009)  
8.29.080 - Level 2 water supply shortage. 
A.  A level 2 water supply shortage exists when the city determines, in its sole discretion, that due to drought or other water supply conditions, a water supply shortage or threatened shortage exists and a consumer demand reduction is necessary to make more efficient use of water and appropriately respond to existing water conditions. Upon the declaration by the city of a level 2 water supply shortage condition, the city will implement the mandatory level 2 conservation measures identified in this section. 
B.  Additional Conservation Measures. In addition to the prohibited uses of water identified in Sections 8.29.060 and 8.29.070, the following additional water conservation requirements apply during a declared level 2 water supply shortage: 
1.  Watering Days. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to not to exceed two days per week on a schedule established and posted by the city. During the months of November through March, watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to no more than one day per week on a schedule established and posted by the city. This provision does not apply to landscape irrigation zones that exclusively use very low flow drip type irrigation systems when no emitter produces more than two gallons of water per hour. This provision also does not apply to watering or irrigating by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system. 
2.  Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks or Malfunctions. All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or distribution system must be repaired within forty-eight hours of receipt of written notification by the city unless other arrangements are made with the city. All leaks, breaks or malfunctions in the water purveyor's water system shall be repaired within forty-eight hours of the water purveyor becoming aware thereof. 
3.  Limits on Filling Ornamental Lakes or Ponds. Filling or re-filling of ornamental lakes or ponds is prohibited, except to the extent needed to sustain aquatic life, provided that such aquatic life are of significant value and have been actively managed within the water feature prior to declaration of a supply shortage level under this chapter. 
4.  Limits on Washing Vehicles. Using water to wash or clean a vehicle, including but not limited to, any automobile, truck, van, bus, motorcycle, boat or trailer, whether motorized or not, is prohibited except by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, by high pressure/low volume wash systems, or at a commercial car washing facility that utilizes a recirculating water system to capture or reuse water. 
5.  Limits on Filling Residential Swimming Pools and Spas. Re-filling of more than one foot of depth in a pool or spa and initial filling of residential swimming pools or outdoor spas with potable water is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2333, § 1, 7-22-2009)  
8.29.090 - Level 3 water supply shortage—Emergency condition. 
A.  A level 3 water supply shortage condition is also referred to as an "emergency" condition. A level 3 condition exists when the city declares a water shortage emergency and notifies its residents and businesses that a significant reduction in consumer demand is necessary to maintain sufficient water supplies for public health and safety. Upon the declaration of a level 3 water supply shortage condition, the city will implement the mandatory level 3 conservation measures identified in this section. 
B.  Additional Conservation Measures. In addition to the prohibited uses of water identified in Sections 8.29.060, 8.29.070, and 8.29.080, the following water conservation requirements apply during a declared level 3 water supply shortage emergency: 
1.  No Watering or Irrigating. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is prohibited. This restriction does not apply to the following categories of use, unless the city has determined that recycled water is available and may be applied to the use: 
a.  Maintenance of vegetation, including trees and shrubs, that are watered using a hand-held bucket or similar container, hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device; 
b.  Maintenance of existing landscape necessary for fire protection; 
c.  Maintenance of existing landscape for soil erosion control; 
d.  Maintenance of plant materials identified to be rare or essential to the well-being of protected species; 
e.  Maintenance of landscape within active public parks and playing fields, day care centers, golf course greens, and school grounds, provided that such irrigation does not exceed two days per week according to the schedule established in Section 5.29.070(B)(1) and time restrictions in Section 5.29.060(A) and (B); 
f.  Actively irrigated environmental mitigation projects. 
2.  Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks or Malfunctions. All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or distribution system must be repaired within twenty-four hours of notification by the city unless other arrangements are made with the city. The same time restrictions shall apply to water systems of water purveyors. 
3.  a.  No New Potable Water Service. Upon declaration of a level 3 water supply shortage emergency condition by the city, no new potable water service shall be provided, no new temporary meters or permanent meters are to be provided, and no statements of immediate ability to serve or provide potable water service (such as, will-serve letters, certificates, or letters of availability) are to be issued, except under the following circumstances: 
i.  A valid, unexpired building permit has been issued for the project; or 
ii.  The project is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare; or 
iii.  The applicant provides substantial evidence of an enforceable commitment that water demands for the project will be offset prior to the provision of a new water meter(s) to the satisfaction of the city. 
This provision does not preclude the resetting or turn-on of meters to provide continuation of water service or the restoration of service that has been interrupted for a period of one year or less. 
b.  Limits on Building Permits. The city will limit or withhold the issuance of building permits which require new or expanded water service, except to protect the public health, safety and welfare, or in cases which meet the city's adopted water conservation offset requirements. 
4.  Discontinue Service. The city, in its sole discretion, may order a water purveyor in the city to discontinue service to a water user who, in the opinion of the city, willfully violates provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2333, § 1, 7-22-2009)  
8.29.100 - Procedures for determination/notification of water supply shortage. 
A.  Declaration and Notification of Water Supply Shortage. The existence of level 1, level 2 or level 3 water supply shortage conditions may be declared by resolution of the city adopted at a regular or special public meeting held in accordance with state law. The mandatory conservation requirements applicable to level 1, level 2 or level 3 conditions will take effect on the tenth day after the date the water supply shortage level is declared. Within five days following the declaration of the shortage level, the city and other water purveyors must publish a copy of the resolution in a newspaper used for publication of official notices. If the city activates a water allocation process, it must provide notice of the activation by including it in the regular billing statement or by any other mailing to the address to which the city or other water purveyors customarily mail the billing statement for fees or charges for ongoing water service. A water allocation will be effective on the fifth day following the date of mailing or at such later date as specified in the notice. 
(Ord. No. 2333, § 1, 7-22-2009)  
8.29.110 - Hardship waiver. 
A.  Undue and Disproportionate Hardship. If, due to unique circumstances, a specific requirement of this chapter would result in undue hardship to a person using water or to property upon which water is used, that is disproportionate to the impacts to water users generally or to similar property or classes of water users, then the person may apply to the city for a waiver to the requirements as provided in this section. 
B.  Written Finding. The waiver may be granted or conditionally granted by the city only upon a written finding by the city of the existence of facts demonstrating an undue hardship to a person using water or to property upon which water is used, that is disproportionate to the impacts to water users generally or to similar property or classes of water use due to specific and unique circumstances of the user or the user's property. 
1.  Application. Application for a waiver must be on a form prescribed by the city and accompanied by a non-refundable processing fee in an amount set by city council resolution. 
2.  Supporting Documentation. The application must be accompanied by photographs, maps, drawings, and other pertinent information, including a written statement of the applicant as to the reasons for the application. 
3.  Required Findings for Waiver. An application for a waiver will be denied unless the city finds, based on the information provided in the application, supporting documents, or such additional information as may be requested, and on water use information for the property as shown by the records of the applicant or its agent, all of the following: 
a.  That the waiver does not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties and businesses; 
b.  That because of special circumstances applicable to the property or its use, the strict application of this chapter would have a disproportionate impact on the property or use that exceeds the impacts to properties and businesses generally; 
c.  That the authorizing of such waiver will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent properties, and will not materially affect the ability of the city to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and will not be detrimental to the public interest; 
d.  That the condition or situation of the subject property or the intended use of the property for which the waiver is sought is not common, recurrent or general in nature; and 
e.  That the water user has demonstrated that he or she, prior to or after adoption of this chapter, has taken effective measures for purposes of water conservation. 
4.  Approval Authority. The city engineer must act upon any completed application no later than ten days after submittal and may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the waiver. The applicant requesting the waiver must be promptly notified in writing of any action taken. Unless specified otherwise at the time a waiver is approved, the waiver will apply to the subject property during the period of the mandatory water supply shortage condition. The decision of the city engineer will be final, except that the applicant may file a written appeal to the city council. The city council, after due process, may grant, deny or grant with conditions, the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2333, § 1, 7-22-2009)  
8.29.120 - Penalties and violations. 
A.  Misdemeanor. Any violation of this chapter may be prosecuted by the city as a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than thirty days, or by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or by both. 
B.  Penalties. Penalties for failure to comply with any provisions of the chapter are as follows: 
1.  First Violation. The city will issue a written warning and deliver a copy of this chapter by United States Postal Service first class (USPS) mail. 
2.  Second Violation. A second violation within the following twelve calendar months of the first violation is punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars. 
3.  Third Violation. A third violation within the following twelve calendar months of the first violation is punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars. 
4.  Fourth and Subsequent Violations. A fourth violation in the following twelve calendar months of the first violation and any subsequent violation thereof is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars. 
a.  Water Flow Restrictor. In addition to any fines, the city may require the applicable water purveyor to install a water flow restrictor device of approximately one gallon per minute capacity for service pipe up to one and one-half inch size and comparatively sized restrictors for larger services after issuance by the city of a written notice of intent to install a flow restrictor for a minimum of forty-eight hours. 
5.  Discontinuing Service. In addition to any fines and the installation of a water flow restrictor, the city may require the applicable water purveyor to disconnect a customer's water service for willful violations of mandatory restrictions in this chapter. 
C.  Cost of Flow Restrictor and Disconnecting Service. A person or entity that violates this chapter is responsible for payment of the water purveyor's charges for installing and/or removing any flow restricting device and for disconnecting and/or reconnecting service per the water purveyor's schedule of charges then in effect. The charge for installing and/or removing any flow restricting device must be paid to the water purveyor before the device is removed. Nonpayment will be subject to the same remedies as nonpayment of a regular water bill. 
D.  Separate Offenses. Each day that a violation of this chapter occurs is a separate offense. 
E.  Notice and Hearing. 
1.  The city will issue a notice of violation by USPS first class mail or personal delivery at least ten days before taking enforcement action. Such notice must describe the violation and the date by which corrective action must be taken. A water service user may appeal the notice of violation by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk no later than the close of business on the day before the date scheduled for enforcement action. Any notice of violation not timely appealed will be final. Upon receipt of a timely appeal, a hearing on the appeal will be scheduled, and the city will mail by USPS first class service written notice of the hearing date to the water service user and the serving water purveyor at least ten days before the date of the hearing. 
2.  Pending receipt of a written appeal or pending a hearing pursuant to an appeal, the city may take appropriate steps to prevent the unauthorized use of water as appropriate to the nature and extent of the violations and the current declared water level condition. 
(Ord. No. 2333, § 1, 7-22-2009)  
8.29.130 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase in this chapter is for any reason held invalid, the validity of the remainder of the chapter will not be affected. The city council hereby declares it would have passed this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases or is later declared invalid. 
(Ord. No. 2333, § 1, 7-22-2009)  
Chapter 8.32 - SMOKING 
Sections: 
 
8.32.010 - Purpose. 
The city council has determined that there is ample evidence that smoking in any form is a serious hazard to the health of members of the general public and city employees and an irritation, inconvenience and discomfort to persons in enclosed areas. In order to serve the public health, safety and welfare, the declared purpose of this chapter is to promote a policy of nontobacco use in all areas of city-owned buildings and in city-owned vehicles, unless exempted. 
(Ord. 2068 § 2 (part), 1992: prior code § 6800)  
8.32.020 - Definitions. 
The words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless from the context a different meaning is apparent: 
"City-owned building" means any building owned or leased and in use by the city. City-owned building shall not include any building owned in part by the city redevelopment agency which is also partly owned by private individuals or corporations under a disposition and development agreement or owner participation agreement; city-owned buildings include, but are not limited to, the Montebello senior citizens center, Taylor Ranch, parks and recreation, corporate yard, police department, fire department and city hall. 
"City-owned vehicle" means any vehicles owned or leased and in use by the city of Montebello. 
"Exceptions" means any building or designated area identified in writing by the city manager as exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
"Smoking" means the burning of any form of tobacco, in a pipe, cigar or a cigarette or any other device used for burning of tobacco or other similar combustible material so that the person in possession thereof can inhale and exhale the smoke therefrom. 
(Ord. 2068 § 2 (part), 1992: prior code § 6801)  
8.32.030 - Prohibition. 
Smoking is prohibited in all city-owned buildings and city-owned vehicles. 
(Ord. 2068, § 2 (part), 1992: prior code § 6802)  
8.32.040 - Signs. 
Signs designating "no smoking" areas in city-owned buildings and in city-owned vehicles shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted. The manner of such posting, including the wording, size, color, design, and place of posting, shall be determined by the city manager. 
(Ord. 2068 § 2 (part), 1992: prior code § 6803)  
8.32.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and, notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, upon conviction thereof, may be punished by a warning for the first offense, a fine of not more than fifty dollars for the second offense, and one hundred dollars for the third and subsequent offenses. 
(Ord. 2068 § 2 (part), 1992: prior code § 6804)  
Chapter 8.36 - STORM WATER AND URBAN RUNOFF POLLUTION PREVENTION* 
Sections: 
 
8.36.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and improve water quality of receiving waters by: 
A.  Reducing illicit discharges to the municipal storm water system to the maximum extent practicable. 
B.  Eliminating illicit connections to the municipal storm water system. 
C.  Eliminating spillage, dumping, and disposal of pollutant materials into the municipal storm water system. 
D.  Reducing pollutant loads in storm water and urban runoff, from land uses and activities identified in the municipal NPDES permit. 
The provisions of this chapter are adopted pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the "Clean Water Act," codified and amended at 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. The intent of this chapter is to enhance and protect the water quality of the receiving waters of the United States in a manner that is consistent with the Clean Water Act and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto; applicable implementing regulations; the municipal NPDES permit, and any amendment, revision, or re-issuance thereof. 
(Ord. 2245 § 1 (part), 2002)  
8.36.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of the provisions of this chapter concerning water quality hereinafter set forth, the following words and phrases shall be construed to have the meanings set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended. If the definition of any term contained in this chapter conflicts with the definition of the same term in Order No. R4-2012-0175, issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board Los Angeles Region on November 8, 2012, then the definition contained in Order No. R4-2012-0175 shall govern: 
"Automotive service facility" means a facility that is categorized in any one of the following Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) and North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) codes. For inspection purposes, permittees need not inspect facilities with SIC codes 5013, 5014, 5511, 5541, 7532-7534, and 7536-7539 provided that these facilities have no outside activities or materials that may be exposed to stormwater. 
"Basin plan" means the Water Quality Control Plan, Los Angeles Region, Basin Plan for the Coastal Watersheds of Los Angeles and Ventura Counties, adopted by the Regional Water Board on June 13, 1994 and subsequent amendments. 
"Best management practice" or "BMP" means practices or physical devices or systems designed to prevent or reduce pollutant loading from stormwater or non-stormwater discharges to receiving waters, or designed to reduce the volume of stormwater or non-stormwater discharged to the receiving water. 
"Biofiltration" means a LID BMP that reduces stormwater pollutant discharges by intercepting rainfall on vegetative canopy, and through incidental infiltration and/or evapotranspiration, and filtration. As used in this chapter, "biofiltration" includes only systems designed to facilitate incidental infiltration or achieve the equivalent pollutant reduction as biofiltration BMPs with an underdrain (subject to approval by the Regional Board's Executive Officer). Biofiltration BMPs include bioretention systems with an underdrain and bioswales. 
"Bioretention" means a LID BMP that reduces stormwater runoff by intercepting rainfall on vegetative canopy, and through evapotranspiration and infiltration. A bioretention system may include, but is not limited to, a minimum two-foot top layer of a specified soil and compost mixture underlain by a gravel-filled temporary storage pit dug into the in-situ soil. A bioretention BMP may be designed with an overflow drain, but may not include an underdrain. If a bioretention BMP is designed or constructed with an underdrain, then it is regulated by Order No. R4-2012-0175 as a biofiltration BMP. 
"Bioswale" means a LID BMP consisting of a shallow channel lined with grass or other dense, low-growing vegetation. Bioswales are designed to collect stormwater runoff and to achieve a uniform sheet flow through the dense vegetation for a period of several minutes. 
"Clean Water Act" or "CWA" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act enacted in 1972, by Public Law 92-500, and amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987. The Clean Water Act prohibits the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States unless the discharge is in accordance with an NPDES permit. 
"Commercial malls" means any development on private land comprised of one or more buildings forming a complex of stores which sells various merchandise, with interconnecting walkways enabling visitors to easily walk from store to store, along with parking area(s). A commercial mall includes, but is not limited to: mini-malls, strip malls, other retail complexes, and enclosed shopping malls or shopping centers. 
"Construction activity" means any construction or demolition activity, clearing, grading, grubbing, or excavation or any other activity that result in land disturbance. Construction does not include: 1) emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety; or 2) routine maintenance activities (as defined below). Where clearing, grading or excavating of underlying soil takes place during a repaving operation, State General Construction Permit coverage by the State of California General Permit for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Industrial Activities or for Stormwater Discharges Associated with Construction Activities is required if more than one acre is disturbed or the activities are part of a larger plan. 
"Control" means to minimize, reduce or eliminate by technological, legal, contractual, or other means, the discharge of pollutants from an activity or activities. 
"Development" means construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment or reconstruction of: 1) any public or private residential project (whether single-family, multi-unit or planned unit development); 2) industrial, commercial, retail, and other non-residential projects, including public agency projects; or 3) mass grading for future construction. It does not include Routine Maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety. 
"Directly adjacent" means situated within two hundred feet of the contiguous zone required for the continued maintenance, function, and structural stability of the environmentally sensitive area. 
"Discharge" means any release, spill, leak, pump, flow, escape, dumping, or disposal of any liquid, semi-solid, or solid substance. 
"Disturbed area" means an area that is altered as a result of clearing, grading, and/or excavation. 
"Executive officer" means Executive Officer of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles. 
"Flow-through treatment BMPs" means a modular, vault type high flow biotreatment devices contained within an impervious vault with an underdrain or designed with an impervious liner and an underdrain. 
"General construction activities storm water permit" or "GCASP" means the general NPDES permit adopted by the state board which authorizes the discharge of stormwater from construction activities under certain conditions. 
"General industrial activities storm water permit" or "GIASP" means the general NPDES permit adopted by the state board which authorizes the discharge of stormwater from certain industrial activities under certain conditions. 
"Green roof" means a LID BMP using planter boxes and vegetation to intercept rainfall on the roof surface. Rainfall is intercepted by vegetation leaves and through evapotranspiration. Green roofs may be designed as either a bioretention BMP or as a biofiltration BMP. A bioretention BMP's green roof system planting medium shall be of sufficient depth to provide capacity within the pore space volume to contain the design storm depth and shall not be designed or constructed with an underdrain. 
"Hillside" means a property located in an area with known erosive soil conditions, where the development contemplates grading on any natural slope that is 25 percent or greater and where grading contemplates cut or fill slopes. 
"Illicit connection" means any manmade conveyance that is connected to the storm drain system without a permit, excluding roof drains and other similar type connections. Examples include channels, pipelines, conduits, inlets, or outlets that are connected directly to the storm drain system. 
"Illicit discharge" means any discharge into the MS4 or from the MS4 into a receiving water that is prohibited under local, state, or federal statutes, ordinances, codes, or regulations. The term illicit discharge includes any non-storm water discharge, except authorized non-storm water discharges; conditionally exempt non-storm water discharges; and non-storm water discharges resulting from natural flows specifically identified in Part III.A.1.d. of the Municipal NPDES permit. 
"Industrial activity" means any of the ten classifications of industrial facilities specified in 40 Code of Federal Regulations Section 122.26(b)(14), defined by Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) and which is required to obtain a NPDES permit, not including construction activities. 
"Industrial/commercial facility" means any facility involved and/or used in the production, manufacture, storage, transportation, distribution, exchange or sale of goods and/or commodities, and any facility involved and/or used in providing professional and non-professional services. This category of facilities includes, but is not limited to, any facility defined by either the Standard Industrial Classifications (SIC) or the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS). Facility ownership (federal, state, municipal, private) and profit motive of the facility are not factors in this definition. 
"Industrial park" means land development that is set aside for industrial development. Industrial parks may include office parks, which have offices and light industry. 
"Infiltration BMP" means a LID BMP that reduces stormwater runoff by capturing and infiltrating the runoff into in-situ soils or amended onsite soils. Examples of infiltration BMPs include infiltration basins, dry wells, and pervious pavement. 
"Low impact development" or "LID" consists of building and landscape features designed to retain or filter stormwater runoff. 
"Maximum extent practical" (MEP) means the extent to which the city can reduce the discharge of pollutants in stormwater runoff. MEP requires selecting and implementing effective BMPs, and rejecting applicable BMPs only where: (i) other effective BMPs will service the same purpose; (ii) the BMPs would not be technically feasible; or (iii) the cost would be prohibitive. Factors considered include, but are not limited to: 
(i)  Effectiveness: Whether the BMP addresses a pollutant of concern. 
(ii)  Compliance: Whether the BMP complies with stormwater regulations, as well as other environmental regulations. 
(iii)  Public acceptance: Whether the BMP has public support. 
(iv)  Cost: Whether the cost of implementing the BMP has a reasonable relationship to the pollution control benefits achieved. 
(v)  Technical feasibility: Whether the BMP is technically feasible, considering soils, geography, and water resources. 
"Municipal NPDES permit" means California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region, Order No. 01-182, NPDES Permit No. CAS004001, Waste Discharge Requirements for Municipal Storm Water and Urban Runoff Discharges Within the County of Los Angeles, and the Incorporated Cities Therein, Except the City of Long Beach, and any amendment thereto or re-issuance thereof. 
"Municipal separate storm sewer system" (referred to herein as "MS4"), means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains): 
(i)  Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, parish, district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, stormwater, or other wastes, including special districts under state law such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or a designated and approved management agency under section 208 of the CWA that discharges to waters of the United States; 
(ii)  Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; 
(iii)  Which is not a combined sewer; and 
(iv)  Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined in 40 CFR Section 122.2. (40 CFR Section 122.26(b)(8)). 
"National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System" or "NPDES" means the national permitting program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements, under Clean Water Act (CWA) Sections 307, 402, 318, and 405. The term includes an "approved program." 
"Natural drainage system" means a drainage system that has not been improved (e.g., channelized or armored). The clearing or dredging of a natural drainage system does not cause the system to be classified as an improved drainage system. 
"New development" means land disturbing activities; structural development, including construction or installation of a building or structure, creation of impervious surfaces; and land subdivision. 
"Non-stormwater discharge" means any discharge to a municipal storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
"Outfall" means a point source as defined by 40 CFR 122.2 at the point where a municipal separate storm sewer discharges to waters of the United States and does not include open conveyances connecting two municipal separate storm sewers, or pipes, tunnels or other conveyances with connect segments of the same stream or other waters of the United Sates and are used to convey waters of the United States. 
"Owner" as applied to a building or real property, means any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or real property. 
"Parking lot" means land area or facility for the parking or storage of motor vehicles used for businesses, commerce, industry, or personal use, with a lot size of five thousand square feet or more of surface area, or with twenty-five or more parking spaces. 
"Person" means, within the context of this chapter, any natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, corporation or company. 
"Pollutant" means any "pollutant" defined in Section 502(6) of the Federal Clean Water Act and incorporated by reference into the California Water Code Section 13373. 
"Planning priority projects" means the following, which shall comply with this chapter: 
1.  All development projects equal to one acre or greater of disturbed area that adds more than ten thousand square feet of impervious surface area. 
2.  Industrial parks ten thousand square feet or more of surface area. 
3.  Commercial malls ten thousand square feet or more of surface area. 
4.  Retail gasoline outlets with five thousand square feet or more of surface area. 
5.  Restaurants (Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) of 5812) with 5,000 square feet or more of surface area. 
6.  Parking lots with five thousand square feet or more of impervious surface area or with twenty-five or more parking spaces. 
7.  Streets and road construction of ten thousand square feet or more of impervious surface area. 
8.  Automotive service facilities (SIC of 5013, 5014, 5511, 5541, 7532-7534 and 7536-7539) with five thousand square feet or more of surface area. 
9.  Projects in, near or discharging to environmentally sensitive areas. 
10.  Single-family hillside homes. 
11.  Redevelopment projects. 
Single-family homes are not deemed planning priority projects unless they create, add or replace at least ten thousand square feet of impervious surface area. 
"Project" means all development, redevelopment, and land disturbing activities. The term is not limited to "project" as defined under CEQA. 
"Rainfall harvest and use" means a LID BMP system designed to capture runoff, typically from a roof but can also include runoff capture from elsewhere within the site, and to provide for temporary storage until the harvested water can be used for irrigation or non-potable uses. The harvested water may also be used for potable water uses if the system includes disinfection treatment and is approved for such use by the local building department. 
"Receiving water" means "water of the United States" (as defined in the municipal NPDES permit) into which waste or pollutants are or might be discharged. 
"Redevelopment" means land disturbing activity that results in the creation, addition, or replacement of five thousand square feet or more of impervious surface area on an already developed site. Redevelopment includes, but is not limited to: the expansion of a building footprint; addition or replacement of a structure; replacement of impervious surface area that is not part of routine maintenance activity; and land disturbing activity related to structural or impervious surfaces. It does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety. 
"Regional board" means the appointed members of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region. 
"Restaurant" means a facility that sells prepared foods and drinks for consumption, including stationary lunch counters and refreshment stands selling prepared foods and drinks for immediate consumption. 
"Retail gasoline outlet" means any facility engaged in selling gasoline and lubricating oils. 
"Routine maintenance" includes, but is not limited to, projects conducted to: 
1.  Maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of the facility; 
2.  Perform as needed restoration work to preserve the original design grade, integrity and hydraulic capacity of flood control facilities; 
3.  Includes road shoulder work, re-grading dirt or gravel roadways and shoulders and performing ditch cleanouts; 
4.  Update existing lines and facilities to comply with applicable codes, standards, and regulations regardless if such projects result in increased capacity; and/or 
5.  Repair leaks. 
Routine maintenance does not include construction of new lines (those that are not associated with existing facilities and are not part of a project to update or replace existing lines) or facilities resulting from compliance with applicable codes, standards and regulations. 
"Runoff" means the portion of rainfall or irrigation water or other water activities also known as dry-weather flows that flow across the ground surface arid eventually to receiving waters. Runoff can pick up pollutants from the air or the land and carry them to receiving waters. 
"Site" means land or water area where any facility or activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the facility or activity. 
"State board" or "SWRCB" means the State Water Resources Control Board of the California Environmental Protection Agency. 
"Storm drain system" means any facility or any parts of the facility, including streets, gutters, conduits, natural or artificial drains, channels and watercourse that are used for the purpose of collecting, storing, transporting or disposing of stormwater and are located within the city. 
"Storm water" or "stormwater" means runoff and drainage related to precipitation events. 
"Storm water quality management program" means the Los Angeles countywide storm water quality management program, which includes descriptions of programs, collectively developed by the permittees in accordance with provisions of the NPDES permit, to comply with applicable federal land state law, as the same is amended from time to time. 
"Urban runoff" means surface water flow produced by storm and non-storm events. Non-storm events include flow from residential, commercial or industrial activities involving the use of potable and non-potable water. 
(Ord. 2245 § 1 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2361, § 2, 6-25-2014)  
8.36.030 - Illicit discharges, dumping, and non-storm water discharges. 
A.  No person shall cause or allow an illicit discharge to enter the municipal storm water system. 
B.  No person shall place, dump, dispose, litter, accumulate, maintain, discharge, or cause to enter into the MS4 any pollutant or any foreign object such as batteries, tires, waste receptacles, yard debris, refuse, rubbish, food waste, chemicals, animal waste or oil cans—which are also considered illicit discharges. 
C.  Any person causing an illicit discharge to the MS4 may be required to pay for the cost of clean-up and remediation. 
D.  Any owner of any private property from which a non-storm water discharge is observed may be required to pay for the cost of collecting and analyzing the discharge to determine if it is an illicit discharge. 
E.  Discharges identified in Part III.A of the municipal NPDES permit are considered exempt or conditionally exempt illicit discharges. 
(Ord. 2245 § 1 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2361, § 3, 6-25-2014)  
8.36.040 - Illicit connections. 
A.  No person shall maintain or intentionally use a connection that operates to convey an illicit discharge to the municipal storm water system. 
B.  Upon discovery of an illicit connection, the person owning or operating such connection shall either remove it or render it incapable of conveying an illicit discharge. 
C.  If any person fails to eliminate an illicit connection after being called upon by the city to do so, the city manager or the director of public works or his/her designee(s), shall impose appropriate measures to remove or disable the illicit connection and may recover the costs from the owner of such illicit connection. 
(Ord. 2245 § 1 (part), 2002)  
8.36.050 - Reduction of pollutants in runoff. 
A.  No person shall cause or threaten to cause the discharge of pollutants to the MS4 by exposing such pollutants to storm water runoff. 
(Ord. 2245 § 1 (part), 2002)  
8.36.060 - Control of pollutants from commercial facilities. 
A.  Subject commercial facilities shall implement BMPs prescribed by the regional board or its Executive Officer, through programs or actions made pursuant to the municipal NPDES permit, as called for more particularly in the city's storm water quality management program, or any revisions made thereto. 
(Ord. 2245 § 1 (part), 2002)  
8.36.070 - Control of pollutants from industrial activities. 
A.  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any industry in the city that is subject to waste discharge requirements specified in the SWRCB Water Quality Order No. 97-03-DWQ, Permit No. CAS00001, any revision or a re-issuance thereof, to operate without a general industrial activities storm water NPDES permit. 
B.  Industries that require a general industrial activities storm water NPDES permit shall retain on-site the following documents: (i) a copy of the notice of intent for general permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity; (ii) a waste discharge identification number issued by the SWRCB; and/or (iii) a storm water pollution prevention plan and monitoring program plan. 
C.  Any industry in the city requiring a general industrial activities storm water NPDES permit shall, upon reasonable request from a duly authorized officer of the city, provide any of the documents described in subsection B of this section. 
(Ord. 2245 § 1 (part), 2002)  
8.36.080 - Control of pollutants from other industrial facilities. 
A.  Industrial facilities not subject to the general industrial activities storm water NPDES permit but are subject to pollution control requirements under the municipal NPDES permit, shall implement BMPs prescribed by the regional board or its Executive Officer, through programs or actions made pursuant to the municipal NPDES permit. 
(Ord. 2245 § 1 (part), 2002)  
8.36.090 - Control of pollutants from state permitted construction activities. 
A.  No person shall be granted a grading permit or shall commence or continue any construction activity that is subject to an general construction activity storm water NPDES permit without showing proof of having applied for such permit. 
B.  Any person engaged in a construction activity requiring a general construction activity storm water NPDES permit construction permit shall retain at the construction site the following documents: (i) a copy of the notice of intent to comply with terms of the general permit to discharge water associated with construction activity; (ii) a waste discharge identification number issued by the SWRCB; (iii) a storm water pollution prevention plan and monitoring program plan for the construction activity requiring the construction permit; and (iv) records of all inspections, compliance and non-compliance reports, evidence of self-inspection and good housekeeping practices. 
C.  Any person engaged in a construction activity in the city requiring an NPDES general construction storm water activity permit shall, upon reasonable request from a duly authorized officer of the city, provide any of the documents specified in subsection B of this section and shall retain said documents for at least three years after completion of construction. 
(Ord. 2245 § 1 (part), 2002)  
8.36.100 - Control of pollutants from other construction activities. 
A.  Any person engaged in a construction activity that is not subject to the general construction storm water activity NPDES permit, but is subject to the municipal NPDES permit, shall comply with all requirements specified in the storm water management quality program, including any revisions made thereto. 
(Ord. 2245 § 1 (part), 2002)  
8.36.110 - Control of pollutants from new developments/redevelopment projects. 
A.  Objective. The provisions of this section establish requirements for construction activities and facility operations of development and redevelopment projects to comply with the current municipal NPDES permit, lessen the water quality impacts of development by using smart growth practices, and integrate LID practices and standards for stormwater pollution mitigation through means of infiltration, evapotranspiration, biofiltration, and rainfall harvest and use. LID shall be inclusive of new development and/or redevelopment requirements. 
B.  Scope. This section contains requirements for stormwater pollution control measures in development and redevelopment projects and authorizes the city to further define and adopt stormwater pollution control measures, and to develop LID principles and requirements, including but not limited to the objectives and specifications for integration of LID strategies, grant waivers from the LID requirements, and collect funds for projects that are granted waivers. Except as otherwise provided herein, the city shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this section. 
C.  Applicability. Development projects subject to permittee conditioning and approval for the design and implementation of post-construction controls to mitigate stormwater pollution, prior to completion of the project(s), are: 
(1)  All development projects equal to one acre or greater of disturbed area that adds more than ten thousand square feet of impervious surface area. 
(2)  Industrial parks ten thousand square feet or more of surface area. 
(3)  Commercial malls ten thousand square feet or more of surface area. 
(4)  Retail gasoline outlets with five thousand square feet or more of surface area. 
(5)  Restaurants (Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) of 5812) with five thousand square feet or more of surface area. 
(6)  Parking lots with five thousand square feet or more of impervious surface area, or with twenty-five or more parking spaces. 
(7)  Streets and roads construction projects with construction costs greater than five hundred thousand dollars and add at least ten thousand square feet or more of impervious surface area. Street and road construction applies to standalone streets, roads, highways, and freeway projects, and also applies to streets within larger projects. 
(8)  Automotive service facilities (Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) of 5013, 5014, 5511, 5541, 7532-7534 and 7536-7539) 5,000 square feet or more of surface area. 
(9)  Projects located in or directly adjacent to, or discharging directly to an environmentally sensitive area (ESA) (as defined in California Public Resources Code Section 30107.5), where the development will: 
a.  Discharge stormwater runoff that is likely to impact a sensitive biological species or habitat; and 
b.  Create two thousand five hundred square feet or more of impervious surface area 
(10)  Single-family hillside homes. 
(11)  Redevelopment projects. 
a.  Land disturbing activity that results in the creation or addition or replacement of five thousand square feet or more of impervious surface area on an already developed site on planning priority project categories. 
b.  Where redevelopment results in an alteration to more than fifty percent of impervious surfaces of a previously existing development, and the existing development was not subject to post-construction stormwater quality control requirements, the entire project must be mitigated. 
c.  Where redevelopment results in an alteration of less than fifty percent of impervious surfaces of a previously existing development, and the existing development was not subject to post-construction stormwater quality control requirements, only the alteration must be mitigated, and not the entire development. 
d.  Redevelopment does not include routine maintenance activities (as defined in Section 8.36.020) or emergency redevelopment activity required to protect public health and safety. Impervious surface replacement, such as the reconstruction of parking lots and roadways which does not disturb additional area and maintains the original grade and alignment, is considered a routine maintenance activity. Redevelopment does not include the repaving of existing roads to maintain original line and grade. 
e.  Existing single-family dwelling and accessory structures are exempt from the redevelopment requirements unless such projects create, add, or replace ten thousand square feet of impervious surface area. 
D.  Effective Date. The planning and land development requirements contained in Section 7 of Part VI.D of the municipal NPDES permit shall become effective ninety days from the adoption of the order (February 6, 2013). This includes planning priority projects that are discretionary permit projects or project phases that have not been deemed complete for processing, or discretionary permit projects without vesting tentative maps that have not requested and received an extension of previously granted approvals within ninety days of adoption of the order. Projects that have been deemed complete within ninety days of adoption of the order are not subject to the requirements [in] Section 7. 
E.  Specific Requirements. The site for every planning priority project shall be designed to control pollutants, pollutant loads, and runoff volume to the maximum extent feasible by minimizing impervious surface area and controlling runoff from impervious surfaces through infiltration, evapotranspiration, bioretention and/or rainfall harvest and use. 
(1)  A new single-family hillside home development shall include mitigation measures to: 
a.  Conserve natural areas; 
b.  Protect slopes and channels; 
c.  Provide storm drain system stenciling and signage; 
d.  Divert roof runoff to vegetated areas before discharge unless the diversion would result in slope instability; and 
e.  Direct surface flow to vegetated areas before discharge, unless the diversion would result in slope instability. 
(2)  Street and road construction projects with construction costs greater than five hundred thousand and add at least ten thousand square feet or more of impervious surface shall follow USEPA guidance regarding Managing Wet Weather with Green Infrastructure: Green Streets (December 2008 EPA-833-F-08-009) to the maximum extent practicable. 
(3)  The remainder of planning priority projects shall prepare a LID plan to comply with the following: 
a.  Retain stormwater runoff onsite for the stormwater quality design volume (SWQDv) defined as the runoff from: 
i.  The eighty-fifth percentile twenty-four-hour runoff event as determined from the Los Angeles County 85th percentile precipitation isohyetal map; or 
ii.  The volume of runoff produced from a three-quarter-inch, twenty-four-hour rain event, whichever is greater. 
b.  Minimize hydromodification impacts to natural drainage systems as defined in Order No. R4-2012-0175. 
c.  To demonstrate technical infeasibility, the project applicant must demonstrate that the project cannot reliably retain one hundred percent of the SWQDv on-site, even with the maximum application of green roofs and rainwater harvest and use, and that compliance with the applicable post-construction requirements would be technically infeasible by submitting a site-specific hydrologic and/or design analysis conducted and endorsed by a registered professional engineer, geologist, architect, and/or landscape architect. Technical infeasibility may result from conditions including the following: 
i.  The infiltration rate of saturated in-situ soils is less than 0.3 inch per hour and it is not technically feasible to amend the in-situ soils to attain an infiltration rate necessary to achieve reliable performance of infiltration or bioretention BMPs in retaining the SWQDv onsite. 
ii.  Locations where seasonal high groundwater is within five to ten feet of surface grade; 
iii.  Locations within one hundred feet of a groundwater well used for drinking water; 
iv.  Brownfield development sites or other locations where pollutant mobilization is a documented concern; 
v.  Locations with potential geotechnical hazards; 
vi.  Smart growth, infill, specific plans, or redevelopment locations where the density and/or nature of the project would create significant difficulty for compliance with the onsite volume retention requirement. 
d.  If partial or complete onsite retention is technically infeasible, the project site may biofiltrate one and one-half times the portion of the remaining SWQDv that is not reliably retained onsite. Biofiltration BMPs must adhere to the design specifications provided in Order No. R4-2012-0175. Additional alternative compliance options such as offsite infiltration and groundwater replenishment projects may be available to the project site. The project site should contact the city of Montebello to determine eligibility. 
e.  The remaining SWQDv that cannot be retained or biofiltered onsite must be treated onsite to reduce pollutant loading. BMPs must be selected and designed to meet pollutant-specific benchmarks as required per Order No. R4-2012-0175. Flow-through BMPs may be used to treat the remaining SWQDv and must be sized based on a rainfall intensity of: 
i.  0.2 inches per hour, or 
ii.  The one year, one-hour rainfall intensity as determined from the most recent Los Angeles County isohyetal map, whichever is greater. 
F.  A multi-phased project may comply with the standards and requirements of this section for all of its phases by: (a) designing a system acceptable to the city and satisfying the standards and requirements of this chapter for the entire site during the first phase, and (b) implementing the standards and requirements of this chapter for each phase of development or redevelopment of the site during the first phase or prior to commencement of construction of a later phase, to the extent necessary to treat the stormwater from such later phase. For purposes of this section, "multi-phased project" shall mean any planning priority project implemented over more than one phase. The site of a multi-phased project shall include any land and water area designed and used to store, treat, or manage stormwater runoff in connection with the development of redevelopment, including any tracts, lots, or parcels of real property, whether developed or not, associated with, functionally connected to, or under common ownership or control with such development or redevelopment. 
G.  Additional Requirements. The site for projects not classified with general applicability listed in paragraph C of this section, but resulting in the creation or addition or replacement of five hundred square feet or more of impervious surface area shall be designed to control pollutants, pollutant loads, and runoff volume per requirements listed herein. 
(Ord. 2245 § 1 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2361, § 4, 6-25-2014)  
8.36.120 - Enforcement—Authority. 
A.  The director of public works, the city engineer and duly authorized representatives thereof, are hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Nothing in this chapter precludes a local authority from using regular full-time employees to enforce this chapter. This authority shall be in addition to the authority granted to police and code enforcement officers. 
C.  Fees to be charged for plan checking, inspection, enforcement and any other activities carried out by the city shall be specified by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2245 § 1 (part), 2002)  
8.36.130 - Enforcement—Right of entry and inspection. 
A.  The director of public works, city engineer or duly authorized designee thereof, may, on twenty-four hour oral or written notice, unless exigent circumstances justify a shorter time period, enter upon and inspect any private premises for the purposes of verifying compliance with the terms of this chapter and perform any duty imposed upon the officer by this chapter, provided that: 
1.  If such building or premises be occupied, he or she shall first present proper credentials and request entry. 
2.  If such building or premises be unoccupied, he or she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or occupant of the building or premises and request entry. In the event that a request for entry is refused, the officer is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
B.  Such inspection may include, but is not limited to: 
1.  Identifying products produced, processes conducted, chemicals and materials used, stored or maintained on the subject premises; 
2.  Identifying points of discharge of all waste water, non-storm water, processed water system and pollutants; 
3.  Investigating the natural slope of the premises, including drainage patterns and man-made conveyance systems; 
4.  Establishing location of all points of discharge from the premises, whether by surface runoff or through a storm drain system; 
5.  Locating any illicit connection or illicit discharge; 
6.  Inspecting a vehicle, truck, trailer, tank or other mobile equipment; 
7.  Inspecting all records of the owner or occupant of public or private property relating to chemicals or processes presently or previously stored or occurring on the property, including material and/or chemical inventories, facilities maps or schematics and diagrams, material safety data sheets, hazardous waste manifests, business plans, pollution prevention plans, state general permits, and any and all records relating to illicit connections, illicit discharges, or any other source of contribution or potential contribution of pollutants to the municipal storm drain system; 
8.  Inspecting, sampling and testing any area runoff, soils area (including groundwater testing), process discharge, materials with any waste storage area (including any container contents), and/or treatment system discharges for the purpose of determining the potential for contribution of pollutants into the municipal storm drain system; 
9.  Inspecting the integrity of all storm drain and sanitary sewer systems and any connection to other pipelines on the property, including the use of dye and smoke tests, video surveys, photographs or videotapes, and the taking of measurements, drawings, or any other records reasonably necessary to document conditions as they exist on the premises; 
10.  Installing and maintaining of monitoring devices for the purpose of measuring any discharge, or potential source of discharge, to the municipal storm drain system; 
11.  Evaluating compliance with this chapter or the Clean Water Act. 
(Ord. 2245 § 1 (part), 2002)  
8.36.140 - Enforcement—Violations and penalties. 
A.  The director of public works, city engineer or duly authorized representatives may serve notice of violation upon a person owning or occupying a premises, describing the violations and requiring prompt correction thereof, when: 
1.  Pollutants or potential pollutants are being maintained, discharged or deposited in such a manner as to create, or if allowed to continue will create, any one or more of the following conditions, (a) a public nuisance, (b) a menace to the public safety, (c) pollution of underground or surface waters, (d) damage to any public sewer, municipal storm sewer system, or public or private property. 
2.  The person has failed to respond or comply with a previous notice of violation within the time period specified in the notice. 
B.  Failure to comply with a duly served notice of violation shall constitute a willful violation of this chapter. 
C.  The city manager, director of public works, or duly authorized representatives may serve a cease and desist order upon a person owning or occupying a premises, requiring the person to immediately: 
1.  Discontinue any illicit discharge, including process water, wastewater or pollutant discharge to the MS4. 
2.  Block or divert any flow of water from the property where the flow is occurring in violation of any provision of this chapter. 
3.  Discontinue any other violation of this chapter. 
The cease and desist order may contain terms and conditions or other provisions to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
D.  Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction is punishable by fine not exceeding one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. As a part of any sentence or other penalty imposed or the award of any damage, the court may also order that restitution be paid to the city or any injured person, or, in the case of a violator who is a minor, by the minor's parent or lawfully designated guardian or custodian. Restitution may include the amount of any reward. 
E.  The city attorney is also authorized to file in a court of competent jurisdiction a civil action seeking an injunction against any violation or threatened or continuing violation of this chapter. Any temporary, preliminary or permanent injunction issued pursuant hereto may include an order for reimbursement to the city for all costs incurred in enforcing this chapter, including costs of inspection, investigation, monitoring, treatment, abatement, removal or remediation undertaken by or at the expense of the city, and may include all legal expenses and fees and any or all costs incurred relating to the restoration or remediation of the environment. 
F.  Each separate discharge in violation of this chapter and each day a violation described in this chapter exists without correction, shall constitute a new and separate violation punishable as a separate criminal offense and/or civil violation. 
G.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who discharges waste or wastewater which causes pollution, or who violates any cease and desist order, prohibition, or effluent limitation, also may be in violation of the Federal Clean Water Act and/or Porter-Cologne Act and may be subject to the sanctions of those acts including civil and criminal penalties. In addition, the city attorney is authorized to file a citizen's suit pursuant to the Clean Water Act, seeking penalties, damages and orders compelling compliance and appropriate relief. 
H.  The penalties and remedies established by this chapter shall be cumulative. 
I.  Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall reimburse the city for any and all costs incurred by the city in responding to, investigating, assessing, monitoring, treating, cleaning, removing, or remediating any illicit discharge or pollutant from the municipal storm drain system; rectifying any illicit connection; or remediating any violation of this chapter. Such costs to be paid to the city include all administrative expenses and all legal expenses, including costs and attorneys' fees, in obtaining compliance, and in litigation including all costs and attorneys' fees on any appeal. The costs to be recovered pursuant to this section shall be recoverable from any and all persons violating this chapter. 
J.  The city shall have full power and authority to take any necessary precautions including, but not limited to, decontamination, storm drain closure, packaging, diking, and transportation of materials, in order to protect life, protect property, or prevent an imminent hazard to the public's health, safety or welfare. In the event any violation of this chapter constitutes an imminent danger to public health, safety, or the environment, the director of public works, city engineer or any authorized agent thereof, may enter upon the premises from which the violation emanates, abate the violation and danger created to the public safety or the environment, and restore any premises affected by the alleged violation, without notice to or consent from the owner or occupant of the premises. An imminent danger shall include but is not limited to exigent circumstances created by the discharge of pollutants, where such discharge presents a significant and immediate threat to the public health or safety, or the environment. 
K.  Notwithstanding any other provisions herein, violations of this chapter may further be deemed to be a public nuisance that may be abated by administrative or civil or criminal action in accordance with the terms and provisions of this code and state law. All costs and fees incurred by the city as a result of any violation of this chapter which constitute a nuisance, including all administrative fees and expenses and legal fees and expenses, shall become a lien against the subject premises from which the nuisance emanated and a personal obligation against the owner, in accordance with Government Code Sections 38773.1 and 38773.5. The owner of record of the premises subject to any lien shall receive notice of the lien prior to recording, as required by Government Code Section 38773.1. The city attorney is authorized to collect nuisance abatement costs and enforce a nuisance lien in an action brought for money judgment, or by delivery to the county assessor of a special assessment against the premises in accordance with the conditions and requirements of Government Code Section 38773.5. 
L.  Any remedies provided to the city in this chapter are not exclusive, and the city may utilize any and all other remedies as otherwise provided by law. 
M.  Compliance by any person or entity with the provision of this chapter shall not relieve any such person or entity from complying with other applicable local, state or federal statutory or regulatory requirements. 
(Ord. 2245 § 1 (part), 2002)  
Chapter 8.40 - ABANDONED PROPERTY AND VACANT LOTS 
Sections: 
 
8.40.010 - Purpose/scope. 
It is the purpose and intent of the Montebello City Council, through the adoption of this chapter, to establish a vacant property registration and maintenance program as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of abandoned and/or vacant properties. This chapter is intended to apply to abandoned and/or vacant property located within the City of Montebello. 
(Ord. No. 2329, § 1, 4-8-2009)  
8.40.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
"Abandoned" means real property that is vacant and is under a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee's sale, pending tax assessors lien sale and/or a property that has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. 
"Accessible property" means a property that is accessible through a compromised or breached gate, fence, wall etc. 
"Accessible structure" means a structure/building that is unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by unauthorized persons. 
"Agreement" means any agreement or written instrument, which provides that title to residential property, shall be transferred or conveyed from one owner to another owner after the sale, trade, transfer or exchange. 
"Assignment of rents" means an instrument that transfers the beneficial interest under a deed of trust from one lender/entity to another. 
"Beneficiary" means a lender under a note secured by a deed of trust. 
"Buyer" means any person, co-partnership, association, corporation, or fiduciary who agrees to transfer anything of value in consideration for property described in an agreement of sale, as defined in this subsection. 
"Days" means consecutive calendar days. 
"Deed of trust" means an instrument by which title to real estate is transferred to a third party trustee as security for a real estate loan. In California, a deed of trust is used instead of a mortgage. This definition applies to any and all subsequent deeds of trust (i.e.: 2nd trust deed, 3rd trust deed, etc.). 
"Deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale" means a recorded document that transfers ownership of a property from the trustor to the holder of a deed of trust upon consent of the beneficiary of the deed of trust. 
"Default" means the failure to fulfill a contractual obligation, monetary or conditional. 
"Distressed" means a property that is under a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee's sale and/or pending tax assessor's lien sale or has been foreclosed upon by the trustee or has been conveyed to the beneficiary/trustee via a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. 
"Evidence of vacancy" means any condition that on its own, or combined with other conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or mail, past due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities, accumulation of trash, junk and/or debris, the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds and/or shutters, the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent with residential habitation, statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, government employees that the property is vacant. 
"Foreclosure" means the process by which a property, placed as security for a real estate loan, is sold at auction to satisfy the debt if the trustor (borrower) defaults. 
"Local" means within forty road/driving miles distance of the subject property. 
"Neighborhood standard" means those conditions that are present on a simple majority of properties within a three hundred-foot radius of an individual property. A property that is the subject of a neighborhood standard comparison, or any other abandoned property within the three hundred-foot radius, shall not be counted toward the simple majority. 
"Notice of default" means a recorded notice that a default has occurred under a deed of trust and that the beneficiary intends to proceed with a trustee's sale. 
"Out of area" means in excess of forty road/driving miles distance of the subject property. 
"Owner" means any person, co-partnership, association, corporation, or fiduciary having a legal or equitable title or any interest in any real property. 
"Owner of record" means the person having recorded title to the property at any given point in time the record is provided by the Los Angeles County Recorders Office. 
"Property" means any unimproved or improved real property, or portion thereof, situated in the city and includes the buildings or structures located on the property regardless of condition. 
"Residential property" means any improved real property, or portion thereof, situated in the city, designed or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes, and shall include the buildings and structures located on such improved real property. This includes any real property being offered for sale, trade, transfer, or exchange as "residential" whether or not it is legally permitted and/or zoned for such use. 
"Securing" means such measures as may be directed by the city manager, or his or her designee that assist in rendering the property inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including but not limited to the repairing of fences and walls, chaining/pad locking of gates, the repair or boarding of doors, windows and/or other openings. Boarding shall be completed to a minimum of the current HUD securing standards at the time the boarding is completed or required. 
"Trustee" means the person, firm or corporation holding a deed of trust on a property. 
"Trustor" means a borrower under a deed of trust, who deeds property to a trustee as security for the payment of a debt. 
"Vacant" means a building, structure, or real property that is not legally occupied. 
(Ord. No. 2329, § 1, 4-8-2009)  
8.40.030 - Maintenance of unimproved vacant lots. 
Lots that are unimproved due to never having been developed or having become vacant subsequent to the removal of any pre-existing buildings, structures or impervious surfaces shall be subject to the approval of a landscape and irrigation plan by the planning division and shall be improved and maintained at all times in accordance with the following provisions: 
A.  Lots less than one acre. For unimproved vacant lots that are less than one acre in size, the entire lot shall be improved and maintained in the following manner: 
1.  For residentially zoned lots, the entire lot shall be maintained using sod, hydro-seed, drought tolerant ground cover or other acceptable ground cover approved by the planning division. The ground cover shall be maintained in good condition at all times. 
2.  For commercial or industrial zoned lots, a minimum ten-foot wide perimeter landscape planter along all street frontages shall be provided. All other internal areas may be landscaped or include a decorative hardscape subject to the approval of the planning division. 
3.  The lot shall be improved with an irrigation system and maintained in good condition at all times. 
4.  The lot shall be maintained free of litter and debris, including the stockpiling of any material, at all times. Any on-site litter, debris or stockpiling of material shall be immediately removed. The property owner shall be responsible for inspecting the property weekly, or taking all necessary steps to reasonably ensure that no litter, debris or material stockpiling collects or is maintained on the lot. 
5.  Any dead or dying vegetation as well as any broken, malfunctioning or non-functioning irrigation components on the lot shall be replaced within seventy-two hours of their discovery. The property owner shall be responsible for inspecting the property weekly, or taking all necessary steps to reasonably ensure that there is no dead or dying vegetation or any broken, malfunctioning or non-functioning irrigation components on the lot. 
B.  Lots one acre or greater. For unimproved vacant lots that are one acre or greater in size, the entire lot shall be improved and maintained in the following manner: 
1.  A minimum ten-foot wide perimeter landscape planter along all street frontages shall be provided. 
2.  All landscape planters shall be improved with an irrigation system and consist of decorative landscaping containing a combination of trees, shrubs, and groundcover, or other acceptable landscaping approved by the planning division. A landscape and irrigation plan shall be submitted to and approved by the planning division prior to implementation. 
3.  All on-site landscaping and irrigation shall be maintained in good condition at all times. Any dead or dying landscaping shall be replaced within seventy-two hours of their discovery, including any broken, malfunctioning or non-functioning irrigation components. The property owner shall be responsible for inspecting the property weekly, or taking all necessary steps to reasonably ensure that all of the landscaping and irrigation on the lot is maintained in good condition and there are no broken, malfunctioning or non-functioning irrigation components on the lot. 
4.  A six-foot high decorative, view-obscuring fence shall be installed behind all required perimeter landscaping to secure the lot. If the property owner decides not to install the six-foot high view-obscuring fence, the entire lot shall be landscaped. In circumstances where the director of planning and community development finds that a higher fence is warranted for adequate security of the site and/or because of usual topographical circumstances associated with the vacant lot, a fence may be constructed up to a maximum of eight feet high. All fences shall include a security gate to provide accessibility to the lot for the police department or other emergency personnel. A security code for the gate shall be provided to the police department upon installation and shall be kept up-to-date at all times. 
5.  Decorative view obscuring fencing may include redwood or cedar fencing, woodcrete, green vinyl chain-link fencing with a green windscreen securely attached, or any other durable, aesthetically attractive, material deemed acceptable by the planning division. Green vinyl chain-link fencing with a green windscreen will not be permitted in residential or commercial zones or zones which abut residential or commercial zones, except as a temporary construction fence with the approval of planning division. 
6.  All fencing shall be maintained in good condition at all times. Any on-site graffiti shall be removed within twenty-four hours of its appearance. The property owner shall be responsible for inspecting the property weekly, or taking all necessary steps to reasonably ensure that the entire lot is free from graffiti. 
(Ord. No. 2329, § 1, 4-8-2009)  
8.40.040 - Maintenance of vacant property acquired by foreclosure. 
Subject to certain amendments and additions as hereinafter set forth in this chapter, the city council references California Civil Code Section 2929.3 which requires a legal owner to maintain vacant residential property purchased by that owner at a foreclosure sale or acquired by that owner through foreclosure under a mortgage or deed of trust. 
The definition of "failure to maintain" as found in Civil Code Section 2929.3(a)(3)(b) is supplemented and clarified by referencing the conditions designated as public nuisances in Chapter [Section] 8.16.010 and the maintenance and security requirements of [Sections] 8.40.070 and 8.40.080 of the Montebello Municipal Code (Civil Code Section 2929.3(a)(3)(f)). 
(Ord. No. 2329, § 1, 4-8-2009)  
8.40.050 - Recordation of transfer of loan/deed of trust/assignment of rents. 
Within ten days of the purchase and/or transfer of a loan/deed of trust secured by property the new beneficiary/trustee shall record, with the Los Angeles County Recorders Office, an assignment of beneficial interest, or similar document, that lists the name of the corporation, and/or individual, the mailing address and contact phone number of the new beneficiary/trustee responsible for receiving payments associated with the loan/deed of trust. 
(Ord. No. 2329, § 1, 4-8-2009)  
8.40.060 - Registration of vacant properties under notice of default. 
Any beneficiary/trustee, who holds a deed of trust on a property located within the City of Montebello, shall perform an inspection of the property that is the security for the deed of trust, upon default by the trustor, prior to recording a notice of default with the Los Angeles County Recorders Office. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it is, by this chapter, deemed abandoned and the beneficiary/trustee shall, within ten days of the inspection, register the property with the code enforcement division or his or her designee on forms provided by the city. 
If the property is occupied but remains in default it shall be inspected by the beneficiary/trustee, or his designee, monthly until (1) the trustee or other party remedies the default, or (2) it is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy at which time it is deemed abandoned, and the trustee shall, within ten days of that inspection, register the property with the code enforcement division on forms provided by the city. 
The registration shall contain the name of the beneficiary/trustee (corporation or individual), the direct street/office mailing address of the beneficiary/trustee (no P.O. boxes), a direct contact name and phone number for the beneficiary/trustee and, in the case of a corporation or out of area beneficiary/trustee, the local property management company responsible for the security, maintenance and marketing of the property. Registration fees will not be prorated. 
An annual registration fee shall accompany the registration form. The fee and registration shall be valid for the calendar year, or remaining portion of the calendar year, in which the registration was initially required. Subsequent registrations and fees are due January 1st of each year and must be received no later than January 31st of the year due. 
This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. 
Properties subject to this chapter shall remain under the annual registration requirement, security and maintenance standards of this section as long as they remain vacant. 
Any person, firm, corporation or any other legal entity that has registered a property under this chapter must report any change of information contained in the registration within ten days of the change. 
(Ord. No. 2329, § 1, 4-8-2009)  
8.40.070 - Maintenance requirements. 
Properties subject to this section shall be: 
A.  Free from all conditions expressly designated as public nuisances in Chapter [Section] 8.16.010. 
B.  In a condition comparable to the neighborhood standards. 
C.  Shall comply with all of the landscape and irrigation requirements in Title 17 (Zoning Code) of the Montebello Municipal Code. 
D.  Pools and spas shall be kept in working order so the water remains clear and free of pollutants and debris or drained and kept dry. Properties with pools and/or spas must comply with the minimum security fencing requirements of the State of California. 
Adherence to this section does not relieve the beneficiary/trustee or property owner of any obligations set forth in any covenants conditions and restrictions and/or home owners association rules and regulations which may apply to the property. 
(Ord. No. 2329, § 1, 4-8-2009)  
8.40.080 - Security requirements. 
Properties subject to this section shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. 
Secure manner includes, but is not limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors (walk-through, sliding and garage) gates and any other opening of such size that it may allow any person including but not limited to a child to access the interior of the property and or structure(s). In the case of broken windows securing means the re-glazing or boarding of the window immediately and within ten days the window shall be replaced. 
If the property is owned by a corporation and/or out of area beneficiary/trustee/owner, a local property management company shall be contracted to perform weekly inspections to verify that the requirements of this section, and any other applicable laws, are being met. 
The property shall be posted with the name and twenty-four-hour contact phone number of the local property management company. The posting shall be no less than eighteen inches × twenty-four inches and shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of forty-five feet and shall contain along with the name and twenty-four-hour contact number, the words "THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY" and "TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL". The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street, secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street or if no such area exists, or on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting in a location that is visual from the street to the front of the property but not readily accessible to vandals. Exterior posting must be constructed of, and printed with, weather resistant materials. 
The local property management company shall inspect the property on a weekly basis to determine if the property is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2329, § 1, 4-8-2009)  
8.40.090 - Additional authority. 
In addition to the enforcement remedies established in Chapters 1.12 and 1.14, the city manager or his or her designee shall have the authority to require the beneficiary/trustee/owner and/or owner of record of any property affected by this section, to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures including, but not limited to, securing any/all door, window or other openings, installing additional security lighting, increasing on-site inspection frequency, employment of an on-site security guard or other measures as may be reasonably required to arrest the decline of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2329, § 1, 4-8-2009)  
8.40.100 - Fees. 
The fee for registering an abandoned property shall be set by resolution of the City of Montebello City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2329, § 1, 4-8-2009)  
8.40.110 - Enforcement. 
Violations of this chapter may be enforced in any combination as allowed in Chapters 1.12 and 1.14. The rights and remedies provided in this section are cumulative and in addition to any other rights and remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2329, § 1, 4-8-2009)  
8.40.120 - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by any of the requirements of this section my appeal insofar as such appeal is allowed under Chapter 1.14. 
(Ord. No. 2329, § 1, 4-8-2009)  
8.40.130 - Violation/penalty. 
Violations of this chapter shall be treated as a strict liability offense regardless of intent. Any person, firm and/or corporation that violates any portion of this section shall be subject to prosecution and/or administrative enforcement under Chapters 1.12 and 1.14. Fines and penalties collected pursuant to this section shall be directed to city nuisance abatement programs. 
(Ord. No. 2329, § 1, 4-8-2009)  
8.40.140 - Severability. 
Should any provision, section, paragraph, sentence or word of this chapter be determined or declared invalid by any final court action in a court of competent jurisdiction or by reason of any preemptive legislation, the remaining provisions, sections, paragraphs, sentences or words of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2329, § 1, 4-8-2009)  
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE  
Chapter 9.04 - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY 
 
9.04.010 - Drinking in public. 
No person shall drink any intoxicating liquor in or upon any public street or public place within the city. 
(Prior code § 4206)  
9.04.020 - Soliciting or accepting drinks from customers where employed. 
No employee shall accept or solicit for himself drinks of alcoholic beverages from any customer at the place where he is employed. 
(Prior code § 4243)  
9.04.030 - Strip tease acts. 
No person shall, in any public place, in the course of any entertainment participated in by him as a performer, remove from his person any article of clothing other than a hat, coat, necktie, gloves or shoes. 
(Prior code § 4241)  
9.04.040 - Exposure by waiters, waitresses and entertainers. 
A.  Prohibitions—Waiters, Waitresses and Entertainers. Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who, while acting as a waiter, waitress or entertainer in an establishment which serves food, beverages, or food and beverages, including, but not limited to, alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises of such establishments: 
1.  Exposes his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or 
2.  Exposes any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or 
3.  Exposes any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof. 
B.  Employment or Payment Not Necessary for Offense. A person shall be deemed to be a waiter, waitress or entertainer if such person acts in that capacity without regard to whether such person is paid any compensation by the management of the establishment in which the activity is performed. 
C.  Prohibitions—Public Performance. Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who, while participating in any live act, demonstration or exhibition in any public place, place open to the public or place open to public view: 
1.  Exposes his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or 
2.  Exposes any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or 
3.  Exposes any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof. 
D.  Counseling or Assisting. Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who causes, permits, procures, counsels or assists any person to expose or simulate exposure as prohibited in this section. 
E.  Exemption of Theatrical Establishments. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a theater, concert hall or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances. 
(Prior code § 4450)  
9.04.050 - Depositing human waste prohibited. 
A.  No person shall urinate, defecate, or deposit any human waste or excrement in any manner on or at any public place, including, but not limited to, any street, park, restaurant, cafe, theater, store, playground, school ground, recreational area, or other place to which the public is invited or has access to, or any place open to the public view. 
B.  No person shall enter into or remain on private property for the purpose of urinating, defecating, or deposit any human waste or excrement in any manner, except with the permission of the lawful occupant in a restroom or otherwise enclosed facility designed for the sanitary disposal of human waste, or as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. 2320 § 1, 2008)  
Chapter 9.08 - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 
 
9.08.010 - Declaration of policy. 
A.  In order to control loud, raucous and excessive noise and vibration in the city, it is declared to be the policy of the city to prohibit such noise and vibration generated from all or by all sources specified in this title. 
B.  It is determined that certain noise levels and vibrations are detrimental to the public health, welfare and safety and contrary to public interest and, therefore, the creating, maintaining, causing or allowing to be created, maintained or caused, of any loud or raucous noise or vibration in a manner not in conformity with the provisions of this title is prohibited. Any loud or raucous noise is a public nuisance and may be abated as such. 
(Ord. 2143 § 1, 1996: prior code §§ 4223 and 4223.1)  
9.08.020 - Loud and raucous noise prohibited. 
No person shall make, create, maintain, cause or allow to be created, maintained or caused any loud or raucous noise. 
(Ord. 2143 § 2, 1996: prior code § 4224)  
9.08.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall be applied to the terms utilized in this chapter unless it appears from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
"Danger warning" means any audible sound issued to warn of an impending danger such as an approaching train or an emergency response vehicle. 
"Day" means any day of the week. 
"Loud and raucous noise" means any sound or vibration which disturbs the peace and quiet of a reasonable person of ordinary sensitiveness, and prevents such person from the enjoyment or use for which the property they occupy was intended. Complaints of a noise disturbance from two or more persons shall constitute prima facie evidence that a noise is loud and raucous. 
"Motor vehicles" shall include, but not be limited to, mini-bikes, go-carts, automobiles and trucks. Motor vehicle shall include any and all self-propelled vehicles as defined in the California Vehicle Code, including all on-highway type motor vehicles subject to registration under the said Code, and all off-highway type motor vehicles subject to identification under said Code. 
"Noise resulting from emergency action" shall refer to a sound or vibration generated by any machinery, vehicle, work or alarm used, employed, performed or operated in order to abate an imminent hazard to a person, property, or the public health, safety or welfare, or to restore a utility service. 
"Sound amplifying equipment" means any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound. "Sound amplifying equipment" shall not include standard automobile radios when used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which the automobile radio is installed. "Sound amplifying equipment" as used in this chapter shall not include warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles, or horns or other warning devices on any vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes. 
"Sound truck" means any motor vehicle, or any other vehicle regardless of motor power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon, or attached thereto, any sound amplifying equipment. 
(Ord. 2143 § 3, 1996)  
9.08.040 - Special provisions. 
The following activities shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter: 
A.  Occasional outdoor entertainment including outdoor dancing and/or the performance of live or recorded music, and show, sporting and entertainment events, provided said events are conducted in accordance with the terms of any permit issued for same; 
B.  All noise resulting from emergency action, except that any bell or alarm on any building or structure which is not terminated within 30 minutes from the time it is activated shall not be exempt from this chapter. Noise resulting from emergency action shall refer to a sound or vibration generated by any machinery, vehicle, work or alarm used, employed, performed or operated in order to abate an imminent hazard to a person, property, or the public health, safety or welfare, or to restore a utility service; 
C.  Any motor vehicle alarm as defined in Chapter 9.28 of this code which is terminated within five minutes of its being activated. 
(Ord. 2143 § 4, 1996)  
9.08.050 - Loud and raucous noise. 
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud or raucous noises but the enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
A.  Horns, Signaling Devices, Etc. The sounding of any horn or similar audible device on any vehicle on any street or public place of the city which is louder or longer than is reasonably needed to warn of a danger, or the use of any horn, whistle, or other similar audible device for an unreasonable period of time; 
B.  Radios, Stereos, Etc. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio, stereo or sound amplifying equipment in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants. The operation of any such radio, stereo or sound amplifying equipment between the hours of eight p.m. and seven a.m. on any day in such a manner as to be audible to a property and/or structure adjacent to the building, structure, or vehicle from which the sound originates shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section; 
C.  Sound Trucks, Etc. The use of sound amplifying equipment on a sound truck between the hours of nine p.m. and ten a.m. each day, and the use of said equipment within two hundred feet of churches, schools, hospitals, or city or county buildings; 
D.  Yelling, Shouting, Etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing within a residential or commercial area in such manner as to disturb the peace and quiet enjoyment of a reasonable person. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing between the hours of eight p.m. and seven a.m. shall constitute prima facie evidence that said activities disturb the peace and quiet of a reasonable person; 
E.  Animals and Birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort and repose of any persons in the vicinity; 
F.  Mechanical Whistles. The blowing of any mechanical whistle attached to a stationary location except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon the request of proper city authorities; 
G.  Defect in Vehicle or Load. The use of any motor vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such a manner as to disturb the peace and quiet of a reasonable person; 
H.  Loading, Unloading, Opening Boxes. The creation of any noise which disturbs the peace and quiet of a reasonable person in connection with loading or unloading of any vehicle, or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m.; 
I.  Construction or Repairing of Real Property. Noise sources associated with construction, demolition, grading, repair or remodeling of any real property other than between the hours of seven a.m. and eight p.m. on weekdays (Monday through Friday), and nine a.m. to six p.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, except in the case of an emergency where such action is immediately required to prevent injuries to persons or damage to property as determined by the director of building and safety or his designated representative; 
J.  Schools, Courts, Churches, Medical Facilities. The creation of noises adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same are in use, or adjacent to any medical facility, including but not limited to, a hospital, medical office, clinic, or any location where medical treatment is rendered, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or which unreasonably disturbs the occupants of or visitors to these structures; 
K.  Hawkers, Peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of a reasonable person; 
L.  Pile Drivers, Hammers, Etc. Any pile driver, pneumatic hammer, bulldozers or other construction vehicles, motorized hoists or other devices operated between the hours of eight p.m. and seven a.m.; 
M.  Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower, power fan or internal combustion engine in which the power is produced by the explosion of a fuel and air mixture within the cylinder(s) shall be prohibited unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. 
(Ord. 2164 §§ 1, 2, 1997; Ord. 2143 § 5, 1996)  
9.08.060 - Penalty for violations. 
A.  Any person who violates any provision of this title is guilty of a misdemeanor or an infraction, and shall be punished according to the discretion of the prosecuting authority. 
B.  Each separate noise violation under this title shall constitute a separate offense. Repeated noise disturbance calls to the same location within a twenty-four hour period will result in a service fee charge for all personnel and equipment costs, or other damage and expenses as set by city council resolution. 
C.  As an additional remedy, any chronic or repetitive violation of this title shall be deemed and is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated as provided in Chapter 8.16 of this code, or summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 2143 § 6, 1996)  
Chapter 9.12 - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
 
9.12.010 - Depositing dead animals, filth or rubbish in streets or parks. 
No person shall deposit in any street or park within the city, any dead animal, filth, dirt, trash, rubbish or offensive matter. Any person violating the provisions of this section, or any part thereof, shall be liable for the cost of removing such dead animal, filth, dirt or rubbish or offensive matter, in addition to the other penalties prescribed in this code. 
(Prior code § 4226)  
9.12.020 - Throwing stones at houses or buildings. 
No person shall wilfully and maliciously throw stones or other substances at, against or upon any house or other building within the city. 
(Prior code § 4227)  
9.12.030 - Permitting water to flow into, upon or along streets. 
No person owning, occupying, keeping or operating any house, barn, stable, store, room, pumping plant, reservoir, tank or other building or structure, or garden, grove, orchard or field for any use or purpose whatsoever, shall cause, permit or allow any water or drainage to flow from same into, upon or along any street. 
(Prior code § 4234)  
9.12.040 - Obstructing streets. 
A.  No person shall place or leave upon any public street or public place any goods, merchandise, boxes, barrels, handcarts, handtrucks, benches or seats, or any article or substance which shall obstruct the passage thereof; or leave standing upon any public street or public place, any automobile, truck or other vehicle overnight, or as a parking place for such automobile, truck or vehicle when not in use. 
B.  The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply to: 
1.  Goods or merchandise in actual process of receipt, delivery or removal; 
2.  Building material for use in work being actually carried on, and for which permission has been obtained from the city council or the street superintendent; 
3.  Any public necessity or convenience for which express permission has been obtained from the city council of the city. 
(Prior code §§ 4237 and 4238)  
9.12.050 - Packing or unpacking merchandise upon street. 
No person shall pack or unpack any goods, wares or merchandise in or upon any public street. 
(Prior code § 4239)  
9.12.060 - Unauthorized removal, use or possession of shopping carts. 
A.  Removal. No person shall remove any shopping cart, shopping basket, or other similar device, (hereinafter referred to as "shopping cart") from the premises or parking area of any business establishment utilizing such shopping carts, if such shopping cart has permanently affixed to it a sign which: 
1.  Identifies such shopping cart as belonging to the owner or operator of such business establishment; and 
2.  A notice to the effect that such shopping cart is not to be removed from the owner's premises. 
B.  Abandonment. No person shall abandon, deposit or leave any such shopping cart, which has been removed from the owner's premises, upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or other public place, nor upon any private property except that of the owner of such cart. 
C.  Possession. No person shall have in his possession any shopping cart which has been removed from the premises of any business establishment operated by the owner of the cart and which has permanently affixed to it a sign as referred to in subsection A of this section. 
D.  Alteration. No person shall alter, or tamper with any shopping cart, or remove any part thereof, without the owner's written consent. 
E.  Exception. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the owner of any shopping cart, nor to such owner's agents or employees. 
(Prior code § 4247)  
Chapter 9.16 - OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS 
 
9.16.010 - Curfew. 
It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen years to be present in or upon the public streets, avenues, highways, roads, alleys, sidewalks, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement or eating places, parking lots or vacant lots in the city between the hours of ten p.m. on any day and sunrise of the immediately following day. This section does not apply when: 
A.  The minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care or custody of the minor, or by his or her spouse eighteen years of age or older; 
B.  The minor is on an errand directed by his or her parent or guardian or other adult person having the care or custody of the minor, or by his or her spouse, eighteen years of age or older, without any detour or stop; 
C.  The minor is attending or returning directly home from a public meeting, or a place of public entertainment, such as a movie, play, sporting event or school activity, without any detour or stop; 
D.  The presence of such minor in such place or places is connected with or required with respect to a business, trade, profession or occupation in which the minor is lawfully engaged; 
E.  The minor is attending school, religious, recreational or civic functions; 
F.  The minor is in a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
G.  The minor is married, has been previously married or has been declared emancipated pursuant to California law; 
H.  The minor is on the property or sidewalk abutting the minor's residence; 
I.  The minor is involved in an emergency; or 
J.  The minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and freedom of assembly. 
(Ord. 2170 § 3 (part), 1997: Ord. 1983 § 1, 1989: prior code § 4221)  
9.16.020 - Sexually explicit material. 
A.  As used in this section: 
"Display for sale" means placed within reach and accessible to persons under age of eighteen years or the public and does not include the shelving or storage of magazines, books or publications reasonably beyond the reach of customers or the public. 
"Knowingly" means being aware of the character of the material either directly, or because of its outward appearance or its reputation. 
"Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other legal entity. 
"Sexually explicit material" means a photograph or pictorial representation of a person's genitals or anus or of any act of sexual intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy, masturbation or bestiality, whether actual or simulated, which when to the average person such photograph or pictorial representation has as its primary purpose, design or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront. 
B.  No person shall knowingly display for sale, or knowingly cause or permit to be displayed for sale, in any business open to persons under the age of eighteen years not accompanied by a parent or guardian, any magazine, book or other publication containing illustrations of sexually explicit material unless such magazine, book or other publication is stapled closed, sealed in a wrapper, or is by any other means sealed in such a manner as to prevent its being opened prior to sale. 
C.  No person shall knowingly display the cover of a book, magazine, or other publication which cover illustrates sexually explicit material in a place where such cover may be readily viewed by persons under the age of eighteen years. Such cover shall be covered from view when displayed in such locations. 
D.  The provisions of subsection C of this section shall not apply to any business which is not open to persons under the age of eighteen and which has a sign posted at each door intended for public entrance which shall read: 
Notice, this business displays sexually explicit materials. Admission of persons under eighteen years of age unless accompanied by a parent or guardian is prohibited. 
The letters composing such sign each shall be a minimum of three inches high. 
(Prior code §§ 4460 and 4461)  
9.16.030 - Daytime loitering by minors. 
It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen years, who is subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuation education to be present in or upon the public streets, avenues, highways, roads, alleys, sidewalks, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement or eating places, parking lots or vacant lots in the city during the minor's school hours. This section does not apply when: 
A.  The minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care or custody of the minor; 
B.  The minor is involved in an emergency; 
C.  The minor is going to or coming directly from his or her place of employment or a medical appointment; 
D.  The minor has permission to leave school campus for lunch or for a school-related activity and has in his or her possession a valid off-campus permit issued by the school; 
E.  The minor is exempt from compulsory education as enumerated in Education Code Section 48410; 
F.  The minor is exempt from compulsory education as enumerated in Education Code Sections 48220 et seq.; including, but not limited to, a minor receiving instruction at home pursuant to Education Code Sections 482222, 48224, 51745 or other applicable provisions of state law, or is otherwise exempt from attendance at a public or private full-time day school as set forth in the Education Code; 
G.  The minor is conducting activities which are "excused" for justifiable personal reasons within the meaning of Education Code Section 48205; 
H.  The minor is going directly to or from an event or activity sponsored, sanctioned or arranged by the school; 
I.  The minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and freedom of assembly; or 
J.  The minor is not a resident of the city and possesses a valid passport, visitor's visa or other form of identification to establish the minor is temporarily visiting with the city, or the minor is in a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel. 
(Ord. 2170 § 3 (part), 1997: Ord. 2144 § 2, 1996)  
9.16.035 - Violation of Section 9.16.010 or 9.16.030—Penalty—Enforcement. 
A.  Violation. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, when a person under the age of eighteen years is charged with a violation of this section, and peace officer issues a notice to appear in juvenile court to that minor, the charge shall be deemed an infraction unless the minor requests that a petition be filed under Section 601 or 602 of the Welfare and Institutions Code. 
B.  Penalties for Violation. Any person convicted of wilfully violating this section is guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred thirty-five dollars and/or twenty-seven hours of community service; or such other punishment as may be approved by the municipal court from time to time. Community service shall be served during a time other than the minor's hours of school attendance or employment. 
C.  Before taking any action to enforce the provisions of this section, police officers shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being out in a public place during curfew hours. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest for a violation of this ordinance unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no exceptions apply. 
(Ord. 2170 § 3 (part), 1997)  
9.16.040 - Minor curfew, loitering or wilful misconduct—Cost recovery. 
A.  Determination by Court. When, based on a finding of civil liability or criminal conviction for violations of curfew pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Section 625.5, daytime loitering (truancy) or wilful misconduct in violation of Welfare and Institutions Code Section 602, a minor under eighteen years of age is detained for a period of time in excess of one hour and said detention required the supervision of the juvenile offender by Montebello police department employee(s), the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) having custody or control of said minor shall be jointly and severally liable for the cost of providing such personnel over and above the services normally provided by said department. 
B.  Determination by Chief of Police. As determined by the chief of police or his designee, the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of a minor committing any public offense amounting to an act of wilful misconduct in violation of Welfare and Institutions Code Section 602 where police personnel provide services relating to the detention, processing or supervision of minors that are over and above the normal services usually provided by the Montebello police department, may be billed for the cost of providing such personnel for such services beyond those normally provided by said department. 
C.  Appeal. Any person receiving a bill for police services pursuant to this section may, within fifteen days after the billing date, file a written request appealing the imposition of said charges. Any billing sent pursuant to this section shall inform the billed party of the right to appeal said billing. Any appeal regarding such billing shall be heard by the chief of police or his designee as the hearing officer. Within ten days after the hearing, the hearing officer shall give written notice of the decision to the appellant. Upon the filing of a request for an appeal, payment of the bill for the police services shall be suspended until notice of the decision of the hearing officer. If the appeal is denied in part or in full, all amounts due to the city shall be paid within thirty days after notice of the decision of the hearing officer. 
(Ord. 2144 § 3, 1996)  
9.16.050 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section. 
"Emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes but is not limited to the following: a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
"Guardian" means: (1) a person who under court order is the guardian of minor, or (2) a public or private agency with whom the minor has been placed by a court order, or (3) a person at least eighteen years of age exercising care and custody of a minor. 
"Minor" means any person under the age of eighteen years of age. 
"Parent" means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or a stepparent of another person. 
"Public place" means any place to which the public or any substantial group of the public has access including but not limited to, sidewalks, streets, highways, beaches, parks, playgrounds and common areas of schools, hospitals, apartments, houses, office buildings, transport facilities, theaters, game rooms, shops, shopping malls, or any other public place of business. 
"Street" means a way or place, of whatever nature, open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the purpose of vehicular travel or in the case of a sidewalk thereof for pedestrian travel. The term "street" includes the legal right-of-way, including but not limited to the traffic lanes, curbs, sidewalk whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots or other grounds found within the legal right-of-way of a street. The term "street" applies irrespective of what the legal right-of-way is formally called, whether alley, avenue, court, road, or otherwise. 
(Ord. 2170 § 3 (part), 1997)  
Chapter 9.18 - LOITERING BY CRIMINAL STREET GANGS 
 
9.18.010 - Prohibited acts. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person who is a member of a "criminal street gang" as that term is defined in California Penal Code Section 186.22(f) or who is in the company of or acting in concert with a member of a "criminal street gang" to loiter or idle in a "public place" as defined in subsection B of this section, under any of the following circumstances: 
1.  With the intent to publicize a criminal street gang's dominance over certain territory in order to intimidate nonmembers of the gang from entering, remaining in, or using the public place or adjacent area; 
2.  With the intent to conceal ongoing commerce in illegal drugs or other unlawful activity. 
B.  For purposes of this chapter, a "public place" means the public way and any other location open to the public, whether publicly or privately owned, including, but not limited to any street, sidewalk, avenue, highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground or other public ground or public building, any common area of a school, hospital, apartment house, office building, transport facility, shop, privately owned place of business, to which the public is invited, including any place of amusement, entertainment, or eating place. Any "public place" also includes the front yard area, driveway and walkway of any private residence, business, or apartment house. 
(Ord. 2226 § 1 (part), 2001)  
9.18.020 - Powers of law enforcement officers not limited. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in any way to limit the power or right of a law enforcement officer to make any investigation, detention or arrest as such law enforcement officer would be permitted to make in absence of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2226 § 1 (part), 2001)  
9.18.030 - Parental control. 
Any parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) authorized by said parent(s) or guardian(s) to have the care and custody of a minor, who knowingly permits or by insufficient control allows a minor to violate the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2226 § 1 (part), 2001)  
9.18.040 - Penalty. 
Violation of this chapter shalt be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both. 
(Ord. 2226 § 1 (part), 2001)  
9.18.050 - Severability. 
If any provision or clause of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any other provision or application of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end of provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. 2226 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 9.20 - WEAPONS 
 
9.20.010 - Discharging guns. 
No person shall, without first obtaining permission from the city council, shoot, fire or discharge, any pistol, rifle, gun or other firearm, or any pistol, rifle or gun operated by compressed air, or a spring device, including, but not limited to, B.B. or pellet guns, not necessary in self-defense, or in performance of an official duty within the city. 
(Prior code § 4231)  
Chapter 9.24 - GRAFFITI[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2365, § 7, adopted Jan. 28, 2015, amended ch. 9.24 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 9.24, §§ 9.24.010—9.24.090, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from prior code §§ 4475—4483; Ord. 2082, §§ 2—10, adopted 1993; and Ord. 2227, § 1, adopted 2001. 
 
9.24.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Aerosol paint container" means any aerosol container, regardless of the material from which it is made, which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint or other substance capable of defacing property. 
"Etching tool" means an instrument, tool or device designed or commonly used for marking, cutting or defacing glass, and includes devices designed for marking surfaces and capable of marking glass. 
"Felt tip marker" means any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which, at its broadest width is greater than one-eighth inch, containing ink that is not water soluble. 
"Graffiti" means and includes any unauthorized inscription, word, figure or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn or painted on any real or personal property. 
"Graffiti implement" means an aerosol paint container, a felt tip marker, an etching tool or a graffiti stick. 
"Graffiti stick" means a device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, leaving a mark at least one-eighth of an inch in width and not water soluble. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 7, 1-28-2015)  
9.24.020 - Graffiti prohibited. 
A.  No person shall place graffiti on any public or privately owned property, including natural and manmade objects, within the city. 
B.  Pursuant to Government Code section 38772, any person who places graffiti on any public or privately owned property, including natural and manmade objects within the city, shall be personally liable for any and all costs incurred in connection with the removal of any graffiti caused by that person, including all abatement costs, attorney's fees, court costs, removal costs, costs of repair and/or replacement, and the law enforcement costs incurred by the city in identifying and apprehending the person. Such liability shall be a personal obligation and shall constitute a lien or special assessment on property owned by such person pursuant to Chapter 8.16 of this code. The city is authorized to initiate a legal action to enforce this section, or to recover these costs by any other means provided by law. Disposition of a criminal prosecution relating to placement of graffiti does not preclude the city from seeking full cost recovery as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 7, 1-28-2015)  
9.24.030 - Possession of graffiti implements. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person who is less than eighteen years of age to have in his or her possession any graffiti implement except for the minor's use under the supervision of the minor's parent, guardian, instructor or employer. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any graffiti implement while upon any property of the city of Montebello other than public highways, streets, alleys or ways, except as may be authorized by the city. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any graffiti implement while upon any private property, except as may be authorized by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 7, 1-28-2015)  
9.24.040 - Furnishing certain graffiti implements to minors. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, give, exchange or in any way furnish any felt tip marker, etching tool or graffiti stick to any person who is less than eighteen years of age. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 7, 1-28-2015)  
9.24.050 - Posting requirements. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation that offers to the public any graffiti implement to fail to post in a conspicuous location, a sign containing the following language in letters at least one-half inch in height: 
IT IS UNLAWFUL FOR A MINOR TO BUY OR BE SOLD SPRAY PAINT, PAINT STICKS, ETCHING TOOL OR MARKERS ONE-EIGHTH OF AN INCH OR WIDER. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 7, 1-28-2015)  
9.24.060 - Storage of graffiti implements. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation that offers to the public any graffiti implement for sale to fail to store or cause to be stored any graffiti implements in such a manner as to be accessible to the public without employee assistance. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 7, 1-28-2015)  
9.24.070 - Parental and minor liability. 
Pursuant to California Civil Code Section 1714.1(b) and Government Code Section 38772, any parent or legal guardian having custody or control of a minor who places graffiti on any public or privately owned property within the city shall be jointly and severally liable with such minor for any and all costs incurred in connection with the removal of any graffiti caused by the minor, including but not limited to: all abatement costs, attorney's fees, court costs, removal costs, costs of repair and/or replacement and law enforcement costs incurred by the city in identifying and apprehending the minor. The liability of each parent or guardian shall not exceed the amount set by the California Judicial Council in accordance with California Civil Code Section 1714.1(c). Such liability shall be a personal obligation of each parent or guardian and shall constitute a lien or special assessment on property owned by each parent or guardian. The city is authorized to initiate legal action to enforce this section, or to recover these costs by any other means provided by law. Disposition of a criminal prosecution relating to placement of graffiti does not preclude the city from seeking full cost recovery as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 7, 1-28-2015)  
9.24.080 - Determination of liability. 
Liability of a minor or any other person for placement of graffiti may be determined by any confession or admission, or any guilty plea, nolo contendere plea, or conviction regarding any violation of the Penal Code relating to graffiti or any other federal, state or local graffiti law relating to graffiti. 
A.  The city shall pay a reward in an amount established by resolution for information leading to the arrest and conviction or plea of guilty of any person for violation of Section 594 (by the use of graffiti) or Section 640.5 of the California Penal Code, or Section 9.24.020 of this code. 
B.  No employee or official of the city shall be eligible for a reward pursuant to this section. 
C.  Claims for rewards under this section shall be in writing and filed with the city. Each claim shall: 
1.  Specifically identify the date, location, and kind of property defaced; 
2.  Identify by name the person who was convicted, or pled guilty to the defacement; 
3.  Identify the court and the date the conviction or plea occurred; 
D.  The person committing the graffiti and, if an unemancipated minor, then the custodial parent or parents or the minor shall be liable for the amount of any reward paid pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 7, 1-28-2015)  
9.24.090 - Removal of graffiti. 
Graffiti may be removed by any of the following methods: 
A.  Any person who applies graffiti within the city shall have the duty to remove the same within twenty-four hours after notice by the city or the owner of the property involved. The failure of any person to so remove said graffiti shall constitute an additional violation of this chapter. Where graffiti is applied by anyone under the age of eighteen years, the parent, parents, or legal guardian shall be responsible for such removal or for the payment for removal. 
B.  The city manager or designee is authorized to remove graffiti or other inscribed material from any and all structures and property owned or maintained by the city. 
C.  Whenever the city manager or designee determines that graffiti is located on property within the city and is within view of the public or adjoining properties, he or she is authorized to provide for the removal of the graffiti at the city's sole expense, without reimbursement from the property owner upon whose property the graffiti has been applied, after securing consent from the property owner. 
D.  If the city is unable to obtain the property owner's consent to remove the graffiti pursuant to subsection C., above, the city may commence abatement and cost recovery proceedings pursuant to chapter 8.16 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 7, 1-28-2015)  
9.24.100 - Treble damages for second or subsequent judgment. 
Upon the entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period finding an owner of property, minor or other person is responsible for a condition that may be abated in accordance with this chapter, the city may request the court order treble damages pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.7. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 7, 1-28-2015)  
9.24.110 - Civil penalty. 
Any person who places graffiti on any public or privately owned property, including natural and manmade objects within the city, shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars for each violation. The civil penalty prescribed may be sought in addition to any other remedy. The city is authorized to seek recovery by any means authorized by law. The parent or legal guardian having custody and control of the minor offender shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 7, 1-28-2015)  
9.24.120 - Rewards. 
The city council may, by resolution, establish a reward for information leading to the identification, apprehension and conviction of any person who places graffiti upon any public or private property within the city. Said resolution may require that the convicted offender reimburse the city for any reward paid, and place responsibility for reimbursement upon the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of any minor so convicted. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 7, 1-28-2015)  
9.24.130 - Remedies not exclusive. 
The remedies provided in this chapter are intended to be cumulative. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city from commencing a civil, criminal or administrative proceeding to abate a public nuisance or obtain cost recovery as provided herein, from pursuing any other means available to it under provisions of applicable ordinances or state law, in addition to or as alternatives to the proceedings set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 7, 1-28-2015)  
Chapter 9.28 - MOTOR VEHICLE ALARMS 
 
9.28.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall be applied to the terms utilized in this chapter unless it appears from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
"Emergency situation" means any situation where life or property is in physical jeopardy. 
"False alarm" means an alarm signal from a motor vehicle necessitating a response by the Police Department where an emergency situation does not exist. 
"Motor vehicle" or "vehicle" means a vehicle which is self-propelled as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 415. 
(Ord. 2112 § 1 (part), 1994)  
9.28.020 - Time restriction. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to cause, allow or permit any alarm located in a motor vehicle registered in the name of or driven by such person to emit any audible sound within the city for a period of more than five minutes. 
B.  The time shall be calculated based upon the emission of the first audible sound and ending five minutes thereafter notwithstanding any variation or delay in the emissions of audible sound. 
(Ord. 2112 § 1 (part), 1994)  
9.28.030 - Enforcement of false alarms. 
Any vehicle parked in a public right-of-way, parking lot, parking structure or other public property is subject to enforcement under this chapter. In addition, any vehicle parked on private property may be cited hereunder where the false alarm is clearly audible on the public thoroughfare or nearby private properties. Where such a vehicle is emitting a false alarm, any person may summon city enforcement authorities for the purpose of citing the offending vehicle. 
(Ord. 2112 § 1 (part), 1994)  
9.28.040 - Excessive false alarms. 
Any violation of this section shall be an infraction. The first such violation shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars. The second infraction occurring within one year of the first violation shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars. Every violation occurring after the second violation within one year of the first violation shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars. 
(Ord. 2112 § 1 (part), 1994)  
9.28.050 - Nuisance. 
Any violation of this chapter is declared a public nuisance which is subject to abatement pursuant to the procedures described in Section 9.28.060 of this code and as authorized by law. 
(Ord. 2112 § 1 (part), 1994)  
9.28.060 - Abatement. 
A.  The police department, in order to abate the public nuisance created by a vehicle in violation of Section 9.28.020 of this code, may undertake such procedures as area reasonably necessary to deactivate the alarm. 
B.  If the police department is unable to deactivate the alarm, the vehicle shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of California Vehicle Code Section 22651.5. 
(Ord. 2112 § 1 (part), 1994)  
9.28.070 - Audible status indicator. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to install, operate, use or maintain any vehicle theft alarm system which utilizes an audible status indicator which emits or causes the emission of a chirp, voice message, or other audible sound at (1) intervals of every two minutes or less; or (2) when a person approaches within a certain distance of the vehicle in which the device is installed. 
B.  As used in this section and in Section 10.32.340, an audible status indicator is a component of a vehicle theft alarm system which emits sound audible outside the vehicle for the purpose of warning that a vehicle theft alarm system is installed and armed or operational. The term "audible status indicator" shall include any device which emits a chirp, voice message, or other audible sound. 
C.  In the event enforcement of a violation occurs under this section, no enforcement shall be taken under Section 10.32.340 of this code for the same violation. 
D.  Violation of any provision of this section shall constitute an infraction. 
(Ord. 2112 § 1 (part), 1994)  
Chapter 9.30 - MEDICAL MARIJUANA[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2365, § 10, adopted Jan. 28, 2015, amended ch. 9.30 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 9.30, §§ 9.30.010—9.30.060, pertained to Medical Marijuana Dispensaries, and derived from Ord. 2318, § 1, adopted 2008. 
 
9.30.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the operation and location of medical marijuana dispensaries in the city given the negative and detrimental effects and impacts on communities from this land use. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 10, 1-28-2015; Ord. No. 2399, § 6, 9-13-2017)  
9.30.020 - Definitions. 
"Medical marijuana dispensary" or "dispensary" means any facility or location, whether fixed or mobile, where marijuana is made available and/or distributed, including but not limited to activities meeting the definition of "delivery," "dispensary," "dispensing," "distribution," or "distributor" as set forth in chapter 5.90 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 10, 1-28-2015; Ord. No. 2399, § 7, 9-13-2017)  
9.30.030 - Medical marijuana dispensaries prohibited. 
A.  Medical marijuana dispensaries are hereby deemed a public nuisance and are prohibited in the city. No medical marijuana dispensary shall operate, locate or otherwise be permitted within the city, and no person or entity shall cause, allow or maintain a medical marijuana dispensary within the city. 
B.  Except as expressly authorized in chapter 5.90 or chapter 9.60 of this code, it is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person or entity, including but not limited to primary caregivers and qualified patients, to cause, allow or maintain cultivation of marijuana within the city for any purpose. 
C.  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to permit or authorize any use or activity which is otherwise prohibited by any state or federal law. 
D.  The city shall not issue, approve or grant any permit, license or other entitlement for the establishment or operation of a medical marijuana dispensary. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 10, 1-28-2015; Ord. No. 2399, § 8, 9-13-2017)  
9.30.040 - Severability. 
The city council declares that it would have passed this chapter sentence by sentence, paragraph by paragraph, and section by section, and does declare that the provisions of this chapter are severable, and if, for any reason, any sentence, paragraph or section of this chapter shall be held invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining parts of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 10, 1-28-2015; Ord. No. 2399, § 8, 9-13-2017)  
9.30.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  A violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in this code. 
B.  Distribution of marijuana within the city is deemed a public nuisance, which may be abated by any means authorized by law. Any remedy afforded by law, including this code, may be used in conjunction with or in lieu of each other remedy. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 8, 1-28-2015; Ord. No. 2399, § 9, 9-13-2017)  
Chapter 9.40 - MULTIPLE POLICE RESPONSES 
 
9.40.010 - Findings and purpose. 
A.  Some events become loud and unruly to the point that they constitute a threat to the peace, health, safety, or general welfare of the public through excessive consumption of alcohol, and increased incidents of fighting, litter, noise and other conditions detrimental to the community. Further, police resources and personnel are routinely dedicated to specific locations in particular in response to a series of crimes and offenses. 
B.  The city is required to make multiple responses to such loud or unruly events, or repeated events, offenses, and crimes at a particular location, in order to restore and maintain the peace and protect public health, safety or general welfare. Such events diminish the quality of life in the city, create a burden on scarce city resources, and can result in police responses to regular and emergency calls being delayed and police protection to the rest of the city being reduced. Conditions resulting from such events thereby constitute a public nuisance subject to abatement by any means authorized by law. 
C.  In order to discourage the occurrence of repeated loud, unruly events and repeated crimes and offenses at particular locations, to reduce the detrimental effects of such events, and to ensure continued availability of resources to abate these nuisances, the city seeks to deter such violations by setting forth a mechanism for recovery of such nuisance abatement costs and penalties, as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 8, 1-28-2015)  
9.40.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings. 
A.  "Costs" means any costs or expenses actually incurred by the city in a subsequent police response, including, but not limited to, those costs relating to personnel and administration pursuant to the master fee schedule as may be amended from time to time, equipment, mutual aid, damages to city property and/or costs incurred due to any injuries to city personnel. 
B.  "Event" means any party or gathering on private property, regardless of the number of attendants, to which a police response is required due to any of the following disturbances: 
1.  Loud and boisterous conduct and activities; or 
2.  Loud and unreasonable noise; or 
3.  Disturbing the peace; or 
4.  Intoxication or influence of a controlled substance; or 
5.  Fighting, obscenity; or 
6.  Loud music or noise in violation of this code or which disturbs the peace; or 
7.  Indecent exposure or lewdness; or 
8.  Any conduct or condition resulting in a substantial danger to the public health, safety or welfare. 
C.  "Officer" means any individual employed or otherwise charged by the city to enforce codes, ordinances, mandates, regulations, resolutions, rules or other laws enacted by the city or state, including a police officer and code enforcement officer. 
D.  "Person responsible for the event" means any individual or entity that is any of the following: 
1.  The owner(s) of record of the property where the event takes place; 
2.  The person or persons actually in or apparently in charge of the premises where the event takes place; 
3.  The person or persons authorizing the use of the premises for the event; 
4.  The person or persons who organized the event; or 
5.  The person or persons who the responding officer believes is causing, performing, permitting to exist or otherwise maintaining the event as a public nuisance, including, but not limited to, any other person in real or apparent charge or control of the real property. 
E.  "Subsequent police response" means any police response to the location of an event made within three months after the distribution of a written warning to the person responsible for an event at that location, or within three months after a prior subsequent police response. A subsequent police response is hereby declared a public nuisance subject to abatement. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 8, 1-28-2015)  
9.40.030 - Police responses to events. 
A.  Whenever an officer is called to the scene of an event, the officer shall leave a written warning with a person responsible for the event. If the person responsible for the event cannot be located, the officer shall either post the written warning on the front door or primary entrance to the event, or at a location which is visible from the street and which is as close to the front door or primary entrance to the event as is reasonably possible. 
B.  The written warning shall: (1) identify the date, time and location of the officer's response; (2) include an explanation of why the event qualifies as an "event" under this chapter; and (3) include a general explanation of the consequences of a subsequent police response, including the fact that an administrative citation may be imposed on each person responsible for the event. 
C.  The written warning provided or posted pursuant to this chapter shall constitute constructive notice to a person responsible for the event regardless of actual receipt of the written warning, and such notice shall be imputed to all persons responsible for the event. 
D.  If the property owner does not cause the event, then the city shall send a copy of the warning to the property owner by certified mail to the property owner's mailing address as determined on the most recently available Los Angeles County tax assessor's roll. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 8, 1-28-2015)  
9.40.040 - Cost recovery for subsequent police responses. 
A.  Whenever an officer makes a subsequent police response to an event, all abatement costs, as defined in Section 9.40.020 of this chapter, that are incurred by the city may be recovered from any or all persons responsible for the event, who shall be jointly and severally liable, and/or from the property on which the event occurred. 
B.  Any costs and/or penalties payable to the city by a person responsible for an event as a result of a subsequent police response shall be recovered pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 8.16 of this code. The city may also recover unpaid costs or penalties via initiation of a judicial action or collection process, as it deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 8, 1-28-2015)  
9.40.050 - Appeal. 
A person against whom subsequent police response costs and/or penalties are imposed may appeal the costs and/or penalties pursuant to Chapter 8.16 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 8, 1-28-2015)  
9.40.060 - Alternative remedies. 
The provisions of this chapter are in addition to the authority of the police or other city officials to regulate events or enforce this code or other applicable law, and shall supplement, and not supplant, the exercise of any other power available to the city or the enforcement of any other law within the jurisdiction of the city. Any remedies may be pursued by the city individually, consecutively, or in conjunction with each other. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 8, 1-28-2015)  
9.40.070 - Procedures not substantive. 
Failure of the city to strictly apply any procedure or penalty provided in this chapter or in parts of this code referenced by this chapter, either in whole or in part, shall not invalidate any enforcement procedure or action commenced or concluded by the city, whether under this chapter or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 8, 1-28-2015)  
Chapter 9.50 - SOCIAL HOST OBLIGATIONS 
 
9.50.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms and phrases have the meaning set forth 
A.  "Alcohol." Shall have the same meaning as in Business and Professions Code Section 23003 or any successor statute. 
B.  "Alcoholic beverage." Shall have the same meaning as in Business and Professions Code Section 23004 or any successor statute. 
C.  "Consume or consumption." To use, eat, drink, absorb, smoke or ingest. 
D.  "Controlled substance." Any drug or substance, including marijuana, whose possession and/or use are regulated under the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act codified at Health and Safety Code sections 11000 et seq., or any successor statute, or illegal under the laws of the State of California as defined under the Penal Code and any related statutes. Such term shall not include any drug or substance otherwise legally possessed or consumed. 
E.  "Event." A party, gathering, or event where a group of two or more persons have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or for a social activity at a residence or other private property or public property. 
F.  "Legal guardian." Either of the following: (i) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or (ii) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court. 
G.  "Minor." Any person under twenty-one years of age. 
H.  "Parents." A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of a minor. 
I.  "Public place." Any place in which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, including but limited to, streets, highways, parks, common area developments and common areas inside of country clubs and gated communities. 
J.  "Residence or other private property." A home, yard, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling, party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 9, 1-28-2015)  
9.50.020 - Social host obligations. 
A.  Except as permitted by Article 1, Section 4, of the California Constitution, it is unlawful for any person(s) to conduct, permit, allow, or host an event at his or her place of residence or other private property or host an event at a public place under his or her control where alcoholic beverages or controlled substances are being consumed or have been consumed by a minor, when said person either knows or reasonably should know that a minor has consumed an alcoholic beverage, marijuana or other controlled substance. Whenever such person is present during such an event where alcoholic beverages, marijuana or other controlled substances are being served to, possessed by or consumed by a minor, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that the person has actual or constructive knowledge that a minor has consumed an alcoholic beverage, marijuana or other controlled substance if the person has not taken all reasonable steps necessary to prevent such consumption, as set forth in subsection (B) below. 
B.  It is the duty of any person who permits, allows or hosts an event at his or her place of residence or other private property or hosts an event at a public place under his or her control, where minors will be present, to take all reasonable steps to prevent the illegal consumption by, and service of, alcoholic beverages, marijuana and other controlled substances to minors. Reasonable steps shall, at a minimum, include all of the following: 
1.  Verifying the age of persons attending the event by inspecting driver licenses or other government-issued identification cards; 
2.  Controlling access to alcoholic beverages or controlled substances present at the event; 
3.  Controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages present at the event; 
4.  Prohibiting the possession, service, and/or use of marijuana or other controlled substances at the event; and 
5.  Supervising the activities of minors at the event. 
C.  A person who permits, allows or hosts an event shall not be in violation of this section if he or she seeks immediate assistance from the city police department to remove any person(s) who refuses to abide by the hosts duty to abide by this chapter from the event provided that the person has taken all reasonable steps to necessary to prevent the illegal consumption of alcohol, marijuana or other controlled substances. 
D.  This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages, which occurs exclusively between a minor and his or her parent or legal guardian. 
E.  This section shall not apply to any premises regulated by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
F.  This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages that occurs exclusively between a minor and his or her parent or legal guardian, as permitted by Article 1, Section 4, of the California Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 9, 1-28-2015)  
9.50.030 - Enforcement. 
A.  Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance, which may be abated by the city by any means provided by this code or otherwise available at law, including but not limited to, requiring the gathering to be disbanded. 
B.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided by this code. 
C.  The person responsible for the gathering, the tenant of the premises where the gathering takes place and the owner of the premises are jointly and severally liable for the costs of abating a violation of this chapter. 
D.  The remedies provided in this chapter are intended to be cumulative and may be used on conjunction with or in lieu of any remedies available to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2365, § 9, 1-28-2015)  
Chapter 9.60 - PERSONAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION 
 
9.60.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Accessory structure" shall mean an "accessory building" as defined in Section 17.08.020 of this code, or an "accessory dwelling unit" as defined in Section 17.08.022 of this code. 
"California Adult Use of Marijuana Act" shall mean and refer to the provisions of California law added by Proposition 64, approved by California voters at the election occurring on November 8, 2016. 
"Marijuana" shall mean all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. 
"Permittee" shall mean any person having been issued and maintaining a valid personal cultivation permit under this chapter. 
"Personal cultivation permit" or "permit" shall mean and refer to the permit issued by the city under this chapter authorizing permittees to plant, cultivate, harvest, dry, or process marijuana, marijuana plants, or the marijuana produced by the plants inside a private residence, or inside an accessory structure to a private residence located upon the grounds of a private residence. 
"Private residence" shall mean a house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or other similar dwelling, and inclusive of any rooms, garages, or structures physically attached thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2393, § 3, 1-25-2017; Ord. No. 2395, § 3, 4-12-2017)  
9.60.020 - Outdoor personal cultivation prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, cultivate, harvest, dry, or process marijuana, marijuana plants, or the marijuana produced by the plants outdoors upon the grounds of a private residence. 
(Ord. No. 2393, § 3, 1-25-2017; Ord. No. 2395, § 3, 4-12-2017)  
9.60.030 - Indoor personal cultivation; permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, cultivate, harvest, dry, or process marijuana, marijuana plants, or the marijuana produced by the plants inside a private residence, or inside an accessory structure to a private residence located upon the grounds of a private residence, without first obtaining and maintaining a valid a personal cultivation permit under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2393, § 3, 1-25-2017; Ord. No. 2395, § 3, 4-12-2017)  
9.60.040 - Personal cultivation permit. 
A.  Application. Every person required to have a personal cultivation permit under this chapter shall make an application therefor, in a form prescribed by the city manager, to the planning manager of the city. Upon the payment of the fee established by resolution or ordinance of the city council, and upon determination that none of the grounds for denial as specified in Section 9.60.080 exist, the planning manager shall issue to such person a license which shall contain: 
1.  The name of the person to whom the license is issued. 
2.  The permit issued. 
3.  The address of the personal residence for which the permit has been issued. 
4.  The date of expiration of such permit. 
5.  Any conditions imposed by the city. 
6.  Such other information as may be deemed necessary. 
B.  No more than one permit per private residence shall be issued and maintained at any one time, regardless of the number of persons dwelling or residing in the private residence or upon the grounds thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2393, § 3, 1-25-2017; Ord. No. 2395, § 3, 4-12-2017)  
9.60.050 - Indoor personal cultivation; regulations. 
A.  Permittees issued a personal cultivation permit under this chapter shall, at all times, conduct the activities authorized by said permit in strict accordance with the requirements of this section and the California Adult Use of Marijuana Act, whichever is more restrictive, as well as any conditions of approval imposed by the city. 
1.  All planting, cultivation, harvesting, drying, and processing (or similar actions) of marijuana plants, and the marijuana produced by the plants, shall be conducted entirely within the interior of a private residence or accessory structure. 
2.  No permittee shall exercise or engage in any of the activities authorized by a personal cultivation permit, or otherwise engage in the planting, cultivation, harvesting, drying, and processing or marijuana plants, and the marijuana produced by the plants, except upon the grounds of a private residence of which the permittee is a permanent resident. For purposes of this paragraph, a permeant resident shall mean any permittee who, as of a given date, obtained the right to occupy the private residence for more than thirty consecutive days. 
3.  Not more than six living marijuana plants may be planted, cultivated, harvested, dried, or processed upon the grounds of any single private residence. 
4.  All living marijuana plants, and any marijuana produced by the plants in excess of twenty-eight and one-half grams, shall be kept within the private residence or accessory structure in a locked and secured space. 
5.  No living marijuana plants shall be visible, and no odor, light, heat, or other environmental impacts associated with personal cultivation shall be detectable, from a public place, right-of-way, neighboring property, or beyond the bounds of the grounds of the private residence at any time. 
6.  All planting, cultivation, harvesting, drying, and processing (or similar actions) of marijuana plants, and the marijuana produced by the plants, shall, at all times, comply with all applicable provisions of Title 15 of the Montebello Municipal Code and the California Building Standards Code, as amended from time to time. 
7.  Not more potable water than is reasonably necessary to sustain six living plants shall be utilized. 
8.  No nuisance shall be caused or maintained on the grounds of the private residence, including but not limited to those conditions set forth in Chapter 8.16 of this code. 
B.  As a condition of approval of any application for any personal cultivation permit, the planning manager may, in his/her discretion, impose additional requirements and restrictions in addition those expressly set forth in this section, to the extent such additional requirements and restrictions are necessary to ensure activities authorized by a personal cultivation permit are exercised in a manner that preserves and protects the public interest. In imposing such additional requirements and restrictions, the planning manager may consider such factors as the proximity of the private residence to sensitive land uses, the physical characteristics of the grounds of the private residence, and other relevant matters. 
(Ord. No. 2393, § 3, 1-25-2017; Ord. No. 2395, § 3, 4-12-2017)  
9.60.060 - Enforcement and inspection authority. 
A.  Upon five calendar days' written notice, the planning manager, and any city police officer or code enforcement officer, shall have the right to enter into and upon the grounds of any private residence, and into or upon a private residence or accessory structure, for which a permit has been issued pursuant to this chapter for purposes of conducting an inspection to ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the Adult Use of Marijuana Act. A permittee's refusal to allow said inspection shall be grounds for revocation of the permit. 
B.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city shall make reasonable efforts to schedule and conduct the inspection authorized by this section at the date and time agreeable to be the permittee; provided that if the city makes reasonable efforts with a permittee to establish and agreeable date and time for an inspection, the failure or refusal of a permittee to establish an inspection date and time may be construed as a refusal to allow the inspection. 
C.  This section shall not be limit or be interpreted as limited the authority of the city or any representative thereof to enter upon or into the grounds of a private residence, or the private residence itself, as otherwise may be authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 2393, § 3, 1-25-2017; Ord. No. 2395, § 3, 4-12-2017)  
9.60.070 - Sale or transfer of marijuana prohibited. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person or permittee to sell, or otherwise transfer for any consideration whatsoever, marijuana plants or the marijuana produced by the plants, to any other person. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person or permittee to sell, transfer, give away, or provide access to marijuana plants, or the marijuana produced by the plants, to any person under the age of 21. 
(Ord. No. 2393, § 3, 1-25-2017; Ord. No. 2395, § 3, 4-12-2017)  
9.60.080 - Grounds for permit denial. 
A.  Grounds for Denial. The planning manager shall deny any application for a permit or for the renewal thereof if the planning manager makes any of the following determinations: 
1.  The applicant has not first obtained or has not maintained in full force and effect the permit required under this chapter prior to engaging in the activities authorized by the permit. 
2.  The private residence or accessory structure used to engage in the activities fails to comply with all applicable health, safety, zoning, fire, building and safety laws and regulations. 
3.  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for the permit, in the application for or renewal of the permit. 
4.  The applicant is in violation of a provision of the Montebello Municipal Code or owes taxes, fees, or penalties pursuant to this chapter or any other provision of the Montebello Municipal Code. 
5.  The applicant (new or renewal) has had a permit denied or revoked by the city within the preceding twelve months. 
B.  Notice of Denial. Upon determination of the existence of any factors or conditions specified in this section, the planning manager shall advise the applicant by serving upon the applicant a notice of denial in writing within ten business days of such determination. The notice of denial shall state the planning manager's findings and/or determinations that justify denial of the permit application, and shall include a summary of the evidence upon which such findings and/or determinations are based. 
C.  Appeal of Permit Denial. The denial of any application for a permit may be appealed to the city council, and such appeal shall be governed by the standards and procedures set forth in Section 9.60.130(C) with regards to revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2393, § 3, 1-25-2017; Ord. No. 2395, § 3, 4-12-2017)  
9.60.090 - Permit—Posting or storage. 
Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be posted, kept, stored, or maintained in the private residence or accessory structure for which the permit was issued, and shall remain so posted, kept, stored, or maintained during the period the permit remains in force. 
(Ord. No. 2393, § 3, 1-25-2017; Ord. No. 2395, § 3, 4-12-2017)  
9.60.100 - Permit—Duration and renewal. 
A.  Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for two years from the date of issuance. 
B.  Permits issued pursuant to this chapter may be renewed upon the filing of an application therefore with the planning manager. The application for renewal shall be in the same form as an application for an original permit. It shall be issued or denied in a like manner as in the case of the original permit. 
(Ord. No. 2393, § 3, 1-25-2017; Ord. No. 2395, § 3, 4-12-2017)  
9.60.110 - Permit—Fees. 
A filing and processing fee, in an amount established by resolution or ordinance of the city council, shall be submitted with each application for an original permit, or applications for permit renewals. The fee provided for in this section is imposed to cover the cost of processing and reviewing permit applications, and to cover the cost of site inspections provided for in this chapter. The fee provided for in this section may be amended from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2393, § 3, 1-25-2017; Ord. No. 2395, § 3, 4-12-2017)  
9.60.120 - Transfer of permit prohibited. 
No permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferrable or assignable to any other person. The activities authorized by any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall only be conducted inside the private residence or assessor structure for which the permit was issued. 
(Ord. No. 2393, § 3, 1-25-2017; Ord. No. 2395, § 3, 4-12-2017)  
9.60.130 - Permit revocation. 
A.  Grounds for Revocation. The planning manager shall revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, if the planning manager makes any of the following findings or determinations: 
1.  There exists any ground for denial of the permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
2.  The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a permit or in any report required to be filed by law. 
3.  The permittee has violated or is violating any condition of approval imposed on such permit, or upon any other entitlement granted by the city or other government agency. 
4.  The permittee has violated or is violating any ordinance, law, or regulation of the city, county of Los Angeles, or state of California in the course of exercising any rights under the permit. 
5.  The permittee has been held liable for, or has been convicted of, any offense involving the maintenance of a nuisance resulting from any act performed in exercising any rights under the permit. 
6.  The continued activities under the permit would endanger, disrupt or otherwise be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety, morals or general welfare of the city or its inhabitants, or constitute a public nuisance. 
B.  Order of Revocation. The planning manager shall serve a written order of revocation upon the permittee (in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.04.080 of this code) stating the grounds for revocation and informing the permittee of his/her appeal rights (including method and timeline for requesting appeal). The order shall also advise the licensee/permittee of the effective date of the revocation. 
C.  Effectiveness of Order. Any permit revoked pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall become effective, and the permittee shall cease all activities authorized under such permit, no later than ten calendar days from the service of the order of revocation. Where an appeal is timely filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the notice of revocation shall be stayed pending the city council's resolution of the appeal pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Appeal. 
1.  Request for Appeal. Any permittee may appeal any notice of denial or order of revocation issued by the planning manager by filing a request for an appeal with the city clerk, and tendering a filing and processing fee as set by resolution of the city council, within ten calendar days of service of the notice/order of such denial or revocation. The request for an appeal must be made in writing and must contain the following information: 
a.  The name of the appellant and the address of the applicable location where the appellant was authorized (or was seeking to be authorized) to engage in the activities authorized by a permit issued under this chapter; 
b.  The date of denial or revocation by the planning manager; 
c.  A statement as to all grounds for appeal in sufficient detail to enable the city council to understand the nature of the controversy; 
d.  The signature of the appellant under penalty of perjury as to the contents of the request for appeal. 
2.  Upon receipt of such written appeal and fee, the city clerk shall immediately set the matter for consideration by the city council at its next most convenient regular meeting, or otherwise transmit the appeal to the mayor for the purpose of calling a special meeting to consider the appeal, provided that no appeal hearing related to a revocation shall be commenced in excess of thirty calendar days from the timely filing of a request for appeal and payment of applicable fees without the consent of the appellant. The city clerk shall issue written notice of the time and place of an appeal hearing to the appellant at least seven calendar days' prior thereto. If a request for an appeal is not timely submitted (with all applicable fees) to the city clerk, the notice of denial or order of revocation shall be deemed final and binding, and the permittee shall be deemed to have failed to exhaust all administrative remedies. 
3.  Appeal Hearing. An appeal hearing conducted pursuant to the provisions of this section, shall comply with the following: 
a.  The appeal hearing shall proceed solely on those issues or defenses raised in the request for an appeal filed by the appellant, and all matters not contested in said request shall be deemed admitted into evidence; 
b.  The city shall have the burden to establish the grounds for the denial or revocation that has been contested by the appellant by a preponderance of the evidence. The notice of denial or order of revocation (and all documents or reports relied upon and/or prepared in relation to the notice or order) shall be admitted into evidence and shall constitute prima facie evidence of the grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation; 
c.  The appellant shall be given an opportunity to testify and to present written and/or oral evidence relevant to the matters raised in the request for an appeal filed by the appellant, and shall have the right to examine and cross-examine any documents and witnesses presented by the city in support of the denial, suspension or revocation. The unexcused failure of the appellant to appear at the appeal hearing shall constitute a withdrawal of his/her request for an appeal hearing and the denial, suspension, or revocation as issued by the license collector shall be deemed final and binding; 
d.  Appeals hearings are to be conducted informally, and formal rules of evidence need not be followed; 
e.  Written notice of the city council's determination of whether to approve, revoke, reinstate or conditionally reinstate the permit shall be issued to the appealing party within ten business days of the decision. The determination of the city council shall be final and conclusive; 
f.  The permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative actions in a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law, pursuant to Section 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 2393, § 3, 1-25-2017; Ord. No. 2395, § 3, 4-12-2017)  
9.60.140 - Violation. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the penalty therefor, as set forth in Chapter 1.12 of this code. Any such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day a violation of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted to be continued by such person. 
(Ord. No. 2393, § 3, 1-25-2017; Ord. No. 2395, § 3, 4-12-2017)  
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC* 
Chapters:  
Chapter 10.04 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.04.010 - Police and fire department officers—Duties—Authority. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, to enforce all street traffic laws of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city. 
B.  Officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided, that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
C.  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.03)  
10.04.020 - Direction of traffic by unauthorized persons prohibited. 
No person other than an officer of the police department or a person deputized by the chief of police or person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal (except that persons may operate when and as herein provided any mechanical pushbutton signal erected by the director of public works. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.05)  
10.04.030 - Applicability of provisions of government-owned vehicles. 
The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, this state, any county or city, and it is unlawful for any said driver to violate any of the provisions of this title except as otherwise permitted in this code or by federal, state or county statute. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.06)  
10.04.040 - Exemption of certain vehicles. 
A.  The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of the police or fire department, any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle or private ambulance which has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any such vehicle is operated in the manner specified in the Vehicle Code in response to any emergency call. 
B.  The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his/her willful disregard of the safety of others. 
C.  The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work, or any vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.07)  
10.04.050 - Automated traffic enforcement system. 
A.  The chief of police shall have the power to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained an automated traffic enforcement system, as defined herein. The automated traffic enforcement system shall be identified by appropriate signs, clearly indicating the systems presence at any designated location, visible to traffic approaching from all directions, or alternatively, identified by signs posted at all major entrances to the city, including, at a minimum, freeways, bridges, and state highway routes. All signs shall be in place and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinary observant person, giving notice of the use of the automated traffic enforcement system. All signs related to the automated traffic enforcement system shall be placed and maintained by the director of public works, or his or her designee. 
B.  For purposes of this section, the definition of an automated traffic enforcement system shall be consistent with the definition of such term as defined in the Vehicle Code of this state, and shall be defined as any system operated by a governmental agency, in cooperation with a law enforcement agency, that photographically records a driver's responses to an official traffic control signal, and is designed to obtain a clear photograph of a vehicle's license plate and the driver of the vehicle. 
C.  At least thirty calendar days prior to the commencement of operation of the automated traffic enforcement system, the chief of police, or his or her designee, shall publicly announce the use and implementation of the automated traffic enforcement system, and shall identify the specific locations or intersections equipped with the automated traffic enforcement system. For the first thirty calendar days of operation of the automated traffic enforcement system, the police department shall only be authorized to issue warning notices to traffic violators. 
D.  The chief of police, in cooperation with the department of public works, shall have the power to relocate, replace and add to the automated traffic enforcement system, provided the appropriate signs are in place prior to the implementation to the change in the automated traffic enforcement system. 
E.  In accordance with the Vehicle Code of this state, photographic records made by an automated traffic enforcement system shall be confidential, and shall be made available only to governmental agencies and law enforcement agencies; except that the registered owners or any individual identified by the registered owner as the driver of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation shall be permitted to review the photographic evidence of the alleged violation. 
(Ord. 2210 § 1, 2000)  
Chapter 10.08 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.08.010 - Applicability. 
The following words and phrases when used in this title shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this title. Whenever any words or phrases used in this title are not defined herein, but are now defined in the Vehicle Code of this state, such definitions are incorporated herein and shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein as though set forth herein in full. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.01 (part))  
10.08.020 - Caltrans. 
"Caltrans" means the Department of Transportation of the state of California, or its successor agency. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.01 (part))  
10.08.030 - City. 
"City" means the city of Montebello. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.01 (part))  
10.08.040 - Commuter vehicle. 
"Commuter vehicle" means a motor vehicle parked in a residential area which is not owned, leased or otherwise controlled by: 
A.  A resident who lives in the area designated as a preferential parking district; 
B.  A merchant whose business establishment is located in the area designated as a preferential parking district; 
C.  A guest visiting residents living in the area designated as preferential parking district. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.01 (part))  
10.08.050 - CVC. 
"CVC" means the latest edition of the state of California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.01 (part))  
10.08.060 - Director of public works. 
"Director of public works" means the director of public works of the city of Montebello, or his/her authorized representative. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.01 (part))  
10.08.070 - Interstate truck. 
"Interstate truck" means truck tractor and semitrailer or truck tractor, semitrailer and trailer authorized to operate on designated highways by Section 35401.5 of the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.01 (part))  
10.08.080 - Loading zone. 
"Loading zone" means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.01 (part))  
10.18.090 - Merchant. 
"Merchant" means a person, who as proprietor, operates a commercial business within a preferential parking district. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.01 (part))  
10.08.100 - Official time standard. 
"Official time standard." Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean standard time or daylight savings time as may be current. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.01 (part))  
10.08.110 - Official traffic control devices. 
"Official traffic control device" means all signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this title, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning, guiding traffic. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.01 (part))  
10.08.120 - Official traffic signal. 
"Official traffic signal" means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and proceed and which is erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.01 (part))  
10.08.130 - Parkway. 
"Parkway" means that portion of a street other than a roadway or sidewalk. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.01 (part))  
10.08.140 - Passenger loading zone. 
"Passenger loading zone" shall mean the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.01 (part))  
10.08.150 - Pedestrian. 
"Pedestrian" means any person on foot. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.01 (part))  
10.08.160 - Police chief. 
"Police chief" means the police chief of the city of Montebello, or his/her authorized representative. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.01 (part))  
10.08.170 - Preferential parking district. 
"Preferential parking district" means a residential area with streets and boundaries designated by a city council resolution, wherein vehicles displaying a valid permit shall be exempt from parking restrictions established pursuant to this title. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.01 (part))  
10.08.180 - Resident. 
"Resident" shall mean a person who lives in a dwelling. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.01 (part))  
10.08.190 - Terminal. 
"Terminal" means any facility at which freight is consolidated to be shipped or where full-load consignments may be loaded and off-loaded for shipment to final delivery points. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.01 (part))  
10.08.200 - Traffic. 
"Traffic" means any pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances either singly or together while using any street for purposes of travel. 
(Ord. 2058 S (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.01 (part))  
10.08.210 - Truck yard. 
"Truck yard" means any facility or service point at which trucks are regularly maintained, stored or manufactured. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3201.01 (part))  
Chapter 10.12 - SPEED LIMITS 
Sections: 
 
10.12.010 - Increasing state speed limit in certain zones. 
The director of public works is authorized to post signs for speed limits which are established by resolution of the city council on the basis of an engineering and traffic survey, when the speed permitted by state law upon streets within the city is less than necessary for the safe operation of vehicles thereon. It is declared that the prima facie speed limit shall be as posted on those streets or parts of streets designated when signs are erected giving notice thereof. All current speed limits are to remain in place unless changes are determined by an engineering and traffic survey and by resolution of the city council. The director of public works shall maintain a listing of such streets. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3204.04)  
10.12.020 - Decreasing state speed limit in certain zones. 
The director of public works is authorized to post signs for speed limits which are established by resolution of the city council on the basis of an engineering and traffic survey, when the speed permitted by state law outside of business and residential districts, as applicable, upon streets within the city is greater than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist upon such streets. It is declared that the prima facie speed limit shall be as posted on those streets or parts of streets designated when signs are erected giving notice thereof. All current speed limits are to remain in place unless changes are determined by an engineering and traffic survey and by resolution of the city council. The director of public works shall maintain a listing of such streets. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3204.05)  
10.12.030 - Regulation of speed by traffic signals. 
The director of public works is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections, and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3204.06)  
10.12.040 - Private driveways/property. 
No person shall drive or operate any motor vehicle in a private driveway or on private property in excess of fifteen miles per hour when the owner of the driveway or property has erected a sign giving notice thereof. 
(Prior code § 3402)  
Chapter 10.16 - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 
Sections: 
 
10.16.010 - Authority/duty to install. 
A.  The director of public works shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices. 
B.  Whenever the Vehicle Code of this state requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that signalized traffic control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law, the director of public works is authorized to install the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto. 
C.  The director of public works shall have the power and duty to relocate, replace, add and maintain official traffic control devices, during the construction of capital improvements projects. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3202.01)  
10.16.020 - Placement and visibility requirements for enforcement purposes. 
No provisions of the Vehicle Code or of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate signs are in place and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person, giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3202.02)  
10.16.030 - Obedience required. 
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with this title or the traffic ordinances of the city unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of any authorized vehicle when responding to emergency calls. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3202.03)  
10.16.040 - Traffic signals—Location—Determination. 
A.  The city traffic and safety commission is directed to recommend to the city council the installation of official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard. 
B.  The city traffic and safety commission shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required upon the advice, findings, and recommendations of the director of public works by their resorting to field observation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent, and its determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the California Traffic Manual issued by the California Department of Transportation. 
C.  When ordered to do so by resolution of the city council, the director of public works shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic signals at those intersections and other places indicated in the resolution. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3202.04)  
10.16.050 - Traffic signals—Authority to remove, relocate or discontinue. 
A.  The director of public works is authorized to remove, relocate, or discontinue the operation of any traffic control signal device not specifically required by state law or this title whenever he/she shall determine in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist, unless prohibited from so doing by resolution of the city council. 
B.  No person other than the director of public works or a person acting under his/her directions shall install, place, damage or remove any traffic control signal device except as otherwise expressly provided in this code. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3202.06)  
10.16.060 - Stop signs—Installation—Location. 
A.  Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, stop signs shall be erected and maintained as follows: 
1.  A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersection, where such through street or portion thereof is designated for stop sign installation, and at those entrances of other intersection(s) where a stop is required, and at any railroad grade crossing so designated. 
2.  Every such sign installation shall conform with, and shall be placed as provided in the Vehicle Code or the state guidelines; except that with respect to the installation of multiway stop signs, said installation shall comply with the standards and policies adopted thereto by the city of Montebello, and enforced by the director of public works. 
3.  Prior to the installation of a stop sign, said matter shall be reviewed and approved by the traffic and safety commission. 
B.  However, should a stop location not conform to the preceding, the city council, upon finding a detriment to the health, safety or welfare of the community, can nevertheless order the stop sign installed. 
(Ord. 2223 § 1, 2001: Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3202.13)  
10.16.070 - Lane markings. 
The director of public works is authorized to mark or cause to be marked centerlines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place delineators, cones, and signs in accordance with the California Traffic Manual issued by the California Department of Transportation temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the highway. When authorized signs have been placed designating off-center traffic lines, no person shall disobey the instructions given by such delineators, cones and signs. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3202.05)  
Chapter 10.20 - TURNING MOVEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
10.20.010 - Directional devices—Authority to place. 
The director of public works is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the director of public works is authorized to allocate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right or left hand turns and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991; prior code § 3202.07 (part))  
10.20.020 - Directional devices—Obedience to required. 
When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3202.07 (part))  
10.20.030 - Restrictions—Authority to establish—Signs required. 
The city traffic and safety commission is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall, upon consultation with the director of public works, direct the placement of proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or such signs may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3202.08)  
10.20.040 - Restrictions—Obedience to signs required. 
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3202.09)  
10.20.050 - Restrictions—Authority to prohibit right turns against traffic stop signal. 
The city traffic and safety commission is authorized to determine those intersections within any business or residence district at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right-turn against a red or stop signal and shall upon the consultation with the director of public works direct the erection of proper signs giving notice of such prohibition. No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3202.10)  
10.20.060 - Restrictions—Authority to prohibit left turns from alley or private driveway. 
The city traffic and safety commission is authorized to determine those intersections of streets and alleys and private driveways within any business or residential district at which the drivers of vehicles emerging from an alley or private driveway shall not make a left turn. The commission shall direct the director of public works to erect or cause to be erected proper signs giving notice of such prohibition. No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3202.11)  
Chapter 10.24 - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS 
Sections: 
 
10.24.010 - Sign posting. 
The traffic and safety commission, upon the advice, findings and recommendation of the director of public works, shall recommend to the city council the signing of one-way streets and alleys. The director of public works as directed, shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3202.12)  
10.24.020 - Emerging from alley, driveway or building. 
The driver of a vehicle emerging form an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk areas extending across any alley ways. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3202.14)  
Chapter 10.28 - RESTRICTED USE OF CERTAIN STREETS 
Sections: 
 
10.28.010 - Animal-drawn vehicles. 
No person shall drive any animal-drawn vehicle into or within a business district between the hours of six a.m. to nine a.m. and four-thirty p.m. to six p.m. of any day unless authorized by the police chief. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3204.01)  
10.28.020 - Truck routes. 
A.  The city traffic and safety commission, upon consultation with the director of public works shall recommend to the city council that this code designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is permitted by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons. The street director of public works is directed to designate such street or streets by appropriate signs as "truck traffic routes" for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons. 
B.  When any such truck traffic routes are established and designated by appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons shall drive, park, stop, or stand on such routes and none other, except when necessary to traverse another street or streets to a destination for the purpose of loading and unloading, but then only by such deviation from the nearest truck route as is reasonably necessary. The provisions of this section shall not apply to passenger busses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3204.02)  
10.28.030 - Commercial vehicles. 
A.  The city traffic and safety commission upon consultation with the director of public works shall recommend to the city council that this code designates and describes any street or portion thereof, the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle, the director of public works shall erect and maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected. 
B.  The director of public works shall maintain a listing of such designated streets. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3204.03)  
Chapter 10.32 - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
Sections: 
 
10.32.010 - Application of regulations. 
A.  The provisions of this title prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
B.  The provisions of this title imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the state Vehicle Code prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.01)  
10.32.020 - Parkways. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.02)  
10.32.030 - Public facilities, pedestrian pathways, driveways and aisleways. 
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle whether attended or unattended on public facilities, pedestrian pathways, driveways or aisleways, except in designated vehicle parking spaces. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.03)  
10.32.040 - Use of streets for storage of vehicles prohibited. 
A.  No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two hours. 
B.  In the event a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street in excess of a consecutive period of seventy-two hours, any member of the police department authorized by the chief of police may remove the vehicle from the street in the manner and subject to the requirements of Section 22850 et seq. of the Vehicle Code. Prior to removing any such vehicle, each such officer shall endeavor to contact the vehicle owner to secure removal of the vehicle voluntarily. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.04)  
10.32.050 - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of washing, performing repairs, or servicing such vehicle for the purpose of selling the vehicle, except for minor repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.05)  
10.32.060 - Angle parking. 
A.  Whenever this code designates and describes any street or portion thereof upon which angle parking shall be permitted, the director of public works shall mark or sign such street indicating the angle at which vehicles shall be parked. 
B.  When signs or markings are in place indicating angle parking as herein provided, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.06)  
10.32.070 - Parking adjacent to schools. 
A.  Whenever the city traffic and safety commission is of the opinion that parking upon either side of any street adjacent to any school property would interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation, it may by resolution designate the streets, or any portion thereof, as no parking area. 
B.  Whenever the city traffic and safety commission has designated any such street or portion thereof as a no parking area, the director of public works shall be authorized to erect and maintain appropriate signs and/or curb markings thereon indicating a no parking area. 
C.  When official signs are erected indicating a no parking area upon a street adjacent to any public property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place contrary to the provisions of such signs. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.07)  
10.32.080 - Parking on narrow streets. 
A.  Whenever the city traffic and safety commission is of the opinion that parking on a narrow street will create a hazardous condition or interfere with traffic, it may by resolution designate such street as a no parking area in accordance with the following: 
1.  When the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty feet, it may prohibit parking on both sides of the street. 
2.  When the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty feet, it may prohibit parking upon one side of the street. 
B.  When the city traffic and safety commission has prohibited parking on any such street or portion thereof, the director of public works shall establish the no parking area by erecting and maintaining appropriate signs and/or curb markings indicating a no parking zone, as described by the resolution of the city traffic and safety commission. 
C.  When official signs or curb markings prohibiting vehicle parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.08)  
10.32.090 - Parking on hills. 
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway when upon any grade exceeding three percent within any business or residence district without blocking the wheels of the vehicle by turning them against the curb or blocking by other means in a way as to eliminate the possibility of the unattended vehicle rolling down the roadway. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.09)  
10.32.100 - Close to intersections in business district or traffic control devices. 
The director of public works shall appropriately sign or mark the following places and when so signed or marked no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the places: 
A.  At any place within twenty-five feet of an intersection in any business district except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop; 
B.  Within twenty-five feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign or official electric flashing device; 
C.  At any place where the city traffic and safety commission determines that it is necessary in order to eliminate unusual traffic hazard. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.10)  
10.32.110 - Peddlers and vendors. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall stand or park any vehicle or wagon from which goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables or foodstuffs are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for sale or bartered or exchanged on any portion of any street within the city, except that such vehicles or wagons may stand or park only at the request of a bona fide purchaser for a period of time not to exceed ten minutes at any one place. Further, the vehicle or wagon operator shall not park the vehicle or wagon within one thousand feet of a public school nor within two hundred fifty feet of another vehicle engaged in vending, peddling, selling or soliciting. Further, the vehicle or wagon operator and any assistant thereto shall conduct such commercial activities only between the hours of nine a.m. and nine p.m. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons delivering such articles upon order of, or by agreement with a customer from a store or other fixed place of business or distribution. 
B.  No person shall park or stand on any street, any lunch wagon, eating cart or vehicle from which articles of food or drink are sold or offered for sale without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the Director of Finance. The person applying for such a permit shall designate the specific location, area, or route in which such lunch wagon, eating cart or vehicle shall stand or go subject to approval by the Director of Finance and consistent with the restrictions set forth in subsection A. 
C.  Whenever a permit is granted under the provisions of this section and a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no person shall park or stand any vehicle or wagon on any location other than as designated in such permit. In the event that the holder of any such permit is convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the provisions of this section, such permit shall be forthwith revoked by the director of finance upon the filing of the record of such conviction with the city council, and no permit shall thereafter be issued to such person until six months have elapsed from the date of such revocation. 
(Ord. 2132 § 1, 1995: Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.11)  
10.32.120 - Emergency parking restrictions. 
A.  Whenever the chief of police or director of public works has determined that an emergency traffic has occurred or that congestion is likely to result from the holding of a public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for construction projects, the chief of police or director of public works shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the chief of police or director of public works shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency, event, or during the construction project. The chief of police or director of public works shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter. 
B.  When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.12)  
10.32.130 - Handicapped parking. 
A.  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on any street or portion of a street established by resolution as an area restricted exclusively for use by vehicles of physically handicapped persons as defined in the California Vehicle Code when such area is designated by appropriate signs and by blue paint upon the curbed surface adjacent thereto, unless such vehicle is entitled to display and is displaying the distinguishing license plate or distinguishing placard issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles. 
B.  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on any off-street parking area, public or private, used by vehicles of physically handicapped persons as defined in the California Vehicle Code when such area is designated by appropriate signs and by pavement markings consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant in white on a blue background, unless such vehicle is entitled to display and is displaying the distinguishing license plate or distinguishing placard issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.13)  
10.32.140 - Parking on private property. 
No person shall stop, stand, park or leave standing, any motor vehicle, as that phrase is defined in the Vehicle Code of the state, whether attended or unattended, on any private property within the city, except with the consent of the owner or person in possession of such private property. Such consent, for the purpose of this section, shall be deemed for all purposes not to have been given if the private property has displayed thereon, in plain view, a sign which: 
A.  States that public parking is prohibited; and 
B.  Refers to this code section; and 
C.  Contains a telephone number of the city police department. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.14)  
10.32.150 - Leaving keys in unattended vehicles. 
No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall leave the vehicle unattended upon any street or alley with the ignition keys to the vehicle left in, on or about said vehicle. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.15)  
10.32.160 - Loading zones. 
A.  The city traffic and safety commission is authorized to determine loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows: 
1.  At any place in any business district; 
2.  Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly. 
B.  In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes. 
C.  Whenever the city traffic and safety commission has determined by resolution that a loading zone or passenger loading zone shall be established at a designated place, the director of public works shall mark, designate and establish the loading zones as follows: 
1.  Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint stenciled with black letters, "LOADING ONLY," upon the top of all curbs within such zones. 
2.  Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint stenciled with black letters, "PASSENGER LOADING ONLY," upon the top of all curbs in the zones. 
3.  Mail deposit zones shall be indicated by white paint stenciled with black letters, "MAIL DEPOSIT ONLY," upon the top of all curbs in the zones. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.17)  
10.32.170 - Curb markings. 
A.  The director of public works is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this title and the traffic and safety commission, to place, and when required herein shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and the curb markings shall have the meanings as herein set forth: 
1.  Red and/or no parking signs shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone. 
2.  Yellow means no stopping, standing or parking at any time between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers or materials; provided, that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes or the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty minutes. 
3.  White means no stopping, standing, or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers or mail deposit, which shall not exceed three minutes, and such restrictions shall apply between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays and except as follows: 
a.  When such zone is in front of a mail deposit box or when such zone is in front of a hotel, the restrictions shall apply at all times. 
b.  When such zone is in front of a theater, the restrictions shall apply at all times except when the theater is closed. 
4.  Green means no standing or parking for longer than twenty minutes at any time between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays or holidays. 
5.  Blue means parking is limited exclusively to the vehicles of physically handicapped persons whose vehicles display either one of the distinguishing license plates issued to disabled persons. 
B.  When the director of public works, as authorized under this title, has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the provisions of this title. 
C.  The owner of a business that has an established loading zone as described in Section 10.32.160 and this section, may petition the city to alter the hours of operation and enforcement. 
Upon approval of the petition, the director of public works may direct that a sign be erected, in addition to the curb markings required under this section. The sign shall indicate the days and hours of enforcement. 
(Ord. 2194 § 1, 1999; Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.18 (part))  
10.32.180 - Loading zone use restrictions. 
The traffic and safety commission, by resolution, may direct the street director of public works to erect signs, establishing loading zones and restricting the stopping, standing or parking therein at such times and upon such days as the public interest may require. When such signs have been erected, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in such designated area, except for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers and materials therefrom, providing that such loading or unloading shall not exceed three minutes. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.18 (part))  
10.32.190 - Effect of permission to load or unload. 
A.  Permission herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than twenty minutes. 
B.  The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages and United States mail. 
C.  Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading and unloading of personal baggage, but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three minutes. 
D.  Within the total time limits specified in subsections A, B and C of this section the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading, but without permitting abuse of the privileges granted. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.19)  
10.32.195 - Loading zones on private property. 
When the owner of a business has an established loading zone, as described in Sections 10.32.160 and 10.32.170 of this chapter, which are located on private property, that owner may petition the city engineer for expansion of the days and hours of operation and enforcement. These additional days and hours would be in addition to the days and hours as described in Section 10.32.170 of this chapter. 
When the city engineer approves the petition, the loading zone will have a sign in addition to the curb markings required under Section 10.32.170 of this chapter. The sign will indicate the days and hours of enforcement. 
(Ord. 2154 § 1, 1997)  
10.32.200 - Yellow loading zones. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material for such time as is permitted in Section 10.32.160 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.20)  
10.32.210 - Passenger loading zones. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time as is specified in Section 10.36.160 of this title. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.21)  
10.32.220 - Alleys. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any alley for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.22)  
10.32.230 - Bus zones. 
A.  The city traffic and safety commission is authorized to establish bus zones opposite curb space for the loading and unloading of buses of common carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof subject to the directives and limitations set forth herein. 
B.  The word "bus" as used in this section means any motor bus, motorcoach, or trackless trolley coach used as a common carrier of passengers. 
C.  No bus zone shall exceed eighty feet in length, except that when satisfactory evidence has been presented to the city traffic and safety commission showing the necessity therefor, the city and traffic safety commission may extend bus zones not to exceed a total length of one hundred twenty-five feet. 
D.  Bus zones shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection. 
E.  Whenever the city traffic and safety commission has established a bus zone, the director of public works shall paint the curb red with stenciled white letters, "NO STANDING," together with the words, "BUS ZONE," upon the top or side of all curbs and places specified as a bus zone. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to bus zones established in areas which are classified in the R-1 residential zone. 
F.  No person shall stop or park any vehicle other than a bus in a bus zone. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.23)  
10.32.240 - Taxistands. 
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle other than a taxicab in any street where the adjacent curbing is painted red and has stenciled thereon the words "TAXI STAND." 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.24)  
10.32.250 - One-hour parking zones. 
When signs or curb markings have been determined, by the city traffic and safety commission resolution, to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle, between the hours of seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day designated in the resolution, for a period of time longer than one hour. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.25)  
10.32.260 - Two-hour parking zones. 
When signs or curb markings have been determined, by city traffic and safety commission resolution, to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle, between the hours of seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day designated in the resolution, for a period of time longer than two hours. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.26)  
10.32.270 - Parking restrictions due to traffic hazards. 
Whenever, in the opinion of the city traffic and safety commission, the parking of vehicles in any area constitutes a traffic hazard during certain days and hours, city traffic and safety commission may designate the same as a hazard during such days and hours and order signs to be erected in such area or along the curbing adjacent thereto prohibiting parking in such area during such days and hours, and parking thereafter in such area during such days and hours is prohibited. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.27)  
10.32.280 - No parking areas. 
When signs are erected or when curb surfaces are painted red, giving due notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand, park or leave unattended any motor vehicle on any of the streets, portions of streets or other places, as are designated by resolution of the city traffic and safety commission as no parking areas. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.28)  
10.32.290 - Obedience to signs prohibiting parking. 
Whenever authorized signs are in place, at such locations as the city traffic and safety commission shall designate by resolution giving notice that parking is prohibited during certain hours, it is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle during such specified times at such locations. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.29)  
10.32.300 - Reserved parking spaces. 
It is unlawful for any person to stop, park or leave standing any vehicle on any municipality owned or operated off-street parking facility at any place, location or stall thereon where a conspicuous sign has been erected indicating that the place, location or stall is reserved for a particular individual, officer or employee. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.30)  
10.32.310 - Vehicles over six thousand pounds. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, no person shall stop, park or stand any "motor vehicle," "semitrailer," or "trailer," as those phrases are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state, weighing in excess of six thousand pounds and/or over eighty inches wide, upon any public street within the city for a period of longer than thirty minutes in any calendar day, except for loading and unloading. 
B.  Any vehicle stopped, parked or standing in violation of any regulation imposed by this code may be removed by any member of the police department authorized by the chief of police in the manner and subject to the requirements of Section 22850 et seq. of the Vehicle Code. 
C.  The regulation imposed by this section shall not be effective unless and until signs are posted giving notice of such restricted parking, and of a telephone number which persons whose vehicles are towed pursuant to this section may call to request a hearing. Any hearing shall be conducted within forty-eight hours after request, excluding weekends and holidays. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.31)  
10.32.320 - Maneuvering in public streets. 
It is unlawful for any person to use any public streets to maneuver any vehicles into or from any commercial, industrial or over four-unit multiple-residential properties. All vehicles maneuvering for parking, loading, unloading or any other use shall be done within the commercial, industrial or over four-unit multiple-residential property. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3203.32)  
10.32.330 - Parking on private property or driveway. 
A.  No person shall park a vehicle in a private driveway or on private property without the direct or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such driveway or property. 
B.  The owners or persons in lawful possession of such driveways or property may post on the driveway or property a sign in the form substantially as follows: 
NO PARKING 
WITHOUT CONSENT OF OWNER 
(Prior code §§ 3400 and 3401)  
10.32.340 - Parking with audible status indicator on. 
A.  No person shall park a vehicle on any street or upon any public or private property which while so parked emits sound from an audible status indicator. An "audible status indicator" shall be as defined in Section 9.28.070 of this code. 
B.  In the event a violation occurs under this section, no enforcement action shall be taken under Section 9.28.070 of this code for the same violation. 
(Ord. 2112 § 2, 1994)  
10.32.350 - Restricted parking on major public streets and public property to display vehicle for sale or rent. 
A.  No person shall park or leave standing any motor vehicle in or upon Montebello Boulevard, Beverly Boulevard, Whittier Boulevard, Washington Boulevard, Olympic Boulevard, Wilcox Avenue and Greenwood Avenue within the boundaries of the city of Montebello for the purpose of advertising or displaying the vehicle for sale or rent, except as set forth in subsection C of this section. 
B.  Any motor vehicle parked or left standing in violation of this section is subject to citation and/or impoundment pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 22651.9 of the California Vehicle Code. 
C.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, any person who resides on Montebello Boulevard, Washington Boulevard, Olympic Boulevard, Wilcox Avenue and Greenwood Avenue within the boundaries of the city of Montebello, may park or leave standing any motor vehicle for the purpose of advertising or displaying the vehicle for sale or rent, provided the following: 
1.  The vehicle for sale or rent is registered to resident's address on Montebello Boulevard, Washington Boulevard, Olympic Boulevard, Wilcox Avenue or Greenwood Avenue, or that resident as the registered owner of said vehicle can prove to the city residency on one of the aforementioned public streets; 
2.  The vehicle for sale or rent is parked or left standing on the resident's particular street within four lineal blocks in either direction of resident's address; and 
3.  Residents on Wilcox Avenue shall not park or leave standing any motor vehicle for the purpose of advertising or displaying the vehicle for sale or rent within the 100 to 300 blocks of Wilcox Avenue, adjacent to the Montebello High School campus. 
By way of an example, a person residing on Montebello Boulevard may park or leave standing a motor vehicle for the purpose of advertising its sale or rent provided the vehicle is parked or left standing within four lineal blocks in either direction of person's address on Montebello Boulevard, and the vehicle is registered to the resident's address on Montebello Boulevard or resident can sufficiently prove to the city that he or she resides on Montebello Boulevard. 
This exemption set forth in this subsection shall be reserved to persons residing on the aforementioned public streets, and cannot be assigned or transferred to any person not residing on the aforementioned public streets, regardless of the resident's permission or consent. The exemption shall not apply to persons residing on Beverly Boulevard or Whittier Boulevard. If a person residing on one of the aforementioned streets is issued a citation from the city, he or she must provide documentary evidence to the city proving his or her residency in order for the city to dismiss the citation. 
D.  No person shall park or leave standing any motor vehicle in or upon public property of the city for the purpose of advertising or displaying the vehicle for sale or rent without the consent of the city. 
(Ord. 2277 § 1, 2004: Ord. 2151 § 1, 1996)  
Chapter 10.36 - PREFERENTIAL PARKING DISTRICTS 
Sections: 
 
10.36.010 - Designation authority. 
A.  The city council shall, upon recommendation of the traffic and safety commission or director of public works consider the designation of a preferential parking district for those areas satisfying the criteria established in this chapter and may authorize the traffic and safety commission to establish appropriate parking restrictions for a district. 
B.  The city council may at its discretion designate by resolution a certain area as a preferential parking district and authorize the traffic and safety commission to establish parking restrictions for this district. Motor vehicles displaying a valid parking permit may stand or be parked exempt from the parking restriction established pursuant to authority of this section in the preferential parking district for which the permit is issued. The resolution shall establish the streets and the boundaries of this district. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3204.07)  
10.36.020 - Designation criteria. 
A.  If, based on surveys and studies, the traffic and safety commission establishes that on-street parking in an area is substantially reduced or impaired by commuter vehicles for an extended period, it may recommend that the area be designated as a preferential parking district. 
B.  In determining whether an area identified as eligible for preferential parking may be designated as a preferential parking district, the traffic and safety commission and the city council shall consider factors and criteria which include, but are not limited to the following: 
1.  The extent to which the residents desire and need permit parking; 
2.  The extent to which legal on-street parking spaces are available for the use of residents and their guests; 
3.  The extent to which motor vehicles registered to persons residing in the area cannot be accommodated by the number of available off-street parking spaces; 
4.  The size and configuration of the area as it relates to the problems of enforcement of parking and traffic regulations and the potential impact of parking and traffic congestion, on this and adjacent areas, as a result of the establishment of such a district; 
5.  Whether other regulatory measures would better solve the problem (e.g., parking restrictions and strict enforcement of such restrictions); 
6.  The area to be designated shall include a minimum of one block, both sides. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3204.08)  
10.36.030 - Designation process. 
A.  Upon receipt and verification of a petition signed by residents living in two-thirds of the dwelling units comprising not less than fifty percent of the developed frontage of the area proposed for designation, or upon adoption of a motion by the city council or the traffic and safety commission, all or part of an area may be designated as a preferential parking district. 
B.  Within sixty days of the completion of surveys and studies to determine whether designation criteria are met, the traffic and safety commission shall give notice and conduct a public meeting for the purpose of receiving public comments on the proposed preferential parking district. 
C.  Notice of the public meeting provided for herein shall be sent to all affected adjacent property owners. The notice shall clearly state the purpose of the meeting and shall include a description of the location and boundaries tentatively considered for the proposed preferential parking district, the streets involved, parking restrictions being proposed, and the fee to be charged for permits. 
D.  Within sixty days of the completion of this meeting or meetings conducted with regard to a particular area, the traffic and safety commission shall recommend by written report to the city council, based on the record of such meeting or meetings and the surveys and studies performed, whether to designate the area under consideration as a preferential parking district. 
E.  The traffic and safety commission report shall set forth the evidence generated as a result of surveys and studies performed, significant subjects and concerns raised at public meeting(s) the findings relative to the designated factors and criteria listed herein which are applicable to the area; any other factors used and conclusions reached which justify preferential parking for that particular area; the proposed streets and boundaries of the area; and the proposed parking restrictions. 
F.  The designation process and designation criteria set forth in this section shall also be utilized by the traffic and safety commission and the city council in determining whether to dissolve a preferential parking district shall be initiated: 
1.  Upon receipt of a verified petition of residents living in not less than one-half of the dwelling units comprising not less than one-half of the residential developed frontage within the district proposed to be dissolved; 
2.  By recommendation of the traffic and safety commission; or 
3.  By resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code §§ 3204.09 and 3204.10)  
10.36.040 - Posting. 
Upon the adoption by the city council of a resolution designating a preferential parking district, the director of public works shall cause appropriate signs to be erected in the district, indicating prominently thereon the parking limitation period of the day for its application, and the fact that motor vehicles with valid permits shall be exempt therefrom. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3204.12)  
10.36.050 - Permit—Exemption. 
A.  A motor vehicle on which is displayed a valid parking permit as provided for herein shall be permitted to stand or be parked in the preferential parking district for which it was issued without being limited by parking restrictions established pursuant to this section. Except as provided below, all other motor vehicles parked within a preferential parking district shall be subject to the parking restrictions adopted as provided in this section as well as the penalties provided for herein. 
B.  A preferential parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the holder thereof an on-street parking space within the designated preferential parking district. 
C.  The following vehicles shall be exempt from parking restrictions established pursuant to this section: 
1.  A motor vehicle as owned by or operated under contract to a utility whether privately, municipally or publicly owned, when used in the construction, operation, removal or repair of utility, property or facilities or engaged in authorized work in the designated preferential parking district; 
2.  A motor vehicle owned by or operated under contract to a governmental agency, when used in the course of official governmental business. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3204.13)  
10.36.060 - Permit—Application. 
Except as otherwise provided, each parking permit issued by the police department shall be in accordance with policy established by the police department for which application is made, and such other information that may be deemed relevant by the police department. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3204.15)  
10.36.070 - Permit—Issuance. 
A.  Parking permits for preferential parking districts shall be issued by the police department. Each such permit shall designate, state or reflect thereon the particular preferential parking district and the date on which the permit shall expire. 
B.  Resident, merchant and guest permits shall be issued as provided by policy established by the police department. Guest permit fees shall be as established by city council resolution. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3204.11)  
10.36.080 - Permit—Fees—Transfer—Surrender. 
The fee for preferential parking permits shall be such as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. Upon the permittee's change of place of residence, or business, the permittee shall surrender the permit to the police chief. If the permit is lost or stolen, the police department shall be notified immediately. The replacement permit shall expire on the same day as the original permit. In the event a permittee moves from one preferential parking district to another preferential parking district, the police department shall transfer the permit. The permits so transferred or replaced shall expire on the same day as do all permits in the new district. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3204.16)  
10.36.090 - Visitor permits. 
Any resident or merchant eligible for a preferential parking permit in a preferential parking district may also apply to the police department for a visitor preferential parking permit for the use of guest visitors to said district. No more than three visitor preferential parking permits shall be issued for any one dwelling or business establishment at any one time. Visitor preferential parking permits shall be valid for a period not to exceed one year. Such permits may be extended upon application to the police department. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3204.18)  
10.36.100 - Commercial vehicles. 
No person shall, without a permit therefor, park or leave standing any commercial vehicle or trailer in a preferential parking district in excess of the parking restrictions authorized pursuant to this section, except while loading or unloading property or when such vehicle is parked in connection with, or in aid of, the performance of a service to or on a property in the block in which such vehicle is parked. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3204.14)  
10.36.110 - Enforcement. 
The regulations imposed by this chapter shall not be effective unless and until signs are posted giving notice of such restricted parking. Any vehicle stopped, parked or standing in violation of this regulation imposed by the chief of police shall be enforced in the manner and subject to the requirements of Section 22850 et seq. of the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3204.17 (part))  
10.36.120 - Prohibition—Violations—Permit revocation and fines. 
A.  Unless exempted pursuant to this chapter, no person shall stand or park a motor vehicle in violation of any parking restrictions established pursuant to this chapter. A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction, which shall be punishable by a fine as established by city council resolution. 
B.  No person shall falsely represent him/herself as eligible for a parking permit or furnish false information in an application for a parking permit to the police department. 
C.  No permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall thereafter be assigned, transferred or used for any consideration, monetary or otherwise. 
D.  No person shall copy, produce or create a facsimile or counterfeit parking permit; nor shall any person use or display a facsimile or counterfeit preferential parking district permit. 
E.  The permit of any person who after a hearing has been found by the traffic and safety commission to have violated subsections B, C and D shall be revoked by the police department and no new permit shall be issued to that person for a period of one year. Such person, upon written notification of such revocation, shall surrender the permit to the police department within fifteen days. Failure to surrender a revoked parking permit shall be grounds for the police department to refuse to issue any preferential parking permits to such individual for any district within one calendar year from the date of violation. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3204.17 (part))  
Chapter 10.40 - LOAD LIMITS 
Section: 
 
10.40.010 - Excess weight/size permit. 
The following procedure and fees are established for the securing of special permits authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle, or combination of vehicles, or special mobile equipment of size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in the California Vehicle Code. 
A.  Any person desiring to operate or move a vehicle, or combination of vehicles, or special mobile equipment of size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in the California Vehicle Code, shall apply in writing to the public works department of the city, for a special permit authorizing the person to do so. Upon good cause being shown in the application, the director of public works shall issue the special permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle, or combination of vehicles, or special mobile equipment of size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in the Vehicle Code of the state. 
B.  The applicant shall pay such fees for special permits as shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3204.19)  
Chapter 10.44 - PEDESTRIANS 
Sections: 
 
10.44.010 - Crosswalks—Establishment—Maintenance. 
A.  The city traffic and safety commission is authorized to designate the location of marked crosswalks at intersections and other places upon the streets of the city. 
B.  The city traffic and safety commission shall direct the director of public works to establish and maintain marked crosswalks at all intersections and other places where the city traffic and safety commission determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway. When directed by the city traffic and safety commission, the director of public works shall establish, designate and maintain the marked crosswalks by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface on the roadway. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3202.23)  
10.44.020 - Crosswalks—Use required in business district. 
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a marked or unmarked crosswalk in any business district. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3202.24)  
10.44.030 - Crossing roadways. 
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except in a marked crosswalk. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3202.25)  
10.44.040 - Selling or soliciting in public right-of-way. 
No person shall sell, offer for sale, or otherwise vend, solicit, or display or give away any newspaper or other printed matter, any merchandise or service from a position or place in or upon any public street or way except by special permit from the police department. (Reference: Montebello Merchants Sidewalk Sales.) 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3202.26)  
Chapter 10.48 - VEHICLE REGISTRATION FEE 
Sections: 
 
10.48.010 - Purpose. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is intended to support the South Coast Air Quality Management District's (SCAQMD) imposition of the vehicle registration fee and to bring the city into compliance with the requirements set forth in Section 44243 of the State Health and Safety Code in order to receive fee revenues for the purpose of implementing programs to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles. 
(Ord. 2053 § 1, 1991)  
10.48.020 - Definitions. 
As applied in this chapter, the following words and terms shall be defined as follows: 
"City" means the city of Montebello. 
"Fee administrator" means the director of finance of the city of Montebello and his designee. 
"Mobile source air pollution reduction program" means any program or project implemented by the city to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles which it determines will be consistent with the California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the plan proposed pursuant to Article 5 (commencing with Section 40460) of Chapter 5.5 of Part 3 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 2053 § 2, 1991)  
10.48.030 - Legal constructions. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall be constructed to effectively carry out its purpose, which are found and declared to be in furtherance of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience. 
(Ord. 2053 § 4, 1991)  
10.48.040 - Receipt of fee. 
The additional vehicle registration fees disbursed by the SCAQMD and remitted to the city pursuant to this chapter, shall be accepted by the fee administrator. 
(Ord. 2053 § 3 (A), 1991)  
10.48.050 - Establishment of air quality improvement trust fund. 
The fee administrator shall establish a separate interest-bearing trust fund account in a financial institution authorized to receive deposits of city funds. 
(Ord. 2053 § 3 (B), 1991)  
10.48.060 - Transfer of funds. 
Upon receipt of vehicle registration fees, the fee administrator shall deposit such funds into the separate account established pursuant to Section 10.48.050. All interest earned by the trust fund account shall be credited only to that account. 
(Ord. 2053 § 3 (C), 1991)  
10.48.070 - Expenditure of air quality trust fund revenues. 
All revenues received from the SCAQMD and deposited in the trust fund account shall be exclusively expended on mobile source emission reduction programs as defined in Section 10.48.020. Such revenues and any interest earned on the revenues shall be expended within one year of completion of the program. 
(Ord. 2053 § 3 (D), 1991)  
10.48.080 - Audits. 
The city consents to an audit of all programs and projects funded by vehicle registration fee revenues received from the SCAQMD pursuant to Section 44223 of the Health and Safety Code. The audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor selected by the SCAQMD as provided in Section 44244 and 44244.1(a) of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 2053 § 3 (E), 1991)  
10.48.090 - Supplemental agreements. 
The fee administrator shall be authorized to execute any necessary and supplemental agreements in the furtherance of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2053 § 3 (F), 1991)  
Chapter 10.52 - INTERSTATE TRUCKS 
Sections: 
 
10.52.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for terminal and/or truck yard designation and truck route designations to terminals or truck yards for interstate trucks operated on a federally designated highway system and to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3204.20 (part))  
10.52.020 - Terminals and truck yards/routes—Permit—Application—Submittal. 
Any interested person requiring terminal or truck yard access for interstate trucks from the federally designated highway system shall submit an application, on a form provided by the city, together with such information as may be required by the director of public works and appropriate fees of the city. No such application shall be accepted unless a conditional use permit for a truck terminal or truck yard has been issued for the applicant's facility, if required under Title 17 of this code. However, the director of public works may elect to accept an application for filing when the applicant concurrently files an application for a conditional use permit with the planning division. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3204.20 (part))  
10.52.030 - Terminals and truck yards/routes—Permit—Application—Investigation. 
A.  Upon receipt of an application, the director of public works will cause an investigation to be made to ascertain whether or not the proposed terminal or truck yard facility meets the requirements for an interstate truck terminal. Upon approval of that designation, the director of public works will then determine the capability of the route requested and alternate routes, whether requested or not. Determination or route capability will include, without limitation, a review of the adequacy of turning radii and lane widths of ramps, intersections, highways and general traffic conditions such as site distance, speed, and traffic volumes. No access from a federally designated highway system will be approved without the concurrent approval of Caltrans. 
B.  Should the requested route pass through the city to a terminal located in another jurisdiction, the applicant shall comply with that jurisdiction's application process, if any. Coordination of the approval of the route through the city will be the responsibility of the entity which controls the terminal's land use. Costs for trailblazer signs shall be as provided below. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3204.20 (part))  
10.52.040 - Terminals and truck yards/routes—Permit—Fee. 
The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application fee, as established by resolution, sufficient to pay the costs of the review of the terminal designation and the review of the route and alternate route. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3204.21 (part))  
10.52.050 - Trailblazer signs. 
Upon the approval of the terminal designation and route by the city and by Caltrans, the applicant shall deposit with the city sufficient funds as estimated by the director of public works to pay for the purchase and installation of terminal trailblazer signs. Trailblazer signs will be required at every decision point along any route established by the city. Upon completion of the installation of signs, the actual costs shall be computed and any difference between the actual and the estimated costs shall be billed or refunded to the applicant, whichever the case may be. No terminal or truck yard or route may be used until such signs as may be required are in place. Costs for trailblazer signs may be apportioned in accordance with the procedure provided below. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3204.21 (part))  
10.52.060 - Truck routes—Retrofitting. 
A.  If all feasible routes to a requested terminal or truck yard are found unsatisfactory by the director of public works, the applicant may request retrofitting of the deficiencies. All costs of engineering, construction and inspection will be the responsibility of the applicant. Except when retrofitting of deficiencies is within the jurisdiction of Caltrans, the actual construction will be performed by the city or by a contractor acceptable to it, and in all cases involving work on public property such work shall be subject to the competitive bidding requirements for public work projects established by state law. 
B.  When the work is to be done by the city, the applicant shall deposit with the city the estimated cost of retrofitting. Adjustments between the estimated and actual costs shall be made after completion of the work, and any difference between the actual and the estimated costs shall be billed or refunded to the applicant, as the case may be. When the work is to be done by the applicant, the applicant may file with the director of public works a statement detailing the actual cost of the retrofitting. 
C.  If at any time within five years from the date of completion of the retrofitting by the applicant, should any applicant seek terminal truck yard approval which would use the route upon which such retrofitting was accomplished, any such applicant's fee shall include that applicant's proportionate share of the retrofitting, as determined by the director of public works, which fee shall be disbursed by the city to the applicant who paid for the retrofitting as well as to any other applicant who contributed to the costs of retrofitting under this section. Nothing herein shall require the payment of a proportionate fee if the applicant doing the work failed to file the report with the director of public works required under subsection B of this section. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3204.22)  
10.52.070 - Terminals and truck yards/routes—Permit—Revocation. 
The city traffic engineer may revoke any approved terminal, truck yard or route if the terminal, truck yard or route becomes a traffic hazard. A traffic hazard shall include, but not be limited to, the inability of interstate trucks to negotiate the route in a safe an acceptable manner, or when interstate trucks cause there to be an unsafe driving condition for other vehicular traffic or pedestrians. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3204.23)  
10.52.080 - Appeals. 
If the director of public works denies a terminal or truck yard designation, route feasibility, or revokes a previously approved terminal, truck yard or route, the applicant and/or terminal truck yard owner, within ten days following the date of receipt of the decision of the director of public works, may appeal it to the city council in writing. The appeal shall be made on a form provided by the director of public works and shall be filed with the city clerk. The appeal shall contain a statement of facts indicating the applicant's contentions. Within five days after the filing of the appeal, the city traffic engineer shall transmit to the city clerk the terminal application, sketches of the proposed route, and all other data and reports pertinent to the matter. Copies of such material shall be made available to the applicant upon request. 
B.  The city clerk shall cause the matter to be placed on the city council's agenda not later than thirty days after the filing of the appeal. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be provided to the applicant and to any other interested party who has requested such notice. 
C.  If Caltrans and not the director of public works denies or revokes access to or from a federally designated highway, there shall be no right of appeal to the city council. In such case, the applicant shall be advised to pursue such administrative remedies as Caltrans may provide. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3204.24)  
Chapter 10.56 - MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.56.010 - Driving through funeral processions. 
No driver of a vehicle except an emergency vehicle, shall drive between vehicles comprising a funeral procession while they are in motion and when the vehicles in such procession are conspicuously so designated. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3202.15)  
10.56.020 - Driving on sidewalk or parkways. 
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area or any parkway except at permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3202.17)  
10.56.030 - Crossing fire hose. 
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department when laid down on any street or across any entrance to any private driveway, for the purpose of being used at any fire, without the consent of the chief of the fire department or the assistant in command. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3202.18)  
10.56.040 - Racing. 
No person, while operating any automobile, motorcycle, or any other motor vehicle, upon a public street or on private property within the city, shall engage in any race, contest, or game of follow-the-leader, hare-and-hound, hill climbing, or any other similar game, contest or event. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3202.19)  
Chapter 10.64 - BICYCLES 
Sections: 
 
10.64.010 - Appointment of registrar. 
The chief of police shall be designated as the registrar of bicycles of the city. 
(Prior code § 3300)  
10.64.020 - License—Required. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle propelled wholly or in part by human power upon any public streets, alleys, or public highway within the city without first obtaining a license required by Division 16.7, commencing with Section 39000, of the Vehicle Code of the state. 
(Prior code § 3301)  
10.64.030 - License—Fee. 
The license fee to be paid for each bicycle shall be imposed in accordance with the amount(s) set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2031 § 4, 1990: prior code § 3302)  
10.64.040 - Riding or parking on sidewalk—Position in relation to curb while riding. 
No person shall ride or park or leave a bicycle upon any sidewalk. The rider of a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as nearly as practicable within five feet of the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway except when passing a standing vehicle or making a left-hand turn at an intersection. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3202.20)  
10.64.050 - Riding on handlebars prohibited. 
No operator of any bicycle when upon the street shall carry any other person upon the bar, handle or tank of any such vehicle, and no person so shall ride upon any such vehicle. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3202.21)  
10.64.060 - Use of coasters, roller skates, skateboards and similar devices restricted. 
No person mounted upon roller skates or riding in, on or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, skateboard or similar device shall go upon any roadway, or upon the sidewalk in any business district, or any place within the grounds of the civic center complex, any public building or any city park. 
(Ord. 2058 § 1 (part), 1991: prior code § 3202.22)  
Chapter 10.68 - OVERSIZED VEHICLE PARKING REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.68.010 - Prohibition of parking of oversized vehicles. 
No person shall park, or leave standing on any public street, alley or right-of-way in the city any oversized vehicle for a period longer than four consecutive hours. For purposes of this section, an oversized vehicle that is moved to a location or parking place that is within two hundred feet if its original location or parking place shall be deemed to be parked at the same original location. 
(Ord. 2294 § 1 (part), 2006)  
10.68.020 - Definitions. 
"Oversized vehicle" shall be defined as any vehicle, whether motorized or nonmotorized, that exceeds twenty feet in length, or eighty inches in width or seventy-eight inches in height that weighs less than six thousand lbs (gross vehicle weight). Any extension caused by any mirror or any accessory attached to such vehicle shall be considered part of the measured distance. 
Notwithstanding the length, width, and height requirements for an oversized vehicle, the following vehicles shall also be considered oversized vehicles subject to the prohibitions contained in Section 10.68.010 of this chapter: 
1.  Buses as defined in the California Vehicle Code; 
2.  Trailers, including boat trailers, and semi-trailers, as these are defined in the California Vehicle Code, and stand-alone boats not connected to trailers; 
3.  Trailer coaches as defined in the California Vehicle Code; and 
4.  Recreational vehicles as defined in this chapter. 
Motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers exceeding six thousand lbs (gross vehicle weight) are subject to the parking prohibitions contained in Section 10.32.310 of this chapter. 
"Recreational vehicle" shall be defined as a motor home, slide-in camper, travel trailer, truck camper, or camping trailer, with or without motive power, designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy. Recreational vehicle shall also include: 
1.  Camping Trailer. A vehicular portable unit mounted on wheels and constructed with collapsible partial sidewalls which fold for towing by another vehicle and unfold at the campsite and designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy. 
2.  Motor Home. A vehicular unit built on or permanently attached to a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis, chassis cab or van, which becomes an integral part of the completed vehicle, designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy. 
3.  Slide-in Camper. A portable unit, consisting of a roof, floor and sides, designed to be loaded onto and unloaded from the bed of a pickup truck, and designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy and shall include a truck camper. 
4.  Travel Trailer. A portable unit, mounted on wheels, of such a size and weight as not to require special highway movement permits when drawn by a motor vehicle and for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy. 
(Ord. 2294 § 1 (part), 2006)  
10.68.030 - Exemptions to prohibition on parking of oversized vehicles. 
The provisions of Section 10.68.010 of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following: 
A.  Oversized vehicles making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares, services or merchandise to or from any building or structure immediately adjacent to the property on which such building or structure is situated. 
B.  Any ambulance, paramedic or public safety vehicle involved in responding to an emergency. 
C.  Any vehicle being repaired under emergency conditions for less than eight hours. For purposes of this section, "emergency repairs" means sudden and unexpected repairs occurring during transport of the vehicle. 
D.  Any vehicle belonging to federal, state or local authorities while conducting official government business. 
E.  Any vehicle displaying a valid permit issued pursuant to Sections 10.68.040 and 10.68.060 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2294 § 1 (part), 2006)  
10.68.040 - Permit process for temporary parking permits for oversized vehicles. 
The police chief or his or her designee, shall issue a temporary parking permit to any resident of the city, for parking of an oversized vehicle that belongs to that resident, or a guest of the household in which such resident resides, provided the following conditions are met: 
A.  The permit is obtained by a resident of the property where the oversized vehicle will be parked in accordance with this section. 
B.  The oversized vehicle is parked on the street immediately adjacent to the property upon which the person requesting the permit resides. 
C.  The duration of the permit shall not exceed forty-eight hours. 
D.  Not more than four permits shall be issued for any specific oversized vehicle within any given calendar month. Permits may not be issued for consecutive periods, and there must be a minimum of forty-eight consecutive hours between the issuance of permits for a specific property or a specific oversized vehicle. 
E.  The oversized vehicle shall not be used for overnight camping, lodging, residing in, or any use for accommodation purposes. 
F.  The oversized vehicle shall not visibly block or obscure any existing safety or traffic control device and shall otherwise meet all other parking requirements for the street upon which it is parked. 
G.  The police chief or his or her designee determines that the parking of the oversized vehicle would not create a public safety hazard. Such a determination may be made based on factors, including, without limitation, the size of the oversized vehicle, the configuration of the street or the location of any nearby trees, improvements or structures. 
(Ord. 2294 § 1 (part), 2006)  
10.68.050 - Posting of signs. 
Signs giving adequate notice of the prohibitions contained in Section 10.68.010 of this chapter shall be placed at the city limits, as well as at other appropriate locations as determined by the city engineer to be consistent with applicable law. 
(Ord. 2294 § 1 (part), 2006)  
10.68.060 - Permit. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to whom a permit is issued pursuant to Section 10.68.040 of this chapter to transfer, sell, rent or lease such permit or allow such permit to be used by any person other than a guest of that person, either with or without consideration. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to borrow, buy or otherwise acquire for value or use or display any parking permit, except as provided for in Section 10.68.040 of this chapter. 
C.  Each permit issued pursuant to Section 10.68.040 of this chapter shall be subject to all of the conditions and restrictions set forth in Section 10.68.040 of this chapter. The issuance of such permit shall not be construed to be a permit for or approval of any violation of any provision of this code or any other law or regulation. 
D.  The issuance of a permit pursuant to Section 10.68.040 of this chapter shall not be construed or interpreted as a warranty or representation by the city or its officials, officers or employees that the parking of any oversized vehicle is or is not in compliance with any other provision of law. Neither the enactment of this chapter nor the preparation or delivery of any permit pursuant thereto shall impose any mandatory duty upon the city, its officials, officers or employees to completely and accurately determine the safety of the parking of any oversized vehicle or impose any liability on the city, its officials, officers or employees regarding the same. 
E.  The city council may establish a reasonable permit fee by separate resolution to recover the city's administrative costs in preparing and issuing permits. 
(Ord. 2294 § 1 (part), 2006)  
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 12.04 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
12.04.010 - Standard specifications for public works construction—Adoption. 
Subject to certain changes and amendments hereinafter set forth in this chapter, the following code is adopted by reference: "Standard Specifications For Public Works Construction, 1990 Edition," a code setting forth specifications for construction, maintenance and repair of streets, pavement, curbs, sidewalks, gutters, drainage structures, driveways, bridges and the like, where foregoing code and amendments thereto is designated as the "primary code" adopted by reference. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7100 (a))  
12.04.020 - Standard specifications for public works construction—Authority to modify. 
The director of public works may modify, vary or add to the standard specifications and standard drawings insofar as the same relate to any particular work or construction, maintenance or repair when, because of circumstances or conditions pertaining thereto but not existing generally throughout the city, such modification, variation or addition is required in order to secure the same standard of work ordinarily obtained. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7100 (b))  
12.04.030 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  "Agency" means the city of Montebello. 
B.  "Board" means the city council of the city of Montebello. 
C.  "Director of public works" or "engineer" or "city engineer" means the director of public works or his designee or his authorized agents or inspectors. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7101)  
12.04.040 - Datum plane and official bench mark of datum monument. 
Sea level is declared to be the datum plane or base line of the city for the purpose of establishing and designating the official grades of streets, sewers, and other public works within the city, and for measuring all elevations or surface points therein; and the official bench mark of datum monument within the city shall be the top of that certain leaden tack set in the curb return at the northeast corner of Emmit Williams Way and Sixth Street in the city, and its elevation is 203.84 feet above sea level. The Los Angeles County public works bench marks are declared to be the bench marks of the city. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7102)  
12.04.050 - Street work—Permit required. 
Every person, before commencing the construction of any sidewalk, curb, gutter driveway, approach, excavation, grading or any work in any public street, alley, easement or other public way, except where the work is being done under a public contract for the same, shall make application to the director of public works for a permit to do such work on a form to be supplied by the city, which shall specify the place where the improvements are to be made, the nature and extent of the improvement, the time within which the work shall be commenced and when the same shall be completed and finished, and shall contain a statement that the permit is asked for and the work therein described shall be done subject to the terms and provisions of this chapter. No person shall do any work without first having obtained from the city a permit therefor. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7103)  
12.04.060 - Excavations and obstructions—Permit—Required. 
No person shall make any excavation in, along or under the surface of any street or other public place or dig in, plow up, tear up, fill, cover, disturb or change any portion of the same, or construct, put upon, maintain or leave thereon, any obstruction or impediment to travel, or pile or place thereon any material, without first obtaining a written permit therefor, which permit shall be issued by the director of public works upon the performance by the applicant for the same, or the following requirements and conditions precedent thereto. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7103.1)  
12.04.070 - Excavations and obstructions—Permit—Work done by public contract. 
No permit or a no-fee permit will be required under this chapter for any work which is done by public contract. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7103.12)  
12.04.080 - Excavations and obstructions—Permit—Application—Contents. 
The applicant for such permit shall make, sign and file in the office of the director of public works an application to be approved by the director of public works, which shall set forth the name, address and principal place of business of the person making the application, and shall state in detail the location and dimensions of the excavation intended to be made, and the proposed purpose thereof, and the nature of, and location where it is desired to place obstructions, materials, and debris in connection therewith, and the length of time which will be required to complete the work, backfill the excavation and remove all obstructions, materials and debris. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7103.2)  
12.04.090 - Excavations and obstructions—Permit—Application—Required drawings and plans. 
An applicant for a permit to excavate in any street or other public place shall file in the office of the director of public works drawings in duplicate, designing the street or other public place and the location thereof, together with a designation of the location thereon of the proposed excavation, the dimensions thereof, and any other details which may be requested by the director of public works, provided, however, that the filing of drawings shall not be required when excavations are to be made for service connections or for location of trouble in conduits or pipes or making repairs thereto. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7103.3)  
12.04.100 - Excavations and obstructions—Permit—Application—Demonstration of right to occupy and use street or other public place—Modification of plans. 
The applicant shall show to the satisfaction of the director of public works a right to use and occupy, for the purpose mentioned in the application, the street or other public place wherein the excavation is proposed to be made. The director of public works may modify the time specified for the completion of the work, the backfilling of the excavation and the removal of all obstructions, materials and debris, and may make such changes in the application as to the nature, location, size and depth of the excavation as he may deem necessary for the protection of the street or other public place wherein such excavation is to be made, or are in his judgment necessary for the proposed purposes thereof, and may make such changes as to the location, size and character of the obstructions to be placed in any street or other public place as are in his judgment necessary to prevent undue interference with traffic or danger to the safety of persons using the same. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7103.4)  
12.04.110 - Excavations and obstructions—Permit—Application—Deposit—Use. 
With the application the applicant shall make a special deposit with the director of public works in the amount as shall be established by the director of public works. Such sums deposited with the city shall be used by the city for payment of all expenses of the city in connection with such work. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7103.6)  
12.04.120 - Excavations and obstructions—Permit—Fees. 
Every applicant at the time of filing his application shall pay to the city such fees as shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7107)  
12.04.130 - Excavations and obstructions—Permit—Hold-harmless agreement. 
The permittee shall save harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees of and from any and all liability or responsibility for any property damage or loss, or injury or death to any person arising out of or occurring as the proximate result of the work undertaken. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7108)  
12.04.140 - Excavations and obstructions—Permit—Conditions. 
A.  The director of public works may attach such conditions to the granting of any permit under this chapter as may in his judgment seem best or necessary to secure the proper performance of the work, or to protect the public interests in connection therewith. All applicants shall notify Underground Service Alert (USA) in conformance with state and USA requirements. 
B.  The applicant shall agree in advance to fill the excavation in the manner hereinafter provided and to remove all obstructions, materials and debris placed in the street or other public place by the applicant, all to the satisfaction of the director of public works and within the time limit specified in the permit therefor, or that the excavation may be filled in such manner, and any obstructions, materials or debris may be removed by the director of public works at the expense of said applicant. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code §§ 7103.5 and 7103.9)  
12.04.150 - Excavations and obstructions—Permit—Assignment or transfer. 
Permits shall in all cases be applied for by or on behalf of the person who is to actually perform the work for which the permit is asked, and permits issued under the terms of this chapter shall not be transferable or assignable except by permission of the director or public works. No person shall do any work under a permit granted to another person unless such permit has been first properly transferred or assigned in accordance herewith to the person doing such work. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7103.8)  
12.04.160 - Excavations and obstructions—Compliance with application. 
No person shall make any excavation, or construct, put upon, maintain or leave any obstruction or impediment to travel, or pile, or place any material in or upon any street or other public place at any location other than, or in any greater area, than that described in the application and shown by the plats filed by the applicant, as required by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7103.14)  
12.04.170 - Excavations and obstructions—Work performance restrictions. 
All work shall be done only by contractors licensed by the state. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7103.7)  
12.04.180 - Excavations and obstructions—Diligent completion of work. 
After any excavation, obstruction or impediment is commenced, made or erected by the permit holder, as herein provided, the work of accomplishing the purpose thereof shall be diligently carried out and completed by him in a manner that shall not obstruct the street or other public place, or any travel thereon, more than is absolutely necessary. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7103.15)  
12.04.190 - Excavations and obstructions—Street work—Lines and grades to be obtained prior to commencing work. 
No person shall do any street work without first obtaining the lines and grades therefor from the director of public works, or do the same except at the place and on the line and grade given therefor by the director of public works. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7103.10)  
12.04.200 - Excavations and obstructions—Setting stakes, lines and grades—Approval required. 
No person shall set stakes or give the lines and grades for the improvements without the prior approval of the director of public works. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7103.11)  
12.04.210 - Excavations and obstructions—Section 7 of standard specifications—Compliance required. 
The permittee shall abide by all conditions of Section 7 of the standard specifications at all times. It shall be noted: 
Section 7-4 WORKERS' COMPENSATION INSURANCE. The certificate designated in this section shall be filed with all permit applications or an actual certificate of insurance. 
Section 7-10 PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND SAFETY. Attention is directed to these sections of the Standard Specifications and this chapter and are supplementary with each other. The applicant and contractor are not relieved, by this code or any agent of the city, of the full responsibility for public safety. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7103.13)  
12.04.220 - Excavations and obstructions—Permit—Issuance—Conditions. 
Upon compliance by the applicant with the foregoing requirements, the application insurance and drawing aforesaid shall be approved by the director of public works and shall become a file or public record in his office and thereupon the director of public works shall issue, in such form as he shall approve, a written permit to the applicant to do and perform the acts mentioned in the application. In any permit granted under the provisions of this chapter the director of public works may specify what lights, barriers, warnings signs or other measures designated to protect the traveling public must be erected, maintained or provided by the permit holder; provided, however, that any omission on the part of the director of public works to specify in a permit what lights or warnings signs shall be erected and maintained by the permit holder shall not excuse the permit holder form observing any and all requirements of this chapter. No permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable and every such permit shall become and be void unless the excavation or other work thereby permitted to be done is commenced within the time specified therein and thereafter diligently and continuously prosecuted, and if the same is not so commenced and diligently prosecuted in the judgment of the director of public works, he shall have power to cancel such permit. No work shall be permitted after four p.m. or on Saturdays, Sundays or holidays. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7106.16)  
12.04.230 - Excavations and obstructions—Warning lights and barriers. 
Every person making any excavation, or erecting or leaving any obstruction, in the traveled part of any street or other public place, shall place and maintain lights at each end of such excavation or obstruction, and at distances of not more than one hundred feet along such excavation or obstruction, and at such other locations as may be necessary for the protection of the public from injury, from sunset of each day to sunrise of the next day, until such excavation is entirely filled, or such obstruction is removed, and every such person shall maintain barriers not less than three feet high at each end of the excavation or obstruction, and at such other places as may be necessary for the protection of the public from injury, at all times until each excavation is entirely filled or such obstruction removed. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7104)  
12.04.240 - Excavations and obstructions—Standard specifications for traffic control—Adoption—Authority to modify. 
A.  Subject to certain changes and amendments hereinafter set forth in subsection B of this section, the following codes are adopted by reference: 
1.  "Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction (APWA-A6CA)" Green Book; 
2.  "Work Area Traffic Control Handbook (WATCH)," where foregoing codes and amendments thereto are hereby designated as the "Primary Code" adopted by reference. 
B.  The director of public works may modify, vary or add to the standard specifications and standard drawings insofar as the same relate to any particular work or construction, maintenance or repair when, because of circumstances or conditions pertaining thereto but not existing generally throughout the city, such modifications, variation or addition is required in order to secure the same standard of work ordinarily obtained. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7104.1)  
12.04.250 - Excavations and obstructions—Traffic control plans. 
Traffic control plans may be required on any permit when it is deemed by the director of public works that this plan is necessary for the public safety. When required, traffic control plans shall be prepared by a traffic engineer and approved by the director of public works. Applicant shall pay all costs and fees as required for the processing and checking of the traffic control plan. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7104.2)  
12.04.260 - Excavations and obstructions—Tunneling under street. 
Whenever an excavation is made by tunneling under the surface of any street or other public place, the director of public works may adopt such regulations and require such special inspections as he may deem necessary for the full compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7112)  
12.04.270 - Excavations and obstructions—Connection to sewer—Permit required. 
No person shall make any connection to any public sewer without first obtaining a permit so to do from the public works department in accordance with applicable provisions of this code. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7105)  
12.04.280 - Excavations and obstructions—Sewer lateral construction—Private easements. 
Whenever any person proposes to construct a sewer lateral, in and along private property other than the property to be served by the sewer lateral, he shall file with the public works department a certified copy of the instrument of conveyance granting the easement for such sewer lateral. Such instrument of conveyance shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder prior to the time a certified copy thereof is filed with the public works department. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7106)  
12.04.290 - Excavations and obstructions—Additional requirements. 
The director of public works may establish additional requirements for the work to be done under the permit, including equipment to be used, type of backfill, compaction, paving, traffic regulations, hours of work, flagmen, lights, inspection, and other similar requirements. He also may require whatever advance notice he deems proper for requests for inspection. The director of public works may add these requirements and conditions by rubber stamp or attachments to the permit, or both, and they shall be an integral part thereof. If any of the requirements of the permit are violated, the director of public works may revoke the permit and require that a new permit be secured before further work is done. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7109)  
12.04.300 - Excavations and obstructions—Filling excavations and removing obstructions. 
Upon completion of the work for which the excavation was made, the permit holder shall promptly fill in the excavation in the manner herein provided and shall promptly remove all obstructions, materials, and debris placed in any street or other public place by the permit holder. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7110)  
12.04.310 - Excavations and obstructions—Restoration of street facilities. 
A.  Upon completion of the permittee's activity, the director of public works, at his option, may require the permittee to restore that portion of the street facilities damaged by the permittee's activity, or the director of public works may elect to do such restoration himself. 
B.  Where the pavement or surface has been removed, the permittee shall replace it to a minimum thickness one inch greater than that of the surrounding pavement or surface. 
C.  The base removed shall be replaced to the same thickness as that of the surrounding base course. 
D.  Where the street surface has been treated with a seal or slurry prior to the work under permit, the seal and/or slurry shall be replaced upon the portion repaired. 
E.  When the structural section removed varies from or exceeds the average existing section, the director of public works may elect to require the replacement of an equivalent section which would meet the average structural section requirements. 
F.  In those instances where the permittee's excavation is within an area of street to be reconstructed by the city and the resurfacing of the excavation is an integral part of the general city improvement, the director of public works may waive such resurfacing. 
G.  The permitted work must be restored to the satisfaction of the director of public works, including permanent patching, within thirty days of the completion of any construction. 
H.  The top surface of the backfill shall conform closely enough to the level of the adjoining street surface, and shall be compacted so that it is hard enough and smooth enough to be safe for traffic to travel over at any legal rate of speed. The permit holder shall maintain the backfill safe for traffic until the surface has been replaced to the satisfaction of the director of public works, and shall assume responsibility for all accidents which may occur, due to vehicles crossing the site of the excavation at any legal rate of speed, until such surface has been so replaced. If it is impracticable to maintain the backfill in safe condition for traffic, then the permit holder shall maintain barriers and lights, as hereinbefore provided until such surface has been replaced. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7111)  
12.04.320 - Excavations and obstructions—Warranty of refilling and repair. 
The person, firm or corporation by whom any excavation in paved, macadamized or graveled streets, alleys or sidewalks shall be made, shall be deemed and held to warrant the work of refilling and repair thereof for the period of one year after the refilling of such excavation against all defects in workmanship or materials. Whenever within the period of one year any part of the pavement or surface of any public street, alley or sidewalk so warranted becomes in need of repairs, by reason of any defect in workmanship or material done or used in said work of refilling or repair, the director of public works shall serve on the person, firm or corporation by whom the excavation was made, a written notice, stating what repairs are necessary and requiring such repairs be made within three days after the service of the notice. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7117)  
12.04.330 - Excavations and obstructions—Completion of work—Removal of rubbish. 
The applicant shall remove all surplus material and rubbish from the work after its completion and before application for the final inspection of the work, and shall leave the earth in the space between the curb and sidewalk to the proper grade. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7118)  
12.04.340 - Excavations and obstructions—Completion of work—Final inspection. 
Upon completion of the work to be done under any such permit, the director of public works shall make a final inspection thereof, and if the same is found to be in accordance with the specifications for the same and in accordance with the terms of this chapter, he shall issue a final certificate of the acceptance thereof. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7119)  
12.04.350 - Excavations and obstruction—Defects. 
No work will be considered as accepted which may be defective in its construction or deficient in any of the requirements of these specifications in consequence of the negligence of any officer of the city or inspector connected with the work to point out the defects or deficiency during construction, and the contractor shall be required to correct any imperfect work whenever discovered, before the final acceptance of the work. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7120)  
12.04.360 - Excavations and obstructions—Notice requiring remedy of defects. 
A.  If the work does not comply with the specification therefor or with the terms of this chapter, the director of public works shall notify the person to whom the permit was granted of the defect or failure of the work and shall require such person within five days of service of such notice to proceed to remedy such defect. Such notice shall be written or printed and shall be served personally or by leaving it at the residence or place of business of such person; or if such person cannot be found, and such place of business or place of residence is unknown or is outside of the city, the notice may be served by depositing it in the post office, addressed to the person holding such permit at such address as is shown in his application for such permit. If it is determined that any action or noncompliance is a safety hazard, the applicant or contractor shall be notified verbally or in writing and the contractor or applicant must comply immediately. 
B.  If such notice is not complied with, the director of public works shall not grant any permit to such person to do street work until full compliance with the terms of the notice is made. If such failure or defect relates to the construction of cement walks or cement curbs, or is deemed a safety hazard, the director of public works may order the same taken up and removed from the street at the expense, including salaries, overhead and administrative costs, of the holder of such permit, which expense all applicants, by making application hereunder agree to pay. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code §§ 7114 and 7115)  
12.04.370 - Excavations and obstructions—Completion of work by city—When authorized. 
When paving, excavated material, barricades, lights or other devices are not properly placed or maintained; when the work started is not completed; when the work does not comply with the specifications or any special requirement; when the person fails or refuses to remove any obstruction; when any street facility has been damaged and the person fails or refuses to repair or restore; the director of public works, with the city forces or otherwise, may cause such to be placed, erected, completed, repaired, restored and/or maintained. The applicant shall pay for any and all costs. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7116)  
12.04.380 - Excavations and obstructions—Completion of work by city—Liability for costs. 
If any person making any excavation in, or placing any obstruction on, any street or other public place shall fail to refill such excavation in the manner herein provided, or shall fail to remove such obstruction, within the time specified in the permit therefor, the director of public works may do or complete the work of refilling or removal, and the person by whom, or under whose direction, the excavation was made, or the obstruction was placed, shall be liable to the city for the cost of the work so done by the director of public works. The amount of such cost shall be payable on demand to the director of public works by the person to whom the permit was issued and no permit shall thereafter be issued to such person until the demand is paid in full. The decision of the director of public works as to the cost of any work done by him, or under his direction, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be final and conclusive as to such cost. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7113)  
12.04.390 - Driving, walking or riding upon newly made pavement. 
No person shall drive or ride any animal, or drive or propel any vehicle, or walk or go upon, over or across any newly made pavement or newly made sidewalk, or newly made concrete or cement work in any public street where there is a barrier to prevent traveling upon the same, or near which there is a sign stating that the road is closed, or where warning lights are maintained during the night to indicate the street is closed. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7121)  
12.04.400 - Driving on sidewalk. 
No person shall ride or drive any horse or other animal, drive or propel any wagon, automobile, truck or other motor vehicle upon, along or across any cement sidewalk, cement curb or any street, except where a driveway has been constructed across the same for the use of vehicles, or permit any animal or vehicle to stand upon any cement sidewalk. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7122)  
12.04.410 - Vehicles with studs, cleats or flanges. 
No person shall drive along or upon any paved, macadamized or improved street, or any public highway, culvert or bridge in the city, any tractor or motor vehicle having any part of the vehicle coming in contact with the surface of any such street any block, stud, flange, cleat, ridge, bead, or any other protuberance of metal or wood which projects beyond the tread or traction surface of the tire, or that will cause damage to the pavement or surface of any such street, but this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the use of antiskid chains of reasonable proportions on pneumatic tires attached to the wheels of motor vehicles. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7123)  
12.04.420 - Throwing articles likely to puncture or injure tires into streets. 
No person shall throw, deposit or place in or upon any public street any nails, tacks, crockery, wire, scrap, iron, tin, bottles, glass, thorns or thorny clippings, or other article or thing likely to puncture or injure the tire of any vehicle. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7124)  
12.04.430 - Curb markings—Permit required. 
No person shall paint, dye, or otherwise mark, letter or number with any permanent substance or material, any curb or gutter within the city, for house numbering purposes or any other purpose, without first obtaining a permit therefor, which permit shall be in addition to any other permit or license required by this code. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7125)  
12.04.440 - Curb markings—House numbering. 
Where a permit is issued for house numbering purposes, markings shall consist of a white field with black letter thereon; the field shall be reflectorized by clear glass spherical beads applied with force against the white field plaint while the same is still tacky so that the beads will be firmly bonded to the field paint upon drying. The field and numeral borders shall be sharply defined with no running or blurring of edges. The numerals shall be four inches in height. The field shall have a minimum border of one and one-half inches at all edges of the numerals. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7126)  
12.04.450 - Abandoned curb-cuts and driveways. 
A.  Authority to order alteration. When any curb-cut or driveway within the city has been abandoned and is no longer in use, and in any case where the use, convenience and necessity of the public require, the director of public works shall have authority to order the owner or agent in charge of the property adjacent to which curb-cuts are maintained to alter the curb-cut in such manner as he shall find reasonably necessary. 
B.  Notice of alternation order. Whenever the director of public works shall determine that a curb-cut or driveway has been abandoned, or shall determine that the use, convenience and necessity of the public require an alteration, the director of public works shall serve a written notice on the owner or agent in charge of the adjacent property and shall post a conspicuous notice on the property notifying the owner or agent in charge that an alteration of the curb-cut is required, and such notice shall specify the time in which the owner or agent shall comply with such requirement, which time shall not be less than twenty days from the date of such notice. 
C.  Violation. If the alteration as required by the director of public works is not complied with within the time specified in the notice, the owner or agent of the property shall be deemed in violation of this chapter, and each day that the curb-cut or driveway is maintained without alteration, after the time set forth in the notice, shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of this chapter. 
D.  Appeal. Any owner or agent in charge of property who has been notified by the director of public works to alter a curb-cut may appeal from the order of the director of public works to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal, specifying the grounds for such appeal, with the city clerk within ten days after the notice of alteration order has been served on such person, or after property has been posted. No appeal shall be heard by the city council unless the notice of appeal is filed within the time herein specified; provided, however, the city council may request a review on its own motion. Where an appeal has been filed as hereinabove set forth, or a review has been requested by the city council, no party shall be deemed in violation of this chapter until such time as the city council has determined the controversy and the owner or agent is allowed a reasonable time thereafter to comply with such alteration order. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7127)  
12.04.460 - Construction of buildings or dwellings—Builder to provide for cement curbs, gutters, sidewalks, driveways and street paving. 
A.  Any owner, lessee or agent constructing or arranging for the construction of any building or dwelling within the city shall also provide for the construction of cement curbs, gutters, sidewalks, driveways, and street paving in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and city specifications and/or repair and/or replace inadequate or unsafe curbs, gutters, sidewalks, driveways and street paving, already existing along all street frontages adjoining the lot or lots on which the building or dwelling is to be constructed. 
B.  The building inspector shall deny final approval and acceptance or final public utility connections to any building or dwelling until the curbs, gutters, sidewalks, driveways, and street paving exist or are constructed, or repaired or replaced. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code §§ 7128 and 7129)  
12.04.470 - Obstruction of thoroughfares. 
It is unlawful for any person or persons to in any manner obstruct any street, alley or sidewalk, or to do any act or thing whatever so as to interfere in any manner whatever with any free passage through, along, across or upon any street, alley or sidewalk in the city, without permission of the director of public works. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7130)  
12.04.480 - Damage caused by tree roots—Responsibility for repair. 
A.  Responsibility For Repair. The owner of any property on which is situated a tree, not in public right-of-way, which causes an adjacent city-owned sidewalk to become cracked, uplifted or depressed due to growth of roots or other material below or next to the sidewalk shall be responsible for repair of the damaged sidewalk and, if necessary, removal of the tree. 
B.  Notification of City Personnel. The city department responsible for maintenance and repair of sidewalks, when aware of such a condition, shall notify the property owner of the requirement to repair the sidewalk removal of roots or other cause of damage and, if necessary, either removal of the tree or execution and recordation of an unsubordinated covenant in a form approved by the city attorney indemnifying and holding the city harmless from any injury or damage caused by the tree, including weakening of the tree due to root removal. 
C.  Repair by City—Fee. If following notification by the appropriate city department, the property owner fails to correct the condition within the time specified in the notice, the city may repair the sidewalk and take all necessary actions to correct the condition. The property owner shall pay for the cost of repair by payment of a fee sufficient to cover the costs incurred, including salary and administrative costs. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7131)  
12.04.490 - Maps required of structures located under surface of any public street or place. 
Every person, company or entity, owning, using, controlling or having an interest in pipes, conduits, ducts, tunnels, storage tanks or other structures under the surface of any street or other public place for supplying or conveying gas, electricity, water, steam, ammonia, oil or other commodity, within ninety days after the effective date of this section shall file in the office of the director of public works a map or set drawn to a scale of not less than two hundred feet to one inch, which shall show in detail the exact location, size, description and date of installation, if known, of all mains, laterals, services and service pipes, and all valves, pressure regulators, drips, manholes, transformers, chambers or other appliances installed beneath the surface of streets or other public places in the city belonging to, used by or under the control of such person, company or entity, or in which such person, company, or entity has any interest. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7132)  
12.04.500 - Abandonment of structures located under any surface of any public street or place. 
Whenever any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other structure located under the surface of any public street or other public place, or the use thereof, is abandoned, the person, company, or entity owning, using, controlling or having an interest therein, shall, within thirty days after such abandonment, file in the office of the director of public works, a statement in writing giving in detail the location of the pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other structure so abandoned. Each map, or set of maps filed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall show in detail the location of all such pipes, conduits, ducts, tunnels or other structures abandoned subsequent to the filing of the last preceding map or set of maps. All such pipes, conduits, ducts, tunnels or other structures abandoned shall be filled or removed in a manner acceptable to the director of public works. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7133)  
12.04.510 - Damage to city-owned property. 
For any damage done to any city-owned sign, barricade, pole, pipe, wall, signal or any city-owned property of any nature, occurring from the operation of any business or use of any property or residence, the responsibility for the repair and cost of repair of such city-owned property shall be the responsibility of the adjacent property owner. 
(Ord. 2029 § 1 (part), 1990: prior code § 7134)  
12.04.520 - Restriction on excavations. 
A.  Prohibition. No excavation and no cutting shall be permitted in any public right-of-way for five years after completion of surface paving or repaving. 
B.  Exceptions. The director of public works or city engineer may in its discretion grant exceptions to the prohibition of this section under the following circumstances: 
1.  Emergency that threatens life or serious property damage. 
2.  Work that is mandated by a federal, state, or county agency. 
3.  No other reasonable means of providing service exists. 
4.  Other situation deemed to be in the public interest. 
In granting exceptions, the director of public works or city engineer may lengthen and enlarge the required area of restoration up to the full-width of the roadway, and impose other reasonable conditions as it deems appropriate to protect the public interest. 
C.  The city engineer shall develop and maintain a master pavement list and make it available at the engineering division public counter and the city clerk's office. The master pavement list shall identify those segments of public right-of-way that are subject to the prohibition of this section and the corresponding starting and ending dates of the prohibition. 
D.  Rules and Procedures. The city engineer may promulgate pavement restoration guidelines and other rules and procedures that are consistent with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2413, § 2, 3-27-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2413, adopted March 27, 2019, provided an Exhibit A and states that Standard ST 11B (Exhibit "A") is the city's trench standard to be used by all entities paving streets in the public right-of-way. Exhibit A can be found on file with the city.  
Chapter 12.08 - TREES AND SHRUBS 
Sections: 
 
12.08.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are defined as follows: 
"List" means the "Official Tree Planting List of the City of Montebello" as approved by the council. 
"Maintain" or "maintenance" includes, but is not limited to, clipping, spraying, fertilizing, staking and tying, treating for disease or injury, and other similar acts which promote life, growth, health or beauty of trees. 
"Plan" means the "Comprehensive Plan for the Planting and Maintenance of Trees in Public Areas and Streets in the City of Montebello" as approved by the council. 
"Planting easement" means strips of land along the front or sidelines of lots abutting streets, avenues and public thoroughfares. 
"Planting strip" means the area between the curb, or the place where the curb should be, and the adjacent property line. 
"Public area" means parks, playgrounds, areas around public buildings, and all other areas under the supervision and maintenance of the city. 
"Street" includes any public street, avenue, boulevard, lane, walk, road, parkway, alley, right-of-way or other public way. 
"Street tree" includes any tree planted for the purpose of providing shade or beauty to the street area. 
"Superintendent" means the superintendent or individual appointed by the director of municipal services/director of public works of the city of Montebello. 
"Tree" includes any tree planted or maintained by the city. 
(Prior code § 2920) 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 1, 4-11-2012)  
12.08.020 - Tree planting list—Duty to prepare. 
The superintendent shall prepare for approval by the council a list containing the types and varieties of trees for planting along streets and in public areas within the city. 
(Prior code § 2921)  
12.08.030 - Planting and maintenance plan—Duty to prepare. 
The superintendent shall prepare for approval by the council the plan for the planting and maintenance of trees in streets and public areas in the city, which shall include, in general, maps of streets and public areas in the city upon which there shall be designated a general plan for the uniform planting of trees and zoning of streets for certain types of trees, and specifications for the size and type of such trees permissible within the planting strips and planting easements within the city. 
(Prior code § 2922)  
12.08.040 - New and replacement trees—Approved types. 
All new and replacement trees shall be confined to shade and ornamental trees from the current list and shall include all such new and replacement plantings in public areas, streets, planting easements and planting strips. 
(Prior code § 2923)  
12.08.050 - Planting strips and easements. 
A.  No person shall plant or place shrubs, low-growing trees, flowers, vines, fences, rocks, gravel, signs, stakes, or any other object excepting sidewalks, driveways, watering basins for young trees, and temporary protection for newly planted lawns; or cause or create conditions of uneven ground holes or other hazards in planting strips and planting easements in the city. 
B.  The superintendent shall require planting of street trees within planting strips or planting easements in any new subdivision in conformity with the plan and the list. 
C.  It shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner to properly maintain all planting strips and planting easements abutting his property, regardless of whether the property is developed. This maintenance shall include keeping such strips free from weeds or any obstructions deemed contrary to the public safety, in conformity with the plan. 
(Prior code §§ 2924, 2925 and 2926)  
12.08.060 - Responsibility for inspection, maintenance, removal and replacement of trees within public areas, planting strips and planting easements. 
The superintendent shall be responsible for the inspection and maintenance, and removal and replacement of all trees within public areas, planting strips and planting easements. Such trees shall not be removed unless ten days written notice of such proposed removal is given to the abutting property owner, except where the superintendent determines that public safety requires immediate removal thereof. The owner concerned may, within ten days after receipt of such notice, file, in writing, his objection to the removal with the superintendent. If the objection is not sustained by the superintendent, the property owner shall have the right, within five days after notification of the overruling of his objection, to appeal the ruling to the council, by filing, in writing, his objection with the city clerk, stating therein the reasons for is objection to the proposed removal. The council shall thereafter hear and consider the matter, administratively, without the necessity of a noticed public hearing; provided, that the person objecting, and any other person requesting such notice, is given written notice by the city clerk of the time and place of such hearing, five days in advance thereof, by depositing such notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid. 
(Prior code § 2927)  
12.08.070 - Removal of roots and limbs in the interest of public safety. 
The superintendent may cause the roots of young trees in the process of development to be cut to prevent future damage to sidewalks. Roots on older trees that have lifted sidewalks, or otherwise damaged sidewalks or curbs, may be cut and the limbs may be pruned or cut back to compensate for loss of root area. The superintendent shall have the right to remove limbs from any tree, regardless of its location, if it appears that such removal is necessary in the public interest. If such trees requiring such removal are located on private property, the superintendent shall notify the property owner of such intent to remove limbs by written notice at least ten days prior to such removal except where he determines that public safety requires immediate removal. The property owner shall have the rights as provided in Section 12.08.090, in the case of tree removal, except that if the superintendent determines that the public safety requires such removal, no such notice need be given. 
(Prior code § 2928)  
12.08.080 - Street tree removal at property owner's request. 
Whenever a person desires to have a street tree removed from a planting strip or easement, located immediately adjacent and abutting such person's property, a written request therefor shall be filed with the superintendent. If such removal is requested solely as a matter of convenience to such person, the matter shall be referred to the city council to determine whether the public interest, convenience and necessity require such removal. The council may, at its discretion, permit such removal; provided, that the person requesting the same shall pay the full cost thereof in advance to the city. 
(Prior code § 2929) 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 2, 4-11-2012)  
12.08.090 - Prohibitions. 
No person shall remove or cut any tree planted or maintained by the city or on city property. No person shall trim or prune any tree planted or maintained by the city or on city property without first obtaining a permit to do so pursuant to Section 12.08.110 of this code. No person shall injure or destroy any tree planted or maintained by the city, by any means, including but not limited to, the following: 
A.  By constructing a concrete, asphalt, brick or gravel sidewalk, or otherwise filling up the ground area around such tree so as to shut off its air, light or water from its roots; 
B.  By piling building material and equipment, or other substance and materials, around any such tree so as to cause injury thereto; 
C.  By pouring any deleterious matter on or around any tree, or on the surrounding ground, lawn or sidewalk; 
D.  By posting any sign, poster or notice on any such tree, tree stake or guard, or by fastening guide wires, cables, ropes, nails, screws or other devices to any tree, tree stake or guard; or 
E.  By causing or encouraging any fire near or around any such tree. 
(Prior code § 2930) 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 3, 4-11-2012)  
12.08.100 - Trees and shrubbery obstructing passage of pedestrians or vehicles. 
No person having charge or control of any premises, either as owner, lessee or tenant or otherwise, shall allow any limb, twig, or leaf of any bush or tree growing in or upon any public street in front of such lot or premises, or upon any premises abutting such street, to interfere with or obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles along such street. Whenever any bush or tree growing in or upon any premises in such manner that any portion thereof shall overhang any sidewalk of any portion thereof shall overhang any sidewalk of any public street, or growing in or upon any such sidewalk, is greater than fifteen feet in height, the lower limbs, twigs and leaves of such tree or bush shall be kept removed at all times so that at no time shall any portion of any twig, limb or leaf hang nearer than nine feet above the sidewalk or street; and wherever such bush or tree is less than fifteen feet in height, the lower limbs, twigs or leaves of such bush or tree shall be kept so at all times the same will not interfere with or obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles along such street. 
(Prior code § 4235)  
12.08.110 - Permits for tree trimming or pruning. 
A.  Any city resident who desires to have a tree trimmed or pruned in front of their residence may apply for a permit with the superintendent. The application shall state the nature of the work and the location where it will be done. Applications for permits under this section shall be made to the municipal services department on forms provided by the superintendent and shall include information as the superintendent deems necessary to review the application. 
B.  The superintendent shall issue the permit if, in his or her judgment, the following conditions are met: 
1.  The resident agrees to hire a private contractor at the resident's sole expense. 
2.  The resident provides sufficient proof that the contractor is duly licensed, certified and bonded to do work in the city at the time of the application. 
3.  The resident provides a certificate of insurance naming the city of Montebello as an "additional insured." 
4  The resident agrees that any and all trimming of the tree shall be done to meet the American National Standard for pruning. 
5.  The resident agrees that all debris from the work shall be removed by contractor. 
C.  The superintendent may order the work to immediately cease in the event that the superintendent determines the work or conditions set forth in the permit are in violation of this chapter. 
D.  Any violation of this section or Section 12.08.090 may be punishable as a misdemeanor or infraction pursuant to Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 4, 4-11-2012)  
Chapter 12.12 - STREET BANNERS 
Sections: 
 
12.12.010 - Purpose. 
Regulating the placement of street banners is required given the nature of the forum and the conflicting interest involved. The First Amendment interests of speakers who desire to use street banners to exercise expressive activity must be balanced against the privacy interests of residents in not being bombarded by political propaganda. The denial of access to political messages reflects the city's recognition that commuters and pedestrians exposed to political messages placed on banners over public thoroughfares are incapable of declining to receive those messages. Commuters and pedestrians exposed to political street banners are not like the passerby who may be offered a pamphlet on the street but who cannot be made to take it. Furthermore, the city's interest on avoiding the reality an appearance of government favoritism or entanglement with a particular viewpoint is served by excluding political messages on street banners. Limiting access to Montebello-based nonprofit service groups and charitable health and welfare agencies serves to promote the city's interest in maximizing private support of social programs that may otherwise have to be supported by government funds. The city does not intend to create a public forum by its granting of selective access to public service groups. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or used to foreclose other alternative channels of communication for political expression. 
(Ord. 2034 § 3, 1990: prior code § 8653.5)  
12.12.020 - Defined. 
The phrase "street banners," as used in this chapter, means any cloth or canvas sign or banner, or other type of banner or sign, or other device, designed for use in or over a public street, public right-of-way, or other public place. 
(Prior code § 8650)  
12.12.030 - Permit—Required. 
No person shall erect, maintain, place, suspend, attach or move, any street banner for any purpose whatsoever, in, along, over, above or across any public street, alley or other public place or any portion thereof, without first obtaining a permit therefor in the manner hereinafter prescribed. 
(Prior code § 8651)  
12.12.040 - Permit—Application—Fee. 
Any person desiring to place or locate a street banner in, along, over, across or above any public street, alley or any other public place, shall file with the building official, an application therefor, on the forms prescribed by the building official, together with an application fee, to be used to defray cost of processing an application in the amount of fifteen dollars. The fee required by this section may be waived by the building official if he finds that the applicant is an organization which would be exempt from the payment of the city business license pursuant to Section 5.04.060. 
(Ord. 2034 § 1, 1990: prior code 8652)  
12.12.050 - Permit—Issuance conditions. 
Approval of a permit for the purpose of placing a street banner or sign over a public street, public right-of-way, or other public place shall be granted subject to the following conditions: 
A.  The exact design and wording proposed to be used on the street banner shall be submitted to the building official together with the application. There shall be no deviation from such design and wording without the building official's prior approval; and 
B.  Permits shall be granted only to Montebello-based, nonprofit service groups and organizations, as well as voluntary, charitable, health and welfare agencies that provide support or support health and welfare services to individuals. Such services must directly benefit human beings, whether children, young, adults, or the aged, the ill and infirm, or the mentally or physically handicapped. Such services must consist of care, research or education in the fields of human health or social adjustment and rehabilitation; relief of victims of natural disasters and other emergencies; or assistance to those who are impoverished and therefore in need of food, shelter, clothing, education and basic human welfare services; and 
C.  No permit shall be approved for those groups or organizations that seek to influence the outcome of elections or the determination of public policy through political activity or advocacy, lobbying or litigation on behalf of parties other than themselves; and 
D.  Each permit shall contain on its face, and the applicant shall be bound thereby, a designation of the location or locations at which the banner or banners may be placed, and the time during which the banner or banners may be so placed; and 
E.  No banner shall be erected pursuant to this chapter, unless the banner or device is of a substantial cloth or canvas material, adequately ventilated for wind, and securely suspended from existing poles or other structures, at least eighteen feet above the highest point of the underlying roadway or other public place. The erection of special poles or other supports on public or private property is not authorized or allowed pursuant to this chapter except by specific city council approval; and 
F.  Banners shall not be placed so as to interfere with street lights, traffic signals or other structures of a public or private nature; and 
G.  No permit for a banner shall be issued for a period of time longer than thirty days. 
(Ord. 2034 § 2, 1990: prior code § 8653)  
12.12.060 - Permit—Suspension. 
The chief of the police department, or the building official, shall, upon twenty-four hours' written notice given by United States mail, postage prepaid, at the last known address of the applicant or permittee, or by personal service, shall suspend a permit whenever it is found by such officer that the applicant has not complied with the conditions of issuance of such permit, or has violated any other rule, regulation or law. 
(Prior code § 8654(1))  
12.12.070 - Appeal. 
Any decision with respect to suspension, or any decision of the building official with regard to the issuance or conditions imposed upon the issuance of a permit hereunder, shall be directly appealable to the city council. Within ten days after receipt of notice of suspension, or within ten days after notification of the decision of the building official with respect to a permit, the permittee or applicant may file with the city clerk a written letter of appeal, appealing such decision to the city council. Upon receipt of such appeal, the city clerk shall place the same on the next city council agenda for consideration by the council. The city clerk shall give at least twenty-four hours' written notice to the appealing party of the time and place of such hearing before the city council in regard to such an appeal. The written notice shall be by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at his last known address, or by personal service upon the applicant or appealing party. 
(Prior code § 8654(2))  
12.12.080 - Appeal hearing. 
At the time and place set for the city council hearing upon such an appeal, the city council shall consider any applicable staff report or other pertinent material concerning such decision appealed from; the hearing in such case need not be a formal public hearing as is required in zoning cases, but the city council shall give the appealing party and any other interested person a reasonable opportunity to be heard and present relevant evidence. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show that the decision appealed from was unreasonable, arbitrary or was not correct in law or fact. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 8654(3))  
12.12.090 - Removal after suspension or revocation of permit. 
If, after due notice of suspension or revocation, in the absence of an appeal, or after a decision adverse to the appealing party in the case of suspension or revocation, the applicant shall, within five days, remove the street banner. If such banner is not removed within the time limit, the street superintendent shall cause the same to be removed, and shall charge the applicant for the cost thereof. 
(Prior code § 8654(4))  
12.12.100 - Removal of hazardous and defective street banners. 
Without regard to the notice provision of this chapter concerning suspension, revocation and the like, the street superintendent is empowered to remove any street banner at any time without notice to the permittee, if he finds the same is hazardous and/or defective and represents and constitutes an immediate threat to the public peace, health, welfare and safety. 
(Prior code § 8654(5))  
12.12.110 - Removal upon expiration of permit. 
Upon expiration of a permit for a street banner the applicant shall cause the banner to be removed within twenty-four hours after such expiration. If such street banner is not removed within the time, the street superintendent shall cause the same to be removed and charge the applicant for the cost thereof. 
(Prior code § 8654(6))  
12.12.120 - Permits requiring state agency's approval. 
If a permit for a street banner is required from the State Division of Highways for any street banner and for any reason the state declines to issue the permit, the building official shall likewise decline to issue a city permit, or if a permit has been issued, he shall immediately revoke same. 
(Prior code § 8655)  
Chapter 12.14 - REMOVAL OF SIGNS ATTACHED TO OBJECTS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
12.14.010 - Prohibition of signs on public property. 
No person shall paint, mark, write-on, post, attach or otherwise affix any handbill, notice, poster, sign or advertisement upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb, streetlight or post, hydrant, traffic sign or post, shrub, tree, tree stake or guard, power pole or telephone pole, bridge, fence, wall, building or other structure located in any public right-of-way or place, except as authorized in this chapter, Chapter 12.12, or Section 17.62.110 of Title 17 of this code. 
(Ord. 2289 § 1 (part), 2005)  
12.14.020 - Signs on public property deemed public nuisance. 
In accordance with California Government Code, Sections 38771 and 38773.5, any markings, postings or attachments described in Section 12.14.010 that are unlawfully attached to any object in the public right-of-way or public place are deemed to be a public nuisance and subject to removal in accordance with the following procedures: 
A.  Summary Removal of Unsafe Signs. The fire chief or designee may remove or cause the removal of any handbill, notice, poster, sign or advertising attached or posted in an unsafe manner onto any object in the public right-of-way or public place summarily and without notice. All costs of removal may be recovered pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. For purposes of this subsection, any handbill, notice, poster, sign or advertising attached or posted illegally and affixed onto any object in the public right-of-way or public place with tape, glue, staples, plastic or rope ties, stakes or similar devices shall be deemed to be attached or posted in an "unsafe manner." 
B.  Alternative Procedures for Removal of Illegally Erected Signs. 
1.  Notice to Remove. In cases where a handbill, notice, poster, sign or advertising that is illegally posted or attached to any object in the public right-of-way or public place such sign may not be immediately and summarily removed by city forces or an authorized contractor. The fire chief or designee may elect to use the following procedures: 
a.  Such sign or posting may be removed five calendar days following the date of service of a written notice of violation to the person or agent who erected, maintained or authorized the erection or maintenance of any sign or posting in violation of this chapter; or on the person or business receiving benefit from the sign or posting. For purposes of this section, the person, organization or business reflected on the sign shall be deemed to conclusively be the person or business receiving benefit from the sign; 
b.  A notice of violation shall be substantially in the following form: 
NOTICE OF VIOLATION AND DEMAND FOR REMOVAL 
Please take notice that the City of Montebello requires you to remove the sign(s) and/or postings affixed in violation of Section 12.14.010 of the Montebello Municipal Code and located at/along ___________. If you fail to remove said sign(s) and/or posting(s) within five (5) calendar days from the date of this notice, the City of Montebello shall proceed to abate and remove said sign(s) and/or posting(s) and shall require you to pay the costs incurred in said removal. The City may collect the costs of removal in any manner authorized by law. In addition, you may be subject to additional fines and penalties for failing to remove the sign(s) and/or posting(s). Such penalties and fines shall accrue each day the sign(s) or posting(s) are maintained in violation of Section 12.14.010. 
You have three (3) days from the date of this notice to appeal this demand to the city manager. Failure to file a written appeal within three (3) days constitutes a waiver of your right to appeal. 
This notice is given without prejudice to any other right or remedy which the City may have by reason of the illegal erection or maintenance of any sign or posting. 
2.  Service of Notice. Notice required by this section may be served by personal service on the person or agent who erected, maintained or authorized the erection or maintenance of any sign or posting in violation of this chapter; or on the person or business receiving benefit from the sign or posting. Service of notice may also be served by certified mail addressed to the known place of business, residence or dwelling of the person or agent who erected, maintained or authorized the erection or maintenance of any sign or posting in violation of this section; or by certified mail addressed to the person or business receiving benefit from the sign or posting. 
3.  Appeal. 
a.  Within three days from the date of the notice of violation and demand for removal, any party who has received notice to remove an illegal sign or posting may file a written appeal to the city manager showing cause as to why the illegal sign or posting should not be required to be removed or why they are not a responsible party. The city manager or designee shall set a hearing on the appeal not more than ten days from receipt of the written appeal. 
b.  The city manager or designee shall notify the appellant of the date of hearing pursuant to the provisions of subsection (B)(2) of this section, conduct the appeal and rule on the appeal. The decision of the city manager or designee shall be final and conclusive. 
c.  Failure to file an appeal within such three-day period constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal. 
4.  Right of Recovery. Signs or postings removed by the city pursuant to this chapter shall be stored for a period of five days, during which time they may be recovered by the person or agent who erected, maintained or authorized the erection or maintenance of any sign or posting in violation of this chapter; or by the person or business receiving benefit from the sign or posting upon payment to the city of the actual costs of removal and storage. If not recovered by the person or agent who erected, maintained or authorized the erection or maintenance of any sign or posting; or by the person or business receiving benefit from the sign or posting prior to expiration of the five-day period, the sign or posting and any supporting structure(s) shall be declared abandoned and title thereto shall vest to the city, and all costs of removal and disposal shall be billed to the person or agent who erected, maintained or authorized the erection or maintenance of any sign or posting in violation of this chapter; or to the person or business receiving benefit from the sign or posting. 
5.  Charges for Costs of Abatement. 
a.  Following abatement of any sign or posting erected or maintained in violation of this chapter or Chapter 17.62, the fire chief or designee shall serve, pursuant to subsection (B)(2) of this section, the person who erected, maintains or authorized the erection or maintenance of the illegal sign or posting, or the person or business receiving benefit from the sign or posting, a statement of the costs of abatement. 
b.  The statement of costs shall charge a fee equal to the city's actual costs for removal of the illegal sign(s) or posting(s). Appeals of the statement of costs shall be filed within ten days of the receipt of the statement of costs and such appeals shall be processed in accordance with subsection (B)(3) of this section. 
c.  The cost of abating an illegal sign shall become a debt in favor of the city and against each person who erected or authorized the erection or maintenance of the illegal sign or posting; or the person or business receiving benefit from the sign or posting. Payment of the costs of abatement shall be due upon presentation of the statement of costs. 
6.  Collection of Costs for Abatement. The fire chief or designee is authorized to file an action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction to collect the debts owed pursuant to this chapter or Chapter 17.62. 
7.  Injunction and Attorney's Fees. In addition to the remedies available to the city under this chapter and the code, the city may file an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin any violation of this section or to collect the costs of abating any nuisance defined in this chapter. In any such action, the city may collect its reasonable costs, including attorney's fees incurred in such action. 
(Ord. 2289 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 12.16 - TEMPORARY PERMITS FOR OUTDOOR ACTIVITIES 
Sections: 
 
12.16.010 - Required. 
A.  Temporary permits shall be required for all of the activities enumerated in subsection B of this section, and all activities found by the council to be similar or related thereto, except those activities sponsored by the city, or sponsored by a school district if conducted on the premises of such district. The activities, being temporary in nature, possess characteristics of such unique and special form as to make impractical their operation without specific approval, upon such conditions as may be deemed appropriate, in the manner hereinafter set forth is this chapter. 
B.  No person shall sponsor, participate or engage in any of the following enumerated activities, without first obtaining a temporary use permit therefor, issued by the zoning administrator of the city; 
1.  Circuses; 
2.  Parades, other than defined in Section 12.17.030 of this code; 
3.  Carnivals; 
4.  Fairs; 
5.  Temporary outdoor exhibits of equipment, goods or services, excepting retail or wholesale sales permitted under the provisions of Title 17 of this code; 
6.  Inflatable signs or advertisements; 
7.  Tents, as defined in Section 2901 of the Fire Prevention Code when used for public occupancy; 
8.  Aircraft and helicopter landings and demonstrations, parachutist demonstrations; 
9.  Public demonstrations or gatherings of more than twenty-five people, other than defined in Section 12.17.030 of this code; 
10.  Outdoor entertainment including outdoor dancing and/or performance of music whether live or recorded for which a charge is made for admission or in conjunction with the consumption of alcoholic beverages; provided, that: 
a.  No such permit shall be issued on any property classified in any of the R-zones, nor shall any location for such use be approved if the same is within seven hundred fifty feet of any lot which is utilized for residential purposes, and 
b.  Issuance of a permit hereunder shall be deemed to be conditional upon the applicant providing all required customer parking on-site or within three hundred feet from the premises. 
The duration of permits for the activities enumerated in subdivisions 1 through 10 of this subsection shall be limited to a period not to exceed seven consecutive calendar days and no more than one permit shall be issued to any organization or individual in any three-month period; 
11.  The indoor and outdoor sale of Christmas trees, except when such sales are in conjunction with an established commercial business, holding a valid city business license. The duration for this activity shall be for a period of not to exceed thirty consecutive calendar days in any one-year period; 
12.  Temporary contractor's storage yards, for use in conjunction with a construction project for or by a public agency or utility; provided, that: 
a.  Such permits shall not be issued for periods in excess of ninety days. Such permits shall be subject to renewal if so required to permit completion of the project, 
b.  Such yard permits shall only be issued if it is found that the location will be comparable with, and not cause a nuisance to adjacent properties, 
c.  No such permit shall be issued on any property classified in any of the R-zones, nor shall any location for such use be approved if the same is within one hundred fifty feet of any lot which is utilized for residential purposes, and 
d.  Issuance of a permit hereunder shall be deemed to be conditioned so as to require that the operation be maintained in a reasonably dust-free condition, and that the area of such use shall be fenced, for security purposes, subject to the approval of the building department; 
13.  Moving and/or estate sales conducted on weekends not designated as "garage sale weekends" as defined in Section 17.10.230 of this code shall not exceed three consecutive calendar days, and the fee for such activity shall be set by city council resolution; 
14.  Temporary signs as defined by Chapter 17.08 of this code. 
a.  Temporary signs relating to the sale of residential units or lots shall be permitted for a period not to exceed six months, but upon application may be extended for a period not to exceed an additional six months, 
b.  All other temporary signs shall be permitted as defined in Section 17.62.070(C) et seq. of this code. 
C.  The issuance of a temporary permit, pursuant to this chapter shall not be deemed a waiver of any requirement of any other provision of this code. 
(Ord. 2141 §§ 5—9, 1996; Ord. 2070 §§ 27, 28, 1992; prior code §§ 6410 and 6410.1)  
12.16.020 - Application—Contents. 
A written application for a temporary permit shall be filed with the license collector containing the following information: 
A.  Name of applicant (including names and addresses of all principals, partners or officers; 
B.  Proposed location; 
C.  Nature of activity; 
D.  Duration of activity; 
E.  Description of any equipment to be used; 
F.  Such other information as the license collector deems appropriate. 
(Prior code § 6410.2(a))  
12.16.030 - Application—Fees—Exemptions. 
A filing and investigation fee of twenty-five dollars shall be required with each such application. The license collector shall exempt an applicant from payment of such fee: 
A.  If the applicant is exempt for business license purposes, under Section 5.04.060; or 
B.  If the application is filed by an organization which has had its principal office, place of worship or headquarters within the city, for a period of not less than one year, and that such applicant is organized and operated for charitable, religious or civic purposes; and if as a result of the organization's character, it is determined that a full investigation is not required for purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2141 § 10, 1996; prior code § 6410.2(b) (part))  
12.16.040 - Application—Review. 
The zoning administrator shall not issue any permit until the application has been referred to the chief of police, or other departments as deemed necessary, for review and the chief returns a report thereon to the zoning administrator, including any pertinent comments and/or recommendations relating to such application. 
(Ord. 2141 § 11, 1996: prior code § 6410.2(b) (part))  
12.16.050 - Denial. 
The zoning administrator shall refuse to issue a permit if the activity would not be compatible with the preservation of the public peace, safety and general welfare, or if the same would be injurious or detrimental to properties adjacent to, or in the vicinity of, the proposed location of the activity. The zoning administrator shall notify the applicant of the fact of such denial by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at his last known address. 
(Ord. 2141 § 12, 1996: prior code § 6410.3(C))  
12.16.060 - Issuance—Conditions. 
A.  The zoning administrator shall, upon proper investigation of the application, issue a temporary permit if it is determined that the proposed activity can, and will, be conducted in a manner compatible with the preservation of the public peace, safety, health and general welfare, and will not be injurious or detrimental to property located in the immediate vicinity of the proposed location for the activity. 
B.  The zoning administrator shall have the power to impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of such permits to insure the preservation of the public peace, safety, health and general welfare, and to insure that the activity will not be injurious or detrimental to property located in the immediate vicinity of the proposed location for the activity. 
C.  In addition to other conditions that may be imposed for the issuance of a temporary permit which includes gatherings of twenty-five persons or more, and concerts or special events held on public or private property, the use of uniformed private patrol personnel who are regularly employed by a private patrol qualified under Chapter 5.04 of this code, and licensed to do business in the city, shall be required in accordance with the following schedule: 
Number of Persons in Attendance 	Number of Patrol Officers Required 
0—100 	2 
100—200 	4 
Over 200 	4 plus 2 for each additional 100 persons 
 
D.  The private patrol officers must be licensed, must be in an easily recognizable complete private patrol officer's uniform which is in contrast to the uniform of the officers of the Montebello police department. 
E.  The city manager may, upon consideration of an application for such permits, require a greater number of private patrol officers or such patrol officers may be waived if the city manager finds that such patrol officers are not required to preserve the public peace, health and safety. 
(Ord. 2141 § 13, 1996; Ord. 2081 § 2, 1993: prior code § 6410.3(A))  
12.16.070 - Administration. 
Immediately upon issuance of a temporary permit, the zoning administrator shall notify the chief of police of such fact together with all pertinent information pertaining to the issuance. Thereafter, the chief of police shall have the responsibility of administrative enforcement. Where the chief of police and/or zoning administrator determines that other permits, licenses or fees are required by law, the respective city department or other agency having jurisdiction thereof shall be notified, and shall suspend the temporary use permit until all such other licenses, permits or fees are obtained. 
The chief of police shall inspect the activities for which temporary permits have been issued, at appropriate times during the duration of such permit thereof. He shall maintain suitable records on all enforcement matters herein and all matters related thereto, that may be pertinent to the use, activities or the public welfare. 
(Ord. 2141 § 14, 1996: prior code § 6410.3(B))  
12.16.080 - Suspension. 
A.  The chief of police shall have the power to suspend, and shall suspend, any temporary permit if he finds that the permittee has: 
1.  Violated any condition imposed upon the permit; or 
2.  Violated any provision of this code; or 
3.  Is, by the actual conduct of the activity, threatening the preservation of the public peace, safety or general welfare, or unreasonably interfering with the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity of the activity. 
B.  The chief of police shall notify the permittee, by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the permittee at his last known address, of such suspension. 
(Prior code § 6410.3(D))  
12.16.090 - Appeals. 
A.  Any person aggrieved by any decision, determination or action taken by the zoning administrator or the chief of police, in connection with a temporary permit, shall have the right of immediate appeal to the city council. Such an appeal shall be in writing, and shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days of the denial thereof, accompanied with the required appeal fee in the amount set by city council resolution. Upon receipt of an appeal, the city clerk shall notify the zoning administrator and/or chief of police thereof, and shall set the matter on the city council agenda for its next regularly scheduled meeting. The city clerk shall give the party appealing, and any other person requesting the same, at least five days' written notice, in the manner previously described, of the time and place of such hearing. This notice provision may be waived by the appellant, and such other persons who have requested such notice. 
B.  The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show that the suspension or other decision was not justified, was unreasonable, or was otherwise incorrect. At the time of the hearing, the applicant shall have the right to present any relevant written or oral evidence. The council shall consider such evidence, together with appropriate staff reports and other information deemed by it to be relevant, and shall determine whether the suspension or decision was justified. 
C.  The hearing before the council, in such cases, shall not be a formal public hearing, nor shall any public notice be required to be given relating thereto. 
D.  The council's decision shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 2141 § 15, 1996; prior code § 6410.3(E))  
Chapter 12.17 - PARADES AND PUBLIC DEMONSTRATIONS 
Sections: 
 
12.17.020 - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted for the purpose of regulating parades and public demonstrations or gatherings of more than twenty-five people occurring on or within a city street, parking facility, sidewalk or other public right-of-way which obstruct, delay or otherwise interfere with the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or which do not comply with applicable traffic laws or controls. 
(Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 1994)  
12.17.030 - Definitions. 
"Applicant" means any person or organization who seeks a special event permit from the city to conduct or sponsor an event governed by this chapter. An applicant must be eighteen years of age or older. 
"Chief of police" means the chief of police or his/her designee. 
"City manager" means the city manager or his/her designee. 
"Event route" means a route (course of travel) along designated streets, sidewalks or other street rights-of-way for use by special events. 
"Parade" means a march or procession consisting of persons, animals or vehicles, or combination thereof, on any city street, sidewalk, alley or other street right-of-way, which obstructs, delays or interferes with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or does not comply with traffic laws or controls. 
"Permit application fee" means the fee to be paid by the special event permit applicant at the time the application is filed with the finance department. A fee schedule shall be set up by the city council and shall cover the actual full costs (or a portion thereof) of processing and investigating special event applications, and administering the special event permit program. 
"Permittee" means any person or organization who has been issued a special event permit by the city. 
"Public demonstrations or gatherings" means a group of people participating in an organized activity (other than public employees acting within the course and scope of their employment) on or within city limits. 
"Special event" means a parade or a public demonstration or gathering of twenty-five or more people. 
(Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 1994)  
12.17.040 - Permits required. 
Any person desiring to conduct or sponsor a parade or a public demonstration or gathering or more than twenty-five people in the city shall first obtain a special event permit from the city. A special event permit shall not be required for the following: 
A.  Parades or other special events which occur exclusively on city property under the jurisdiction of the department of parks and recreation; 
B.  Funeral processions. 
(Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 1994)  
12.17.050 - Application procedure fee. 
A.  Any applicant desiring to sponsor a parade or a public demonstration or gathering of more than twenty-five people shall apply for a special event permit by filing a verified application with the finance department on a form supplied by the finance department. Applications shall be submitted not less than ten calendar days before the special event date. 
B.  Upon a showing of good cause, the city manager shall consider an application which is filed after the filing deadline, if there is sufficient time to process and investigate the application and obtain police services for the event. Good cause can be demonstrated by the applicant showing that the circumstances which gave rise to the permit application did not reasonably allow the participant(s) to file within the time prescribed, and that the special event is for the purpose of exercising the right of free speech. 
C.  The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a non-refundable permit application fee in the amount set by city council resolution. 
(Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 1994)  
12.17.060 - Contents of application form. 
The application for a special event permit shall provide the following information: 
A.  Public Demonstrations or Gatherings of More than Twenty-Five People. 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and an alternative contact person; 
2.  If the special event is proposed to be sponsored by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the organization, and the authorized head of the organization; 
3.  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be present and in charge of the special event on the day of the event; 
4.  The nature/purpose of the special event; 
5.  Date and estimated starting and ending time of the special event; 
6.  Location of the special event including its boundaries; 
7.  Estimated number of participants in the special event; 
8.  The type and estimated number of vehicles, animals and structures which will be used at the special event and whether there will be water aid stations at the event; 
9.  Description of any sound amplification equipment which will be used at the special event; 
10.  Whether any food or beverages will be sold at the special event; 
11.  Whether monitors will be employed at the special event; 
12.  Parking requirements for the special event. 
B.  Additional Information Required for Parades and Public Demonstrations or Gatherings of More than Twenty-five People occurring Along a Route. 
1.  The assembly point for the special event; the time at which units of the parade or public demonstration or gathering will begin to assemble; 
2.  The route to be traveled; 
3.  Whether the parade or public demonstration or gathering will occupy all or only a portion of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
4.  The intervals of space to be maintained between units of a parade or public demonstration or gathering; 
5.  The number, types and size of floats, if applicable; 
6.  Material and maximum size of any signs or banners to be carried along the route. 
C.  Supplemental Information. Any supplemental information which the city shall find reasonably necessary, under the particular circumstances of the special event application, to determine whether to approve or conditionally approve a special event permit pursuant to Sections 12.17.080 and 12.17.090. 
(Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 1994)  
12.17.070 - Action on application. 
The city manager shall approve, conditionally approve or deny an application for the grounds specified in Section 12.17.080. Such action shall be taken not later than ten calendar days after receiving a completed application for the special event. If the application is denied, or conditionally approved, the city manager shall inform the applicant of the grounds for denial in writing, or the reason for a change in the date, time, route or location of the special event, and his/her right to appeal. If the city manager relied on information about the special event other than that contained in the application, he/she shall inform the applicant what information he/she considered. The applicant shall be notified of any permit conditions at the time the application is approved and of his/her right of appeal of the permit conditions. If the city manager refuses to consider a late application under Section 12.17.050(B), the city manager shall inform the applicant of his/her reason(s) for the refusal, and of his/her right of appeal. 
(Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 1994)  
12.17.080 - Grounds for denial of application for a special event permit. 
A.  The city manager shall approve an application for a special event permit unless he/she determines from a consideration of the application, or other pertinent information, that: 
1.  Information contained in the application, or supplemental information requested from the applicant, is found to be false in any material detail. 
2.  The applicant fails to complete the application form after having been notified of the additional information or documents required. 
3.  The sole purpose of the event is advertising of any product, good, ware, merchandise or event, and is designed to be held solely for private profit. 
4.  Another special event permit application has been received prior in time, or had already been approved, to hold another special event at the same time and place requested by the applicant, or is so close in time and place as to cause undue traffic congestion, or the police department is unable to meet the needs for police services for both special events. 
5.  The time, route or size of the special event will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to the event site or route, or disrupt the use of a street at a time when it is usually subject to great traffic congestion. 
6.  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at the site of the special event, or the assembly and disbanding areas around the special event, will prevent proper police, fire or ambulance services to areas contiguous to the special event. 
7.  The size of the special event will require diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to insure that participants stay within the boundaries or route of the special event, or to protect participants in the special event, as to prevent normal protection to the rest of the city. Nothing herein authorizes denial of a permit when additional peace officers would be available to the city under applicable state law and mutual aid plans, if requested by the city in advance of the special event. Nothing herein authorizes denial of a permit because of the need to protect participants from the conduct of others, if reasonable permit conditions can be imposed to allow for adequate protection of special event participants with the number of police officers available to police the special event. 
8.  The special event, if moving along a route, will not move from its point of origin to its point of termination in three hours or less. 
9.  The location of the special event will substantially interfere with any construction or maintenance work scheduled to take place upon or along the city streets, or a previously granted encroachment permit. 
10.  The special event shall occur at a time when a school is in session at a route or location adjacent to the school or class thereof, and the noise created by the activities of the special event would substantially disrupt the educational activities of the school or class thereof. 
B.  When the grounds for denial of an application for permit specified in subsections (A)(4) through (A)(10) of this section can be corrected by altering the date, time, duration, route or location of the special event, the city manager shall instead of denying the application conditionally approve the application upon the applicant's acceptance of conditions for permit issuance. The conditions imposed shall provide for only such modification of the applicant's proposed special event as are necessary to achieve compliance with subsections (A)(4) through (A)(10) of this section. 
(Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 1994)  
12.17.090 - Permit conditions. 
The city manager may condition the issuance of a special event permit by imposing reasonable requirements concerning the time, place and manner of the special event, and such requirements as are necessary to protect the safety or persons and property, and the control of traffic; provided such conditions shall not unreasonably restrict the right of free speech. Such conditions include, but are not limited to: 
A.  Alteration of the date, time, route or location of the special event proposed on the event application; 
B.  Conditions concerning the area of assembly and disbanding of parade or other special events occurring along a route; 
C.  Conditions concerning accommodation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including restricting the special event to only a portion of a street; 
D.  Requirements for the use of traffic cones or barricades; 
E.  Requirements for provision of first aid or sanitary facilities; 
F.  Requirements for use of security personnel, and providing notice of permit conditions to special event participants; 
G.  Restrictions on the number and type of vehicles, animals or structures at the special event, and inspection and approval of floats, structures and decorated vehicles for fire safety by the fire department; 
H.  Compliance with animal protection ordinances and laws; 
I.  Requirements for use of garbage containers, cleanup and restoration of city property; 
J.  Restrictions on use of amplified sound; 
K.  Compliance with any relevant ordinance or law and obtaining all required city, county, state or federal licenses or permits. 
(Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 1994)  
12.17.100 - Appeal procedure. 
A.  The applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a permit or a permit condition. The applicant shall also have the right to appeal the amount of fees and deposits imposed pursuant to Section 12.17.140 and Section 12.17.150, or a determination regarding insurance policy as set forth in Section 12.17.130. A notice of appeal shall be filed by the applicant within ten days after mailing or personal delivery of a notice of denial or permit condition with the city clerk setting the grounds for the appeal. The appeal must be filed no later than noon, one calendar week preceding a city council meeting, to be placed on the next regular meeting's agenda. the city council shall hear the applicant or a designated representative, receive any relevant information and documents, and act on the appeal at its next regular meeting. The decision of the city council is final. 
B.  If there is insufficient time for a timely appeal to be heard by the city council prior to the date on which the special event is scheduled, the applicant may, at his/her option, request that the city clerk schedule the appeal before the city manager. The city manager of his/her designee shall hold a hearing no later than two business days after the filing of the appeal, and will render his/her decision no later than one business day after hearing the appeal. If the appeal is heard before the city manager, the city manager's decision if final. 
(Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 1994)  
12.17.110 - Permit issuance. 
The finance department shall issue the special event permit once the application has been approved, and the applicant has agreed in writing to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit, and the following sections have been complied with: 
A.  Section 12.17.120 pertaining to indemnification; 
B.  Section 12.17.130 pertaining to insurance; 
C.  Section 12.17.140 pertaining to police traffic/pedestrian control fees; 
D.  Section 12.17.150 pertaining to cleanup deposits (when applicable). 
(Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 1994)  
12.17.120 - Indemnification agreement. 
Prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the permit applicant and authorized officer of the sponsoring organization (if any), must sign an agreement to reimburse the city for any costs incurred by it in repairing damage to city property occurring in connection with the permitted special event proximately caused by the actions of the permittee/sponsoring organization, its officers, employees, or agents, or any person who was under the permittee's/sponsoring organization's control insofar as permitted by law. The agreement shall also provide that the permittee/sponsoring organization shall defend the city against, and indemnify and hold the city harmless from, any liability to any persons resulting from any damage or injury occurring in connection with the permitted event proximately caused by the action of the permittee/sponsoring organization, its officers, employees or agents, or any person who was under the permittee's sponsoring organization's control insofar as permitted by law. Persons who merely join in a parade or public demonstration or gathering of more than twenty-five people are not considered by that reason alone to be "under control" of the permittee/sponsoring organization. 
(Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 1994)  
12.17.130 - Insurance. 
A.  The applicant/sponsor of a special event must possess or obtain a comprehensive general liability insurance policy to protect against loss from liability imposed by law for damages on account of bodily injury and property damage arising from the special event. Such insurance shall name on the policy or by endorsement as additional insured the city, its officers, employees and agents. Insurance coverage must be maintained for the duration of the event. 
Minimum limits required: 
1.  $250,000.00 each person bodily injury, 
$500,000.00 each occurrence bodily injury, 
$100,000.00 each occurrence property damage, or 
2.  $600,000.00 each occurrence combined single-limit bodily injury and property damage. 
B.  A copy of the policy or certificate of insurance along with all necessary endorsements must be filed with the risk manager no less than five days before the date of the special event unless the risk manager for good cause waives the filing deadline. The special event permit shall not be issued by the finance department until after the insurance policy or certificate of insurance along with necessary endorsements have been filed by the applicant/sponsor and approved by the risk manager. 
C.  The insurance requirements of subsection A of this section shall be waived by the city manager for special events involving the exercise of free speech rights. 
(Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 1994)  
12.17.140 - Traffic pedestrian control fees. 
A.  Prepayment of Fees. Upon approval of an application for a special event permit, the chief of police shall provide the applicant with a statement of the estimated cost of providing police officers for traffic/pedestrian control at the special event. The applicant/sponsor of the special event shall be required to prepay the traffic/pedestrian control fees prior to the issuance of a special event permit. Traffic/pedestrian control by officers includes, but is not limited to, clearing the special event route or site of unauthorized vehicles, diversion of traffic around the special event, and directing pedestrian and vehicular traffic along the route of a special event. 
B.  Computing Traffic/Pedestrian Control Fees. The traffic/pedestrian control fees will be computed by determining the number of police officers who will be required for traffic/pedestrian control in addition to those who would otherwise be on duty at that time, the number of hours the officers will be on duty for the special event, and the city's full cost of providing officers on an hourly basis as established by police department fee schedule. In determining traffic/pedestrian control fees, the chief of police shall establish a fee based on the applicant/sponsor's use of monitors for the special event. 
C.  Refunds. If the actual cost for traffic/pedestrian control on the date of the special event is less than the estimated cost pursuant to subsection A of this section, the applicant/sponsor will be refunded the difference by the city. 
D.  Waiver of Fees for First Amendment Expression. Traffic/pedestrian control fees shall be waived by the city manager for events involving the exercise of free speech rights. 
(Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 1994)  
12.17.150 - Cleanup deposits for certain special events. 
A.  The applicant/sponsor of a special event involving the sale of food or beverages, erection of structures, horses or other large animals, or water aid stations shall be required to provide a cleanup deposit prior to the issuance of a special event permit. The cleanup deposit shall be in the amount established in a cleanup fee schedule adopted by city council resolution. 
B.  The cleanup deposit shall be returned after the special event if the area used for the permitted event has been cleaned and restored to the same condition as existed prior to the special event. 
C.  If the property used for the special event has not been properly cleaned or restored, the applicant/sponsor shall be billed for the actual cost by the city for cleanup and restoration, and the cleanup deposit (or a portion thereof) shall be applied toward payment of the bill. If the applicant/sponsor disputes the bill, he/she may appeal to the director of public works within ten calendar days after receipt of the bill. Should there by an unexpended balance on deposit after completion of the work, this balance shall be refunded to the applicant/sponsor. Should the amount of the bill exceed the cleanup deposit, the difference shall become due and payable to the city upon the applicant's receipt of the bill. 
(Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 1994)  
12.17.160 - Duties of permittee/sponsor of event. 
A.  Each permittee/sponsor of a special event shall comply with all terms and conditions of the special event permit. 
B.  Each permittee/sponsor of a special event shall ensure that the person leading a parade, or the person in charge of a public demonstration or gathering of more than twenty-five people, shall carry the special event permit on his/her person for the duration of the special event. 
C.  Each permittee/sponsor of a special event shall ensure that the area used for the permitted event is cleaned and restored to the same condition as existed prior to the special event, immediately following the completion of the special event. 
(Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 1994)  
12.17.170 - Unlawful to sponsor or participate in a special event without a permit. 
It is unlawful for any person to sponsor or conduct a parade, or a public demonstration or gathering requiring a special event permit, under Article IV unless a permit has been issued for the special event. It is unlawful for any person to participate in such an event with the knowledge that the sponsor of the special event has not been issued the required permit. 
(Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 1994)  
12.17.180 - Unlawful to exceed scope of permit. 
The special event permit authorizes the permittee/sponsor to conduct only such event as is described in the permit, and in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit. It is unlawful for the permittee/sponsor to willfully violate the terms and conditions of the permit, or for any special event participant with knowledge thereof, to willfully violate the terms and conditions of the permit. 
(Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 1994)  
12.17.190 - Unlawful to interfere with or disrupt a special event. 
It is unlawful for any person to interfere with or disrupt a lawful parade or public demonstration or gathering. 
(Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 1994)  
12.17.200 - Violations—Penalty. 
Any violations of the provisions of this chapter, including any violations of the terms and conditions of a permit approved and issued in the manner provided by this chapter, shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 1994)  
Chapter 12.20 - GOLF COURSE 
Sections: 
 
12.20.010 - Service charges—Establishment. 
The city council shall, from time to time, by motion or resolution, establish charges for services at the golf course. 
(Prior code § 2390)  
12.20.020 - Service charges—Waiver or modification. 
The city council may at any time amend the charges established for any services at the golf course, but may not waive or forgive any charge or any portion of a charge. 
(Prior code § 2391)  
Chapter 12.24 - CONDUCT IN PUBLIC PARKS 
Sections: 
 
12.24.010 - Regulations for conduct in public parks. 
The following rules and regulations shall control the conduct of all persons in or upon public parks located within the city. City employees, in the course and within the scope of performing their duties, are exempt from these rules and regulations. 
(Ord. 2092 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 4304 (part))  
12.24.020 - Disposal of rubbish. 
No person shall throw, place or dispose of any garbage, refuse, bottles, glass, crockery or cans, in any place in any public park other than in a receptacle maintained therein for that purpose. 
(Ord. 2092 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 4304 (a))  
12.24.030 - Dangerous weapons. 
A.  No person shall have in his or her possession, or under his or her control, care or custody, any gun, revolver, pistol, firearm, simulated firearm, airgun, air rifle, pellet gun, B-B gun, slingshot or any device designed or intended to discharge or capable of discharging any dangerous missile. Nor shall any person have in his or her possession, or under his or her control, care or custody, any cartridge, shell, ammunition or device containing any explosive substance designed or intended to be used in or fired from any gun, revolver, pistol or firearm. 
B.  No person shall fire, discharge, shoot or operate, or assist or participate in the firing, discharging, shooting or operating of any gun, revolver, pistol, firearm, simulated firearm, airgun, air rifle, pellet gun, B-B gun, slingshot or any device designed or intended to discharge or capable of discharging any dangerous missile or object. 
C.  No person shall have in his or her possession, or under his or her control, care or custody, any switchblade, dirk, icepick, dagger, bow and arrow or any similar instrument or object that can be used to stab or injure others. 
(Ord. 2092 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 4304 (c), (d))  
12.24.040 - Firecrackers—Fireworks. 
No person shall fire or discharge in any public park, any fireworks as the phrase is defined in Section 8.20.010, except when a permit therefor has been issued by the city council. 
(Ord. 2092 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 4304 (e))  
12.24.050 - Flora. 
No person shall remove, destroy, injure, mutilate or cut any tree, plant, shrub, bloom or flower, or any portion thereof, growing in any public park. 
(Ord. 2092 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 4304 (f))  
12.24.060 - Turf. 
No person shall remove, or deface or destroy, any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand or gravel from any public park. 
(Ord. 2092 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 4304 (g))  
12.24.070 - Park structures. 
No person shall: 
A.  Damage, deface, disturb or disfigure any building, monument, cage, pen, sign, fence, bench, or any other structure, apparatus or equipment, or property of the city, or any portion thereof located in any public park; 
B.  Mark, write or print on any public park structure or any portion thereof; 
C.  Attach to or remove from any public park facility or structure any sign, card, display, or other similar device, except as may be required or permitted by law. 
(Ord. 2092 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 4304 (h))  
12.24.080 - Animals. 
No person shall bring into any public park any cattle, horse, mule, goat, sheep, swine, dog, cat or any other kind of animal, except that dogs or cats may be permitted in the park if kept on a leash not to exceed six feet under the full control of its owner or person in possession. No person shall wound, kill, catch or attempt to wound, kill or catch, any bird, fowl, fish or other animal located in a public park. 
(Ord. 2092 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 4304 (i))  
12.24.090 - Solicitation. 
No person shall sell or offer for sale any goods, wares, services or merchandize, or distribute or pass out any commercial handbill, in any public park, without first obtaining a permit and identity card pursuant to Chapter 5.04 of the Montebello Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2092 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 4304 (j))  
12.24.100 - Alcoholic beverages. 
No person shall enter, be or remain in any public park while in possession of, transporting, purchasing, selling, giving away, or consuming any alcoholic beverages without first obtaining the advance written approval of the director of parks and recreation. The sale, serving and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages will only be permitted at city facilities authorized by resolution of the city council and in accordance with approved city policies and procedures. No person shall remain in any public park, or enter the same, while in an intoxicated condition. 
(Ord. 2092 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 4304 (k))  
12.24.110 - Overnight camping. 
No person shall camp in any public park without first obtaining the permission of the director of parks and recreation. 
(Ord. 2092 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 4304 (l))  
12.24.120 - Fires. 
No person shall light, or cause to be lit, any fire, except in such locations as may be designated by the director of parks and recreation. 
(Ord. 2092 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 4304 (m))  
12.24.130 - Swimming. 
No person shall swim, wade, bathe in or pollute waters of any fountain, pond, take or stream located in any public park. 
(Ord. 2092 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 4304 (n))  
12.24.140 - Vehicles. 
No person shall propel or cause to be propelled any vehicle of any type, cycle or automobile, on any footpath in any public park. 
(Ord. 2092 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 4304 (o))  
12.24.150 - Park hours. 
No person shall enter, loiter or remain in any public park at any time between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m. of the following day, except when the park facilities are rented to the public and approved by the director of parks and recreation. 
(Ord. 2092 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 4304 (p))  
12.24.160 - Picnics. 
No person shall hold, conduct or participate in any picnic except in park areas designated for picnics. 
(Ord. 2092 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 4304 (q))  
12.24.170 - Golf. 
No person shall utilize any portion of a public park, excepting the municipal golf course, for the playing or practice of golf. 
(Ord. 2092 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 4304 (r))  
12.24.180 - Model airplane flying restrictions. 
No person shall operate any model airplane or toy airplane or miniature airplane which is self-propelled and operated or controlled from the ground by means of remote control, one or more wires, cords, strings, or other device attached to the airplane, at any public park, except at a place approved or designated for such purpose by the director of parks and recreation. 
(Ord. 2092 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 4304 (s))  
12.24.190 - Gambling. 
No person shall play or bet at or against any game which is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice, or other device, for money, chips, shells, credit or any other representative of value, or to maintain or exhibit any gambling table or other instrument of gambling or gaming in any public park. 
(Ord. 2092 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 4304 (t))  
12.24.200 - Pressurized cans and other containers. 
No person shall have in his or her possession in any public park any pressurized can, container, or other receptacle containing a substance commonly known as paint or any substance capable of defacing, damaging or disfiguring park property. 
(Ord. 2092 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 4304 (u))  
12.24.210 - Glue, adhesive cement and other substances. 
No person shall have in his or her possession in any public park any container or receptacle containing glue, adhesive cement, dope, mucilage or any chemical substance capable of producing intoxication, hallucinations or that distorts or disturbs the eyesight, thinking process, balance or coordination of a person, with the intent of becoming intoxicated. For purposes of this section, any condition so induced shall be deemed as an "intoxicated condition." 
(Ord. 2092 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 4304 (v))  
12.24.220 - Unlawful assembly. 
No persons shall assemble together in any public park for the purpose of doing any act of violence or inviting or advising other to do any act of violence or to commit any unlawful act. 
(Ord. 2092 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 4304 (w))  
12.24.230 - Threatening and inflammatory language. 
A.  No person shall utter in the presence of hearing of any other person or persons, in or upon any public park, any indecent, obscene, profane, or insulting epithets, words or language for the purpose of threatening or intimidating such other person or persons. 
B.  No person shall utter in the presence of hearing of any other person or persons, in or upon any public park, any words or language inherently likely to provoke an immediate, violent response from the recipient. 
(Ord. 2092 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 4304 ((x), (y))  
12.24.240 - Powers of park employees. 
The parks and recreation manager, director of parks and recreation, and all public employees in the parks and recreation department are given the power and authority to enforce any violation of this chapter, including the authority to issue citations therefor. 
(Ord. 2092 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 4304 (z))  
Chapter 12.26 - PUBLIC SKATE PARK FACILITIES 
Sections: 
 
12.26.010 - Statement of purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a comprehensive set of rules and regulations for the use of public skate park facilities in the city of Montebello. This chapter shall apply to the use and operation of skateboards, roller skates and in-line skates in the city's owned and operated public skate park facility. 
(Ord. 2252 § 1 (part), 2002)  
12.26.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this chapter, words, phrases, and terms used herein shall have their ordinary meaning, unless otherwise indicated as follows: 
"Department" means the city of Montebello department of parks and recreation. 
"Director" means the director of parks and recreation, or his or her designee. 
"In-line skates," including roller blades, means a type of roller skate with wheels attached thereto in a manner so that all wheels are aligned on a single line, and foot propelled without a steering apparatus. 
"Public skate park facility" means any public facility or structure that is designed for, owned, operated and maintained by the city of Montebello, in which skateboarding, in-line skating and roller skating is permitted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and which has been designated as a "public skate park facility" by resolution of the city council. 
"Roller skates" means a shoe, boot, or other footwear to which wheels are attached, and foot propelled without a steering apparatus. 
"Scooter" means a plank or board, whether made of wood, plastic, metal, or any other material, with wheels and steering apparatus attached and is foot propelled or motorized. 
"Skateboard" means any platform of any composition or size to which two or more wheels are attached and which is intended to be ridden or propelled by one person standing or kneeling upon such platform and containing no steering apparatus. 
"Skate activity" means the use of a skateboard, in-line skates or rollers skates. 
"Skater" means any person engaged in a skate activity. 
(Ord. 2252 § 1 (part), 2002)  
12.26.030 - Hours of operation. 
Public skate park facilities shall be open daily from seven a.m. until dusk, or as otherwise posted by the director or his/her designee. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or remain in such facilities without written consent of the director or his/her designee. Public skate park facilities shall be closed in the event of rain, wet conditions or other type of inclement weather which renders the surface of such facility to be unsafe to use. 
(Ord. 2252 § 1 (part), 2002)  
12.26.040 - Prohibited conduct. 
With respect to any public skate park facility, it shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the acts hereinafter specified: 
A.  No person shall be allowed to perform any skate activity at times other than those established by the director or his/her designee; 
B.  No person shall use a public skate park facility for uses other than skate activity; 
C.  No person shall use or enter the fenced area of a public skate park facility unless they wear proper safety equipment, including a helmet, elbow pads, and kneepads. All such safety equipment must be functional and protective, properly sized and designed for its intended use at the public skate park facility; 
D.  No person shall ride or use any items (whether motorized or non-motorized) other than roller skates, in-line skates or skateboards, including but not limited to bicycles, unicycles, scooters, go-carts, or wagons, on or within the skating surface of any public skate park facility; 
E.  No person, other than a skater, is permitted within the skating surface of any public skate park facility, except that spectators may sit or stand in areas designated for that purpose; 
F.  No person shall ride or use any skateboard, roller skates or in-line skates in a public skate park facility in a reckless manner or with willful disregard for the safety of persons or property, or cause anyone with such items to be ridden or used in such a reckless manner; 
G.  No person shall place, affix or utilize any obstacles or other materials within a public skate park facility that are not affixed thereto by the department for recreational purposes; 
H.  No skate activity is permitted on the curbs, sidewalk, fences, railings, seating area, or walls of any city-owned structure or area surrounding or adjoining a public skate park facility; 
I.  No person shall conduct organized activities, events or competitions on any public skate park facility without the prior written approval from the director or his/her designee; 
J.  A public skate park facility shall not be used if a hazardous condition exists, including but not limited to, inclement weather conditions and significant cracks, breaks or other irregularities in the skating surface of a public skate park facility; 
K.  No person shall litter in a public skate park facility. All persons using a public skate park facility must place any trash, cans, bottles, papers, or waste of any kind they create or bring to a public skate park facility in refuse containers provided by the city. If no refuse container is provided by the city, each person shall be responsible for removing and disposing of such items in an appropriate manner; 
L.  No person shall possess or use alcohol or drugs in the public skate park facility; 
M.  No person shall use a public skate park facility while under the influence of alcohol or drugs that would impair the person's judgment or motor skills; 
N.  No person shall allow or cause glass containers of any kind to be brought into any public skate park facility; 
O.  No person shall allow or cause graffiti or tagging in or around any part of the public skate park facility; 
P.  No person shall allow or cause any animal of any kind to be brought into a public skate park facility. 
(Ord. 2252 § 1 (part), 2002)  
12.26.050 - City immunity from liability. 
In accordance with California Government Code Section 831.7 and Health and Safety Code Section 15800, skate activity within a public skate park facility is deemed a hazardous recreational activity under certain conditions, which entitles the city to limit its liability for injuries sustained or incurred by persons engaged in such activity. 
(Ord. 2252 § 1 (part), 2002)  
12.26.060 - Protective gear required. 
All skaters must wear a safety helmet, elbow pads and kneepads while engaging in any skate activity in a public skate park facility. All such protective gear must be functional and protective, properly sized and designed for their intended use at said facility. 
(Ord. 2252 § 1 (part), 2002)  
12.26.070 - Signage and posting requirements. 
In order to provide reasonable notice to the public, the director or his/her designee shall place and post signs in one or more conspicuous and visible area(s) of a public skate park facility, designating the facility, structure or area as a public skate park facility, specifying the rules and regulations established pursuant to this chapter, and the activities described as prohibited in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2252 § 1 (part), 2002)  
12.26.080 - Other rules and regulations. 
The director may set forth any other rules and regulations for the use of a public skate park facility which he or she deems appropriate, provided that signs describing such rules and regulations are placed and posted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2252 § 1 (part), 2002)  
12.26.090 - Violation and penalties. 
A.  Any violation of this chapter may be punishable as either a misdemeanor or an infraction. 
B.  Repeat violators (i.e., having three or more violations) may be suspended or prohibited from using the facility. 
C.  Repeat violations of this chapter may also constitute a public nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances. 
(Ord. 2252 § 1 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. 2349, § 1, 10-10-2012)  
12.26.100 - Additional enforcement. 
In the interest of public safety, the director or his/her designee shall have the authority to eject or expel from the public skate park facility any person who is in violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2252 § 1 (part), 2002)  
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 13.04 - WATER SYSTEMS 
Sections: 
 
13.04.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be construed as follows: 
"Area" means the water service area as defined in Section 13.04.030. 
"City" means the city of Montebello. 
"Commercial and industrial consumer" means consumer who is not a residential consumer. 
"Consumer" means the person who owns, or is in possession of, property which receives all, or a part, of its water supply from the department's facilities. 
"Residential consumer" means any customer whose property is classified, pursuant to Title 17 of this code, in zone R-A, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or R-5. 
"Department" means the water department of the city. 
"Director" means the director of finance of the city. 
"Engineer" means the city engineer. 
(Prior code § 2951)  
13.04.020 - Water department created—Administrative responsibility. 
There is established for the city the water department. The department shall be charged with the administration of the provisions of this chapter, under the supervision of the city manager and under the control of the city council. 
(Prior code § 2950)  
13.04.030 - Service area. 
The city water department is authorized to serve water to properties within the boundaries of the city or such other areas as may be designated by the city council. 
(Prior code § 2952)  
13.04.040 - Connection to system. 
No person shall tap, open or connect to a water main, fire hydrant, pipe or service which forms a part of the water system of the city, without first obtaining written permission to do so from the department. 
(Prior code § 2970)  
13.04.050 - Application for service—Deposit. 
A.  In case of a new user or change of ownership or tenancy of any premises, the new user, owner or tenant shall make written application for water service in the office of the city engineer, and upon a form provided by the department. The application in all instances shall contain the name and address of the applicant, the legal description or street number of the property, and an agreement upon the part of the applicant to pay the stipulated rate at the time and in the manner provided herein, and to abide by all rules and regulations of the department. 
B.  Concurrently with the filing of the application there shall be deposited with the city a new service fee in the amount of twice the minimum rate for the proposed service. If the applicant is the owner of the property served, then no such deposit shall be required. At the termination of the service, such deposit shall be returned after there has been deducted therefrom moneys due and owing the city for water service. 
(Prior code § 2964)  
13.04.060 - Water rates—Establishment—Applicability. 
The city council, from time to time, shall, by resolution, establish water service rates and water system rates for both residential consumers and commercial and industrial consumers. Such rates shall be applicable to, and paid by, each consumer. 
(Prior code § 2953 (part))  
13.04.070 - Water service rates. 
A.  The water service rates so established shall include a rate for flat-rate service, a rate for private fire service, and a rate for metered service. 
1.  The metered service rate shall be applicable to those consumers whose water usage is measured by an acceptable water meter. "Acceptable water meter" means a meter supplied by the city, or a meter which was in use prior to October 26, 1967, and has been examined and accepted by the department, as being serviceable and accurate. 
2.  The private fire service rate shall be applicable to those consumers with a service installed for private fire protection referred to in Section 13.04.260. 
3.  Flat-rate service shall be applicable to any consumer whose water usage is not regulated by an acceptable meter. 
B.  Any consumer who desires to replace an existing, or obtain a water meter, may make application to the city water utility therefor. The cost of such meter and its installation shall be borne entirely by the customer requesting the same. 
(Prior code § 2953 (A))  
13.04.080 - Water system rates. 
There is established a water system rate which shall be applicable to, and paid by, all consumers in the water service areas described in Section 13.04.090. Those consumers whose water is supplied by the department and is located upon a lot, as to which the system charge, referred to in Section 13.04.090 has been paid, are exempted from the water system rate. 
(Prior code § 2953 (B))  
13.04.090 - System charges. 
A.  Service Lateral Installation Fees. Any person who desires to obtain water service for property which is served by the city water system, and as to which no service lateral exists, shall file an application therefor. The service lateral shall be installed, physically connecting the use to be served, if a water distribution main is located in close proximity to such lot as determined by the engineer. If no water main exists in close proximity, or the main is inadequate, subsection B of this section shall apply. The precise location of service laterals shall be designated by the engineer. Such service laterals shall be installed by the owner or his contractor at the expense of the person requesting the same. The owner or his contractor shall make an application and obtain a permit for the proposed connection. 
B.  Main Extension or Reconstruction. 
1.  Application. 
a.  Where no water main exists in close proximity to the property to be served, or where the main is of insufficient size, as determined by the engineer, the person desiring such service shall bear the cost of construction of a water main sufficient in size to serve such property. An application for such service shall not be accepted unless a cash deposit is made with the department, in an amount equal to the estimated construction costs of the main extension, as determined by the engineer. 
b.  An applicant may, upon approval of the engineer, construct or cause the construction of such water main extension at his own expense, in which case the applicant will not be required to post a deposit for the cost of construction. 
c.  If the construction of the water main is accomplished by the city and the actual cost of the same is greater than the amount deposited, the applicant shall, forthwith, pay the difference to the department. If the actual cost is less than the amount deposited, the difference shall, forthwith, be refunded by the city to the applicant. 
d.  All facilities constructed hereunder shall be deemed, for all purposes, the property of the city, and shall be maintained by the city. A permit shall be required for this work. 
2.  Size of Facilities. If the city should elect to cause the construction of facilities of greater capacity than required by the service requested, the city shall assume any additional cost involved, which shall be determined by the city. 
3.  Reimbursement Arrangements. If the system being constructed necessarily extends past property not connected to the city's system, which at some future date may connect thereto, the applicant may request reimbursement of a proportional share of the cost thereof, by means of an agreement with the city, providing for such reimbursement from funds actually received for connection fees. Where such construction occurs, and reimbursement is requested, properties which subsequently request permission to connect to such main shall pay the city a charge therefor, in addition to all other charges and costs, in an amount equal to the proportional share of the cost of such construction, in amounts allocated and set by the engineer. 
C.  Basis of Systems Charges. 
1.  South Montebello Water System. 
a.  The city heretofore obtained financing for the purpose of constructing certain facilities which are essential in order to provide a reasonable level of water service to properties within the South Montebello Water System area, as shown on that certain map, on file in the office of city engineer, entitled "South Montebello Water Service Area." The improvements consist of the following: 
i.  Twelve inch transmission mains; 
ii.  Pumping facilities for Montebello well No. 1; 
iii.  Fourteen inch transmission mains for Montebello well No. 1; 
iv.  Two million gallon water storage reservoir and pumping plant. 
b.  A full description of the improvements is on file in the city engineer's office and shall be available for public inspection. 
c.  The cost of the aforesaid improvements is in the sum of eight hundred fifty-three thousand one hundred fifty-eight dollars. A system charge has been, and will continue to be, levied and shall be collected by the city manager in accordance with the city council resolution. 
2.  The Hillside City Water System. 
a.  The city heretofore obtained financing through the community redevelopment agency for the hillside project to construct certain facilities which are essential in order to provide a reasonable level of water service to the hillside area water service area, as shown on that certain map, entitled "Hillside Water Service Area Map," on file in the office of the city engineer. The improvements consist of the following: 
i.  Transmission mains; 
ii.  Pumping facilities; 
iii.  Water storage reservoirs. 
b.  A full description of the improvements is on file in the city engineer's office, and is available for public inspection. The cost of the aforesaid improvements is in the sum of two million dollars. A system charge for the hillside area has been, and will continue to be, levied and shall be collected by the city manager, in accordance with the city council resolution. 
3.  Systems Charges. The public interest, convenience and necessity require that the cost of the improvements previously described, be charged back, by means of a system charge against properties included within the water service area, which properties are benefitted directly by the improvements, pursuant to the provisions of this code. 
D.  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision made by the engineer pursuant to subsection A of this section regarding the proximity of a main, or pursuant to subsection B of this section as to the appropriate proportional share of costs, shall have the right of appeal from such determination, to the city manager. Any such appeal shall be in writing, and shall describe the property affected, the name of the appealing party, and such other information as the appealing party deems appropriate. The decision of the city manager shall be final and conclusive. 
E.  Construction. All construction performed hereunder shall be accomplished in accordance with the standards and specifications of the city relating thereto. 
F.  Location and Ownership. 
1.  All main extensions constructed under this section shall be constructed in dedicated street rights-of-way, city public utility easements or city water line easements. 
2.  All facilities constructed hereunder shall be deemed, for all purposes, the property of the city; provided, that the same shall be maintained by the city. 
(Prior code § 2965)  
13.04.100 - Charges—Statements—Payment. 
The city shall submit to each consumer, periodically, statements containing the amounts due as and for water service and system rates, imposed pursuant to Sections 13.04.060, 13.04.070 and 13.04.080. All such amounts shall be due and payable within five days after the mailing of such statements. 
(Prior code § 2954 (A))  
13.04.110 - Charges—Adjustment. 
The city engineer shall have the power, in his discretion, to adjust complaints, and in the event of any dispute as to the water rate to be paid by the consumer, he shall determine the same. His decision shall be subject to review by the city council, if requested by the consumer. 
(Prior code § 2959)  
13.04.120 - Charges—Vacant premises. 
In case any premises become vacant, the regular minimum rates shall be charged and no refund or discount shall be made unless the water has been shut off by the department upon written request of the one in whose name the water service is rendered or the written request of the owner. 
(Prior code § 2955)  
13.04.130 - Temporary service. 
A.  Water for construction purposes shall be furnished through a temporary service connection. The applicant shall designate the period of time and purpose for which the water is to be used. The department may discontinue the supply and remove its equipment at the expiration of the period so designated. Such water supply shall be subject to limitations as to the rate of flow and time of use. 
B.  The department initially will install all equipment necessary to furnish a temporary water supply and, upon payment of the charges provided herein, will move equipment for any subsequent changes in location, as requested by the applicant, except when the applicant is being furnished water on a flat-rate basis, and is supplying his own eddy valve. 
C.  At the time of application for temporary service, applicants who are requesting department equipment to be installed, shall make a security deposit against loss or damage to equipment, and to secure payment of department charges, for furnishing, installation, removal, inspection and rental of equipment used. 
D.  If the applicant requires more than one temporary service connection, requiring department equipment during the time his deposit is in effect, only the sum of money necessary to make up any reduction to his original security deposit will be required. In case of nonreturn of department equipment, or damage beyond repair, the applicant shall pay a charge therefor, for replacement of water meter and replacement of eddy valve. The amount of such deposits and charges shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
E.  In addition to the regular domestic rate for water usage, an applicant for temporary service from a fire hydrant shall pay the following: 
1.  A charge, as set by council resolution, for the first installation on each job or project, and an additional sum, as set by the resolution, for all subsequent installations on the same job or project, to cover service charges, and the cost of installing and removing equipment to furnish and measure the temporary water supply. 
2.  Any charges incurred by the department for repairing equipment furnished by the department, if such equipment is damaged while in the custody of the applicant. 
Such charges, as outlined herein may be deducted from the deposit. 
F.  If service is to be metered, a meter and eddy valve shall be furnished and installed by the department, in accordance with the provisions herein. If service is to be on a flat-rate basis, an eddy valve shall be used at all times. In all cases, the applicant shall control fire hydrant flow by means of the eddy valve only, and shall not operate the main fire hydrant valve except in an emergency. 
G.  No person shall make any unauthorized use of water from a fire hydrant, except in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(Prior code § 2958)  
13.04.140 - Service leaks. 
Each applicant shall be responsible for the cost of any water lost through leaks or defective lines between the meter and the point of use. 
(Prior code § 2961)  
13.04.150 - Charges deemed civil debt—Collection—Penalty. 
The charges herein established shall be deemed to be civil debts due and owing the city from the consumer and collection thereof may be enforced by the city by suit in any court of competent jurisdiction. In the event that the amount due hereunder shall remain unpaid for a period of thirty days or more, a penalty of ten percent shall be added to the amount. 
(Prior code § 2954 (B))  
13.04.160 - Disconnection for nonpayment. 
If any account becomes delinquent, the department may shut off the water to the premises concerned. There will be a charge for turning on any water service after a shutoff by reason of delinquency. The amount of such charge shall be established by resolution of the city council. In addition, the department may require a reasonable deposit as determined by the city engineer, to insure payment of future charges. 
(Prior code § 2956)  
13.04.170 - Meter required for service. 
A.  All water furnished to consumer shall be through a metered service unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
B.  All water used where a meter is installed must pass through the meter. No person shall install or suffer or cause to be installed or maintained, any by-pass or connection around or in the place of the meter 
(Prior code § 2966)  
13.04.180 - Meter testing—Adjustments. 
There shall be a five dollar deposit with each written request to check a meter for accuracy. If in the event of such examination and test of meter, the meter shall be found to register over three percent more water than actually passes through it, another meter will be substituted therefor, a proportional deduction will be made in the current bill, and the deposit shall be repaid to the person making the request. If the meter shall be found to register not over three percent more water, the deposit shall be forfeited and the meter reinstalled. 
(Prior code § 2963)  
13.04.190 - Meter failure. 
In the event any meter fails to operate properly or to register correctly the water used, the charge for the period during which the meter fails to operate properly or fails to register water, shall be based upon the average of the four months of the same period of the prior year by the same user or, if such a reading is not available, the charge shall be determined by the city engineer. 
(Prior code § 2960)  
13.04.200 - Meters—Maintenance. 
All meters installed by the department shall remain at all times the property of the department and shall be maintained, repaired and replaced by the department; provided, that adjustment, repair, or replacement of any meter rendered necessary by negligence, carelessness or damage by the consumer, or any member of his family or anyone employed by him, shall be paid for by such consumer to the department and in case such bill is not paid, the water shall be shut off until all charges are paid. 
(Prior code § 2971)  
13.04.210 - Meter box—Access. 
If access to a meter is obstructed in any manner, including the growing of plants or allowing them to grow, the depositing or allowing the deposit of any material, or by the parking of any vehicle, the department shall give a fifteen-day notice in writing to remove such obstruction, and in the event such obstruction is not removed within such time, the water shall be shut off until such removal is effected. 
(Prior code § 2972)  
13.04.220 - Shut-off valves. 
All shut-off valves installed are, by and for, the use of the department. Except in the case of an emergency, the consumer shall not use or molest such shut-off valves. The consumer shall install, for his ordinary usage and at his own expense, a shut-off valve on the property side of the meter. Damage resulting from violation of this rule shall be charged to the consumer. 
(Prior code § 2962)  
13.04.230 - Independent consumers on same premises. 
In all cases in which water is being served to premises occupied by two or more different and independent consumers of water, which premises are held under the same ownership, the owner of such premises shall provide independent service to the service connection for each such independent consumer; provided, however, that if the owner of such premises so served with water shall agree in writing to be responsible for and pay all money due for water used upon such premises, such independent service shall not be required. Should the owner fail or refuse to provide such independent service or fail or refuse to assume responsibility for money due for water used upon such premises, the department shall, after thirty days' notice to the consumer so served, and to the owner of such premises, or the person in charge thereof, cut off water from such premises until the independent services herein required are installed or the agreement assuming responsibility for the money due for water served to the premises is made as herein provided. 
(Prior code § 2967)  
13.04.240 - Single service to more than one lot. 
No service connection shall be made for the purpose of supplying through a common service two or more independent consumers occupying premises held under the same ownership, unless the structures served are on the same lot, or the property is what is known as a court, or apartment house, or block covering more than one lot, and then only providing the owner or owners of such premises shall agree in writing to pay all charges for water served thereto. 
(Prior code § 2968)  
13.04.250 - Common service for separate owners. 
No water shall be served to two or more parcels of property separately owned through a common service, except where such service existed prior to the date of adoption of this chapter. In the event any present consumer of such a service ceases to use such service, the right to use such common service shall terminate and, in any event, no such common service shall be continued for a period of one year beyond the effective date of this chapter. The city council, upon application being duly made, may grant an extension of time to continue such a common service upon such terms and conditions as it may deem reasonable. 
(Prior code § 2969)  
13.04.260 - Private fire protection. 
Whenever a service is installed for private fire protection, a charge shall be made for labor, material and engineering, plus fifteen percent for overhead, and shall include the cost of furnishing and installing a detector check meter, or other fire service meter, when such meter is deemed necessary by the city engineer. Such service shall be used only in case of fire and if it is found that a fire service has been used for any purpose other than in case of fire, the department shall charge the sum of twenty-five dollars for such incident of unauthorized use. If unauthorized use of a fire service persists, the department may discontinue the fire service. 
(Prior code § 2973)  
13.04.270 - Cross connections. 
A.  1.  "Approved water supply" means a potable water supply of safe, sanitary quality which is approved for human consumption by the authorities having jurisdiction thereof. 
2.  "Cross-connection" means any arrangement or installation of piping or structures whereby it is possible for used, unclean, polluted or contaminated water, mixture, or substances to enter any portion of any approved water supply. 
B.  After thirty days written notice to the consumer, water service by the department may be discontinued to any premises upon which there is found to be another source of water supply or a cross-connection. The service shall not be restored until such cross-connection has been eliminated or backflow devices satisfactory to the department have been installed. The expense and maintenance of backflow devices and cost of eliminating cross-connections shall be paid by the consumer or owner of the premises. 
(Prior code § 2975)  
13.04.280 - Backflow protection—Requirements. 
A.  The type of protection that shall be provided to prevent backflow into the approved water supply shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard that exists on the consumer's premises. The type of protective device that may be required (listing in an increasing level of protection) includes: double check valve assembly (DC), reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device (RP), and an air-gap separation (AG). The water user may choose a higher level of protection than required by the city. The minimum types of backflow protection required to protect the approved water supply, at the user's water connection to premises with varying degrees of hazard are given in Table 13.04.280. Situations which are not covered in Table 13.04.280 shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis and the appropriate backflow protection shall be determined by the city or health agency. (See Table 13.04.280 exhibit at end of this chapter.) 
B.  Two or more services supplying water from different street mains to the same building, structure, or premises through which an intersect main flow may occur, shall have at least a standard check valve on each water service to be located adjacent to and on the property side of the respective meters. Such check valve shall not be considered adequate if backflow protection is deemed necessary to protect the city's mains from pollution or contamination. In such cases the installation of approved backflow devices at such service connections shall be required. 
(Prior code §§ 2976.1 and 2976.2)  
13.04.290 - Backflow prevention—Devices. 
A.  Approved Backflow Prevention Devices. 
1.  Only backflow prevention devices which have been approved by the city shall be acceptable for installation by a water user connected to the city's potable water system. 
2.  The city will provide, upon request, to any affected customer a list of approved backflow prevention devices. 
B.  Backflow Prevention Device Installation. 
1.  Backflow prevention devices shall be installed in a manner prescribed in Section 7603, Title 17 of the California Code of Regulations. Location of the devices should be as close as practical to the user's connection. The city shall have final authority in determining the required location of a backflow prevention device. 
a.  Air-Gap Separation (AG). The air-gap separation shall be located on the user's side of and as close to the service connection as is practical. All piping from the service connection to the receiving tank shall be above grade and be entirely visible. No water use shall be provided from any point between the service connection and the air-gap separation. The water inlet piping shall terminate a distance of at least two pipe diameters of the supply inlet, but in no case less than one inch above the overflow rim of the receiving tank. 
b.  Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Device (RP). The approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed on the user's side of and as close to the service connection as is practical. The device shall be installed a minimum of twelve inches above grade and not more than thirty-six inches above grade measured from the bottom of the device and with a minimum of twelve inches side clearance. The device shall be installed so that it is readily accessible for maintenance and testing. Water supplied from any point between the service connection and the RP device shall be protected in a manner approved by the city. 
c.  Double Check Valve Assembly (DC). The approved double check valve assembly shall be located as close as practical to the user's connection and shall be installed above grade, if possible, and in a manner where it is readily accessible for testing and maintenance. If a double check valve assembly is put below grade it must be installed in a vault such as that there is a minimum of six inches between the bottom of the vault and the bottom of the device, so that the top of the device is no more than a maximum of eight inches below grade, so there is a minimum of six inches of clearance between the side of the device with the test cocks and the side of the vault, and so there is a minimum of three inches clearance between the other side of the device and the valve assembles of the "y" type. These devices must be installed on their side with the test cocks in a vertical position so that either check valve may be removed for service without removing the device. Vaults which do not have an integrated bottom must be placed on a three-inch layer of gravel. 
C.  Backflow Prevention Device Testing and Maintenance. 
1.  The owners of any premises on which, or on account of which, backflow prevention devices are installed, shall have the devices tested by a person who has demonstrated their competency in testing of these devices to the city. Backflow prevention devices must be tested at least annually and immediately after installation, relocation or repair. The city may require a more frequent testing schedule if it is determined to be necessary. No device shall be placed back in service unless it is functioning as required. A report in a form acceptable to the city shall be filed with the city each time a device is tested, relocated or repaired. These devices shall be serviced, overhauled or replaced whenever they are found to be defective and all costs of testing, repair, and maintenance shall be borne by the water user. 
2.  The city will supply affected water users with a list of persons acceptable to the city to test backflow prevention devices. The city will notify affected customers by mail when annual testing of a device is needed and also supply users with the necessary form which must be filled out each time a device is tested or repaired. 
D.  Backflow Prevention Device Removal. Approval must be obtained from the city before a backflow prevention device is removed, relocated or replaced: 
1.  Removal. The use of a device may be discontinued and the device removed from service upon presentation of sufficient evidence to the city to verify that a hazard no longer exists or is not likely to be created in the future; 
2.  Relocation. A device may be relocated following confirmation by the city that the relocation will continue to provide the protection and satisfy installation requirements. A retest will be required following the relocation of the device; 
3.  Repair. A device may be removed for repair, provided the water user is either disconnected until repair is completed and the device is returned to service, or the service connection is equipped with other backflow protection approved by the city. A retest will be required following the repair of the device; and 
4.  Replacement. A device may be removed and replaced provided the water use is discontinued until the replacement device is installed. All replacement devices must be approved by the city and must be commensurate with the degree of hazard involved. 
(Prior code § 2977)  
13.04.300 - Backflow prevention—User supervisor. 
At each premises where it is necessary, in the opinion of the city, a user supervisor shall be designated by and at the expense of the water user. This user supervisor shall be responsible for the monitoring of the backflow prevention devices and for avoidance of cross-connections. In the event of contamination or pollution of the drinking water system due to a cross-connection on the premises, the city shall be promptly notified by the user supervisor so that the appropriate measurers may be taken to overcome the contamination. The water user shall inform the city of the user supervisor's identity on, as a minimum, an annual basis and whenever a change occurs. 
(Prior code § 2978)  
13.04.310 - Backflow prevention—System survey. 
A.  Water System Survey. 
1.  The city shall review all requests for new services to determine if backflow protection is needed. Plans and specifications must be submitted to the city upon request for review of possible cross-connection hazards as a condition of service for new service connections. If it is determined that a backflow prevention device is necessary to protect the public water system, the required device must be installed before service will be granted. 
2.  The city may require an on-premises inspection to evaluate cross-connection hazards. The city will transmit a written notice requesting an inspection appointment to each affected water user. Any customer which cannot or will not allow an on-premises inspection of their piping system shall be required to install the backflow prevention device the city considers necessary. 
3.  The city may, at its discretion, require a reinspection for cross-connection hazards of any premises to which it serves water. The city will transmit a written notice requesting an inspection appointment to each affected water user. Any customer which cannot or will not allow an on-premises inspection of their piping system shall be required to install the backflow prevention device that the city considers necessary. 
B.  Customer Notification—Device Installation. 
1.  The city will notify the water user of the survey finding, listing corrective action to be taken if required. A period of sixty days will be given to complete all corrective action required including installation of backflow prevention devices. 
2.  A second notice will be sent to each water user which does not take the required corrective action prescribed in the first notice within the sixty-day period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a two-week period to take the required corrective action. If no action is taken within the two-week period, the city may terminate water service to the affected water user until the required corrective actions are taken. 
C.  Customer Notification—Testing and Maintenance. 
1.  The city will notify each affected water user when it is time for the backflow prevention device installed on their service connection to be tested. This written notice shall give the water user thirty days to have the device tested and supply the water user with the necessary form to be completed and resubmitted to the city. 
2.  A second notice shall be sent to each water user which does not have his/her backflow prevention device tested as prescribed in the first notice within the thirty-day period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a two-week period to have his/her backflow prevention device tested. If no action is taken within the two-week period, the city may terminate water service to the affected water user until the subject device is tested. 
(Prior code § 2979)  
13.04.320 - Emergency shut-offs. 
The city shall have the right at any time to shut off any water by reason of any emergency, for making repairs, modifications, changes or other work in the water service facilities. In cases of such shut-off, city personnel shall notify all residents, if possible, that the water is being shut off. 
(Prior code § 2974)  
13.04.330 - Water service termination. 
A.  General. When the city encounters water uses that represent a clear and immediate hazard to the potable water supply that cannot be immediately abated, the city shall institute the procedure for disconnecting the city water service. 
B.  Basis for termination. Conditions or water uses that create a basis for water service termination shall include, but not be limited to, the following items; 
1.  Refusal to install a required backflow prevention device; 
2.  Refusal to test a backflow prevention device; 
3.  Refusal to repair a faulty backflow prevention device; 
4.  Refusal to replace a faulty backflow prevention device; 
5.  Direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a sewer line; 
6.  Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a system or equipment containing contaminants; 
7.  Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and an auxiliary water system; 
8.  A situation which presents an immediate health hazard to the public water system. 
C.  Water Service Termination Procedures. 
1.  For conditions set out in subdivisions 1, 2, 3, or 4 of subsection B of this section, the city will terminate service to a customer's premises after two written notices have been sent specifying the corrective action needed and the time period in which it must be done. If no action is taken within the allowed time period water service may be terminated. 
2.  For conditions set out in subdivision 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 of subsection B of this section, the city will take the following steps: 
a.  Make a reasonable effort to advise the water user of intent to terminate water service; 
b.  Terminate water supply and lock service valve. The water service will remain inactive until correction of violations has been approved by the city. 
(Prior code § 2980)  
13.04.340 - Disconnection—Reconnection by customer prohibited—Penalty. 
No person shall turn on the water serving any premises after it has been turned off at the curb stop by the department. In the event any person does so turn on the water or cause it to be turned on, there shall be an additional charge placed against the service. The amount of such charge shall be established by resolution of the city council. Service may not be resumed until all delinquent charges, penalty charges, if any, and the additional amount provided herein shall have been paid. 
(Prior code § 2957)  
13.04.350 - Nonliability. 
In the event any water is shut off or service is discontinued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or in order to carry out the terms, intent and objective of this chapter, or when necessary to service the system, its facilities or any portion of the system or its facilities, or to protect the public health interest, safety and general welfare, or in the interest of the consumers of water provided by the department, there shall be no liability on the part of the city, its officers and employees for any claim, demand or judgment arising therefrom. 
(Prior code § 2982) 
Table 13.04.280 
TYPE OF BACKFLOW PROTECTION REQUIRED 
Degree of Hazard 	Minimum Type of Backflow Prevention 
A. Sewage and Hazardous Substances. 	
1. Premises where the public water system is used to supplement the reclaimed water supply. 	AG 
2. Premises where there are wastewater pumping and/or treatment plants and there is no interconnection with the potable water system. This does not include a single-family pump. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency of an AG if approved by the heath agency and the city. 	AG 
3. Premises where reclaimed water is used and there is no interconnection with the potable water system. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the city. 	AG 
4. Premises where hazardous substances are handled in any manner in which the substances may enter a potable water system. This does not include a single-family residence that has a sewage lift pump. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG, if approved by the health agency and the city. 	AG 
5. Premises where there are irrigation systems into which fertilizers, herbicides, or pesticides are, or can be injected. 	RP 
B. Auxiliary Water Supplies. 	
1. Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply which is interconnected with the public water system. An RP or DC may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the city. 	AG 
2. Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply and there are no interconnections with the public water system. A DC may be provided in lieu of an RP if approved by the health agency and the city. 	RP 
C. Fire Protection Systems. 	
1. Premises where the fire system is directly supplied from the public water system and there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply on or to the premises (not interconnected). 	DC 
2. Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public water system and interconnected with an unapproved auxiliary water supply. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the city. 	AG 
3. Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public water system and where either elevated storage tanks or fire pumps which take suction from the private reservoirs or tanks are used. 	DC 
D. Premises where entry is restricted so that inspection for cross-connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short notice to assure that cross-connections do not exist. 	RP 
E. Premises where there is a repeated history of cross-connections being established or reestablished. 	RP 
  
Chapter 13.08 - UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS 
Sections: 
 
13.08.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the following words or phrases are used, they shall have the meanings assigned to them as follows: 
"Commission" means the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California. 
"Person" means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and their agents and employees. 
"Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures" means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communications circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above ground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. 
"Underground utility district" or "District" means an area in the city which is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions hereof, within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited; 
"Utility" includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. 
(Prior code § 7500)  
13.08.020 - Determination of need to establish. 
The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety and welfare requires removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric communication or similar or associated service. Such hearing shall be held either upon a determination of the city council or by petition prepared in accordance with Sections 5896.5 and 5896.6 of the Streets and Highways Code. Prior to holding such public hearing, the city engineer shall consult all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such hearing containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities' participation and estimates of the total costs to the city and affected property owners. Such report shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead facilities. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least fifteen days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 2070 § 29, 1992: prior code § 7501)  
13.08.030 - Designation—Time frame for conversion. 
If, after any such public hearing, the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
(Prior code § 7502)  
13.08.040 - Unlawful acts. 
Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 13.08.030, it is be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as the overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 13.08.090, and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7503)  
13.08.050 - Exemption—Emergency or temporary service. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, poles, overhead facilities and associated overhead structures, may be installed and maintained in a district, with the approval of the city manager, in order to provide emergency or temporary service. 
(Prior code § 7504)  
13.08.060 - Exemptions. 
Any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.08.030 shall not, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, apply to any of the following types of facilities: 
A.  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer; 
B.  Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting; 
C.  Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited; 
D.  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred volts; 
E.  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street; 
F.  Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services; 
G.  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts; 
H.  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(Prior code § 7505)  
13.08.070 - Designation—Notification of property owners and utility companies. 
A.  Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.08.030 the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by the resolution of the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities, on file with the commission. 
B.  Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.08.030, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. 
(Prior code § 7506)  
13.08.080 - Utility company's responsibility. 
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.08.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors, and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. 
(Prior code § 7507)  
13.08.090 - Property owner's responsibility. 
A.  Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 13.08.080 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities, on file with the commission. 
B.  In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting the property does not comply with the provisions of subsection A of this section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.08.030, the city engineer shall post written notice on the property being served and, thirty days thereafter, may authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. 
(Prior code § 7508)  
13.08.100 - City's responsibility. 
The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.08.030. 
(Prior code § 7509)  
13.08.110 - Extension of time. 
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.08.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(Prior code § 7510)  
13.08.120 - Violation—Penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable therefor as provided for in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7511)  
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION  
Chapter 15.04 - CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Prior history: Ords. 2023 and 2049. 
 
15.04.010 - Adoption. 
Subject to certain changes and amendments as hereinafter set forth in this chapter, the city council does adopt as the building regulations for the city, the California Building Code Volumes 1 and 2, 2016 edition with errata (Title 24, part 2, California Code of Regulations), based on the 2015 International Building Code, as published by the California Building Standards Commission (hereinafter referred to as the "code"). The code consists of a published compilation of rules, regulations, and standards pertaining to the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings and all structures. The code shall govern, regulate and control all of the activities therein referred to be conducted within the city. One copy of the code is on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection, and the same is made a part thereof as though fully set in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2260 § 1, 2003: Ord. 2197 § 1, 1999: Ord. 2166 § 1, 1997: Ord. 2067 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 8100 (a)) 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 2, 3-10-2010; Ord. No. 2347, § 1, 12-14-2011; Ord. No. 2356, § 2, 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2392, § 2, 1-25-2017)  
15.04.012 - Designation of enforcement. 
The building division is designated and authorized to enforce the regulations of this chapter. The code enforcement division is authorized to enforce the regulations of this chapter, subject to the approval of the building division. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 3, 3-10-2010)  
15.04.015 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2392, § 3, adopted Jan. 25, 2017, deleted § 15.04.015, which pertained to automatic fire sprinkler system and derived from Ord. 2197 § 2, 1999; and Ord. No. 2336, § 4, 3-10-2010.  
15.04.020 - Work exempt from permit requirement. 
Work Exempt From Permit. A building permit shall not be required for the following: 
Wooden or chain link fences not over six feet high and masonry garden walls less than three feet high measured from the top of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding class I, II, or III - A liquids. 
(Ord. 2166 § 2, 1997: Ord. 2067 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 8100 (b) (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 5, 3-10-2010)  
15.04.030 - Building permit fees. 
Section 109.2 of the California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section 109.2. Building Permit Fees. A fee for each building permit shall be paid to the City in an amount set by City Council resolution. 
Plan Checking Fees. When the valuation of the proposed construction exceeds $1,000.00 and a plan is required to be submitted by subsection 107, a plan checking fee, in an amount set by City Council resolution, shall be paid to the City at the time of submitting plans and specifications for checking. 
When plans are incomplete, or changed so as to require additional plan checking, an additional plan check fee shall be charged at a rate established by the Building Official. 
(Ord. 2166 § 3, 1997: Ord. 2067 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 8100 (b) (1)) 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 6, 3-10-2010; Ord. No. 2356, § 3, 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2392, § 4, 1-25-2017)  
15.04.031 - CBC Section 113.1 amended. Board of appeals designated. 
Section 113.1 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 113.1. Board of Appeals Designated. In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and types of construction, and to provide reasonable interpretation of the provisions of this Code, the City Council shall act as the Board of Appeals, as referred to in this Code. The City Council shall serve as the "Housing Appeals Board" and the "Local Appeals Board," as those terms are defined in the CBC. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 7, 3-10-2010; Ord. No. 2356, § 4, 2-26-2014)  
15.04.033 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2392, § 5, adopted Jan. 25, 2017, deleted § 15.04.033, which pertained to CBC Section 1507.1 amended and derived from Ord. 2166 § 4, 1997: Ord. 2049 § 2, 1991; prior code § 8100(b)(3); and Ord. No. 2336, § 8, 3-10-2010.  
15.04.036 - CBC Section 1510.1, amended. 
Section 1510.1 of the California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section 1510.1. General. 
All re-roofing shall conform to the applicable provisions of the California Building Code. Roofing materials and methods of application shall comply with the CBC Standards or shall follow manufacturer's installation requirements when approved by the Building Official. Unless otherwise approved by the Building Official, all existing wood shake or wood shingle roofing material shall be removed completely. Additionally, where applicable, a minimum of one-half inch thick plywood sheathing shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 23 of this Code prior to the installation of new roofing. 
(a) Roof Covering. All re-roofing shall be fire retardant with a minimum class C classification unless otherwise approved by the Building Official. 
(b) Repairs. Not more than twenty-five percent of the roof covering of any building or structure shall be replaced in any twelve-month period unless the new roof covering is made to conform to the requirements of this code for new construction. 
(c) Materials and methods of application. Roofing materials and methods of application shall comply with applicable California Building Code Standards or shall follow the Manufacturer's installation requirements when approved by the Building Official. 
(Ord. 2197 § 3, 1999; Ord. 2166 § 5, 1997: Ord. 2049 § 3, 1991; prior code § 8100(b)(4)) 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 9, 3-10-2010; Ord. No. 2356, § 5, 2-26-2014)  
15.04.040 - CBC Section 903.2 amended. 
Subsection 903.2 is amended by adding thereto the following paragraph: 
Every new building of any type of construction or occupancy over three (3) stories in height. 
(Ord. 2166 § 6, 1997: Ord. 2067 § 1 (part), 1992: prior code § 8100 (b) (2)) 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 10, 3-10-2010)  
15.04.050 - Conflicts with zoning laws. 
In the case of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter, and those of Title 17 of this code, the most restrictive shall apply. 
(Prior code § 8101)  
15.04.060 - Variances. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 15.04.010 through 15.04.040 which have the effect of adopting the California Building Code by reference, with certain amendments thereto, as the building regulations of the city, variances from the provisions thereof may be granted in the manner hereinafter prescribed where practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships or results inconsistent with the intent and purpose of the building regulations occur by reason of the strict and literal interpretation and application of any of the provisions to a proposed or existing building or structure. 
A.  Granting of Variance. Before any variance hereunder is approved, the applicant must show to the satisfaction of the city council the existence of all the following facts: 
1.  That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions which apply to the proposed or existing building or structure by reason of its type of construction or proposed usage, which do not generally apply to other buildings or structures; 
2.  That without the granting of such a variance the proposed or existing building or structure cannot be accommodated by reason of the building regulations imposed by the code; 
3.  That the granting of the variance will not constitute a special privilege nor will the building or structure be structurally inadequate or hazardous nor will it constitute a fire hazard; and 
4.  That the granting of such variance will be consistent with the purpose and intent of the provisions of the California Building Code. 
B.  Procedure. 
1.  A person desiring to obtain a variance from the provisions of the building regulations of this city shall file a written application therefore with the building official. The application shall be upon a form prepared by the building official and shall contain the following information: 
a.  The name and address of the owner of the property or his designated agent; 
b.  The description and location of the property upon which it is proposed to construct the building or structure; 
c.  A detailed set of plans showing the proposed construction; 
d.  A statement of how, and in what manner, the proposed or existing building or structure cannot be made to comply with the existing building regulations, and the reasons therefore; and 
e.  Such other relevant information as may be required to explain and delineate the nature of, and reason for, the requested variance. 
2.  Upon receipt of such an application, the building official shall advise the city clerk thereof, who shall place the matter upon the council agenda for its next most convenient meeting. The applicant, and any other person requesting the same, shall be given five days' written notice of the time and place when the matter will be heard. The notice shall be by the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his last known address. 
C.  Council Action. 
1.  At the time and place for the hearing upon the variance application, the city council shall give the applicant, and any other person interested in such matter, a reasonable opportunity to be heard. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show that all of the facts required by subsection B of this section are present and apply to his application. Based upon the evidence presented, and any applicable staff reports submitted, the city council shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny such application. If the council finds such facts are present, it shall approve the variance. 
2.  Such approval may be conditioned so as to render the construction or reconstruction consistent with the purpose of the building regulations, and compatible with adjacent and surrounding uses. If such facts are found not to exist the application shall be denied. 
3.  The city council may continue the hearing from time to time as may be necessary, at its discretion. The action of the council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 2166 § 7, 1997: Ord. 2067 § 2, 1992; prior code § 8103) 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 11, 3-10-2010)  
15.04.070 - Building permits—Conditions of issuance—Construction of curbs, gutters and sidewalks. 
A.  Improvements Required. Any building permit, issued pursuant to the provisions of this code, for the construction or reconstruction of any building or structure, the estimated cost of which is in excess of seven thousand five hundred dollars shall be issued subject to the condition that the permittee shall construct and install curbs, gutters and sidewalks at his sole expense, in and along all street frontage abutting the lot or lots on which the building or structure is located or to be located, except that: 
1.  Curbs, gutters and sidewalks on one-half acre lots, or larger in the R-A zone, shall only be required in and along one hundred feet of street frontage, located adjacent to the proposed structure. 
2.  Sidewalks shall not be required along any industrial street designated as such by city council resolution. 
3.  The design of all curb and gutter in and along industrial streets, as designated by city council resolution, shall conform to the street design therefor, approved by city council resolution. 
B.  Construction of Improvements. 
1.  Location. To insure uniformity of development, and adaptation to local conditions, curbs, gutters and sidewalks, or curbs and gutters shall be located as designated by the city engineer. 
a.  Public Right-of-Way. Curbs, gutters and sidewalks, or curbs and gutters, shall be constructed within the dedicated public right-of-way, except as hereinafter provided. 
b.  Insufficient Right-of-Way. Whenever the public right-of-way is of insufficient width to permit the location of the improvements therein, the improvements shall be constructed wholly or partially on private property, and, thereafter, the improvements so located on private property, shall be deemed the property of the property owner and shall be maintained by him until such time as an offer of dedication, as to the improvements and right-of-way, is made by the owner and accepted by the city. 
2.  Standards of Construction. Curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with city standards therefor. 
3.  Width of Sidewalks. 
a.  Residential Zones. Sidewalks in all residential zones shall be a width of five feet, except where a greater or lesser width is directed by the city engineer, in order to adapt the width of sidewalks to existing local conditions and situations. 
b.  Commercial and Manufacturing Zones. Sidewalks in all C and M zones shall be constructed in and along the entire width of all parkway areas abutting the lot or lots for which a building permit is issued, except: 
i.  For such portions of the parkway area in which the owner desires to install landscaping, the plans for which have been submitted to the city council for approval; and 
ii.  Relating to such lots where a greater or lesser width is authorized by the city engineer, in order to adapt the width of sidewalks to existing local conditions and situations. 
4.  Faulty or Defective Curbs, Gutters or Sidewalks. Whenever the construction inspector finds that the existing curbs or gutters, or sidewalks, or driveway approaches, or any of them, are faulty or defective and represent a danger to the public safety, the issuance of such a building permit shall be conditioned so as to require the repair, or removal and reconstruction of the improvements. 
C.  Exemption. 
1.  Whenever the city manager, upon written application therefor, finds: 
a.  That the requirements of subsection A of this section work an undue hardship upon the permittee; 
b.  That the public health, safety and welfare do not require the construction of the improvements described in subsection A of this section; and 
c.  That such permittee agrees, in writing, to waive any right to protect any special assessment district proceedings which contemplate the construction of the improvements as described in subsection A of this section, the city manager may waive the requirements of subsection A of this section, 
2.  The city manager may exempt properties from the application of subsection A of this section when it finds that the public interest, convenience and necessity so requires, by reason of unusual and extraordinary circumstances applicable to such properties, such as, imprecise alignment of abutting future street rights-of-way, destruction, or impairment of the use of buildings, or vehicular access. 
(Prior code § 8104)  
15.04.080 - Buildings—Final approval and acceptance—Construction to be completed or guaranteed by deposit. 
The building inspector shall deny final approval and acceptance, and final public utility connection, for any building or dwelling until: 
A.  The curbs, gutters and sidewalks are constructed, or such construction and installation are guaranteed by the deposit with the city of cash, of an instrument of credit as that phrase is defined in Section 66499 of the Government Code of the state, in an amount equal to the fee schedule as established by resolution of the city council; and 
B.  Whenever the city engineer determines that, due to a proposed future street widening, it is impractical to construct curbs, gutters and sidewalks, as required by Section 5.04.070, he shall require the applicant, for a building permit relating to property affected by such widening, to deposit with the city treasurer an amount equal to the estimated cost of construction of such improvements, and require the applicant to execute an agreement with the city, to be executed by the city engineer on behalf of the city, permitting the city to cause such improvements to be constructed using the proceeds of such deposit, at such time as it is practical, in the judgment of the city engineer, to so construct. 
(Ord. 2070 § 30, 1992: prior code § 8105)  
15.04.090 - Swimming pools—Fencing requirements. 
A.  Every person in possession of land within the city, either as owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant or licensee, upon which is situated a swimming pool shall, at all times maintain on the lot or premises upon which such pool is located and completely surrounding such pool, lot or premises, a fence or other solid structure not less than five feet in height with no opening therein (other than doors or gates) larger than six inches square. All gates or doors opening through such enclosure shall be kept closed at all times when not in actual use and shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device placed not less than four feet from the bottom of such structure designed to keep and capable of keeping such door or gate securely closed at all times and when not in actual use; provided, however, that the door of any dwelling occupied by human beings and forming any part of the enclosure hereinabove required need not be so equipped. 
B.  All plans hereafter submitted to the city for swimming pools to be constructed shall show compliance with the requirements of this section, and final inspection and approval of all pools hereafter constructed shall be withheld until all requirements of this section shall have been complied with. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to public swimming pools for which a charge or admission price is required to be paid for use thereof. 
D.  As used in this section, a swimming pool is any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water over twenty-four (24) inches deep. This includes in-ground, aboveground, and on-ground swimming pools and spas, and fixed in-place wading pools. 
(Ord. 2197 § 4, 1999; prior code § 8106)  
15.04.100 - Hillside areas—Building regulations. 
The provisions of this section shall apply to all work, for which a building permit is required, on property within any hillside areas, as defined in Section 15.48.050, in addition to the regulations as set forth in this chapter and Chapter 15.48 of this code. In all such cases, the building inspector shall not give final approval to any such work until he finds that each of the following regulations have been complied with: 
A.  Compliance With Grading Regulations: 
1.  Filing of a grading certificate from the city engineer; or 
2.  Compliance with each of the following regulations in all cases where a grading permit is not required: 
a.  Section 15.48.260, grading in relation to property lines, 
b.  Section 15.48.270, Consent of adjacent property owner, 
c.  Section 15.48.280, Time of work, 
d.  Section 15.48.290, Building pad development, 
e.  Section 15.48.310 through 15.48.340, excavating, 
f.  Section 15.48.350 through 15.48.450, fills, 
g.  Section 15.48.480, Slope planting and irrigation, 
h.  Section 15.48.500, drainage (general), 
i.  Section 15.48.550, maintenance of grading and protective devices. 
B.  Gutters. Eave and/or ground gutters shall be provided to receive all roof water and deliver it through a nonerosive device to a street or watercourse. 
C.  Maintenance of Drainage. Drainage in conformance with the provisions of this code shall be maintained during and subsequent to construction. 
D.  Driveway Design. Driveways shall be designed to comply with all zoning regulations; provided, that the maximum gradient thereof shall not exceed twenty percent. 
E.  Building Construction. No building shall be constructed upon two-horizontal-to-one-vertical slope or steeper, except that the building inspector shall permit construction upon slopes steeper than 2.1; provided, that a soils report from a qualified soils engineer or engineering geologist is filed indicating that the existing soil condition will permit such construction. Where allowed, adequate provision shall be made to prevent downhill creep of the footings. 
1.  Clearance. 
a.  No building or structure shall be located closer to the toe of any two-to-one or steeper, cut or fill slope than the following: 
i.  A minimum of three feet provided the slope does not exceed six feet in vertical height; 
ii.  One-half the vertical height with a maximum of fifteen feet where the slope exceeds six feet in height. 
b.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, attached or detached open carports or detached garages may be constructed a minimum of three feet clear of the toe of conforming cut or fill slopes. 
2.  Building Construction on Compacted Filled Ground. (General). No building shall be located within a horizontal distance of forty feet from the top of an inclined fill slope which exceeds one hundred feet in vertical height measured from the toe to the top of the fill unless the building is designed to withstand the resulting total and differential settlements. The soils engineer shall submit evidence of the anticipated settlement behavior. (See Exhibit 15.04.100 (J) for further setback specifications.) 
3.  Footing Elevations. 
a.  On graded hillside sites the top of footing stem or finish floor, if a concrete slab, shall extend above the elevation of the low point of the street curb a minimum of six inches, plus two percent of the distance from the footing to the curb. 
b.  Where the site drains to an approved drainage device, the footings shall extend above the elevation of the low point of the device a minimum of six inches, plus two percent of the distance from the footing to the device. In no event shall the top of the footing or finished floor elevation be less than six inches above the finished building pad elevation. 
4.  Slough Wall. If potential sloughing hazards affecting buildings or structures are present on cut or fill slopes in excess of twenty feet in vertical height, where such slopes parallel the buildings or structures, slough protection devices may be required by the department. 
F.  Building Construction Upon Excavations or Fills or in Areas Subject to Drainage or Slide Hazards. When buildings are to be constructed on sites which result from grading performed pursuant to Chapter 15.48 of this code or in areas where hazardous soil conditions exist, then in additional to all other applicable provisions of this code, the following requirements shall be complied with: 
1.  No building inspections shall be made for approvals given thereto until the city engineer has certified compliance with the rough grading as detailed on the grading plan and has received the soils and geological reports. 
2.  No final building inspections shall be made or approvals given thereto until the city engineer has certified compliance with Chapter 15.48 of this code. 
3.  No building shall be constructed in a natural watercourse or an area subject to inundation unless provisions have been made, to the satisfaction of the city engineer, to protect he building and adjacent properties from damage or inundation. 
4.  No building shall be constructed where the proposed building site is in an area subject to slides or unstable soil unless provision has been made, to the satisfaction of the city engineer, to protect the building and adjacent properties from damage. 
G.  Old Fills. 
1.  All manmade fills which were not constructed under a valid grading permit issued by the city shall be tested for relative compaction by an approved soil testing agency before any building permit is issued for a building structure proposed to be located thereon. No building permit shall be issued if the site conditions, as reported upon by the soil testing agency, do not conform with the requirements of this code. 
2.  Buildings designed specifically for soil conditions applicable to the site may be approved by the superintendent of building inspection if sufficient evidence is submitted to the superintendent accommodating the soil condition by reason of the resultant building design. 
H.  Measurement of Settlement. The superintendent of building inspection may require the determination of a soils engineer regarding settlement characteristics of such fills to establish that movements have substantially ceased. In such cases, a system of benchmarks shall be installed at critical points on the fill and accurate measurements of both horizontal and vertical movements shall be taken for a period of time sufficient to define settlement behavior. 
I.  Landscaping Required. In addition to the required landscaping of slopes, all building pads shall be landscaped or surfaced to prevent dust, mud, erosion or unsanitary conditions. 
J.  Appendix A. Attached hereto, and incorporated herein by this reference is that certain document entitled "Exhibit 15.04.100(J)—Montebello Municipal Code—Building Regulations," dated April 24, 1967, which contains certain charts, diagrams and standards relating to building construction in hillside areas. All property in any hillside area shall be improved and maintained in conformity with the charts, diagrams and standards as set forth in Exhibit 15.04.100(J). 
(Prior code § 8107) 
Exhibit 15.04.100(J) 
MONTEBELLO MUNICIPAL CODE 
BUILDING REGULATIONS 
April 24, 1967 
  
Exhibit 15.04.100(J) 
MONTEBELLO MUNICIPAL CODE 
BUILDING REGULATIONS 
April 24, 1967 
  
Exhibit 15.04.100(J) 
MONTEBELLO MUNICIPAL CODE 
BUILDING REGULATIONS 
April 24, 1967 
REQUIRED SETBACKS 
  
Exhibit 15.04.100(J) 
MONTEBELLO MUNICIPAL CODE 
BUILDING REGULATIONS 
April 24, 1967 
DRAINAGE SWALE DETAILS 
   
15.04.110 - Driveways—Construction standards. 
The width and location of all driveways hereafter constructed, or reconstructed, within the city shall be in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
A.  Definitions. 
1.  "Driveway" means that portion of a dedicated street between the right-of-way line and curb, or the edge of the pavement, if no curb exists, where motor vehicles travel when entering or leaving property abutting the street. 
2.  "Driveway width" means the net width thereof, exclusive of side slopes and returns, measured along the curb line or, if none exists, measured along a line parallel to the centerline of the street. 
B.  Width of Driveways. The city engineer shall approve the width of driveways so as to insure that the same will not constitute a hazard to pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic, nor encroach upon, or constitute a nuisance as to, adjacent and/or abutting properties. 
C.  Location of Driveways. The city engineer shall approve the location of driveways so as to insure that the same will not constitute a hazard to pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic, nor encroach upon, or constitute a nuisance as to, adjacent and/or abutting properties. 
D.  Construction. All driveways shall be constructed in accordance with the city standards therefor. 
(Prior code § 8122.1)  
Chapter 15.06 - CALIFORNIA CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 
 
15.06.010 - Adoption. 
Subject to certain changes and amendments hereinafter set forth in this chapter, the city council does adopt, as the housing regulation for the city, the "Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition," copyrighted and adopted by the International Conference of Building Officials, which provides equitable remedies consistent with other laws for the repair, vacation, or demolition of dangerous buildings. One copy of the code is on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection, and the same is made a part hereof as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2197 § 5, 1999)  
15.06.012 - Designation of enforcement. 
The building division is designated and authorized to enforce the regulations of this chapter. The code enforcement division is authorized to enforce the regulations of this chapter, subject to the approval of the building division. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 13, 3-10-2010)  
15.06.020 - Section 205.1 adopted. 
Section 205.1 of the Uniform for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code is adopted by reference to read as follows: 
In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and types of construction, and to provide reasonable interpretation of provisions of this code, the city council shall act as the board of appeals as referred to in this code. 
(Ord. 2197 § 6, 1999)  
Chapter 15.08 - BUILDING CODE SECURITY REGULATIONS 
 
15.08.010 - Scope. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to new construction and to buildings or structures to which additions or alterations are made except as specifically provided by this chapter. When additions or alterations made within any twelve-month period exceed fifty percent of the value of the existing buildings or structures, such buildings or structures shall be made to conform to the security requirements for new buildings and structures. 
B.  Existing multiple-family dwelling units and commercial buildings (multiple occupancy) which are converted to privately-owned units (condominiums) shall comply with the provisions of Sections 15.08.100 and 15.08.110, respectively. 
C.  Any existing structure which converts from its original occupancy group as designated in the California Building Code, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Any building as defined in the CBC and Title 19 of the California Code of Regulations, requiring special type releasing, latching or locking devices, other than described herein, shall be exempt from the provisions hereof relating to locking devices of interior and/or exterior doors. 
(Prior code § 8127) 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 14, 3-10-2010; Ord. No. 2392, § 6, 1-25-2017)  
15.08.012 - Designation of enforcement. 
The building division is designated and authorized to enforce the regulations of this chapter. The code enforcement division is authorized to enforce the regulations of this chapter, subject to the approval of the building division. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 15, 3-10-2010)  
15.08.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of all buildings and structures within the city, as required in Section 14051 of the California Penal Code relating to building security. 
(Prior code § 8125)  
15.08.030 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter certain terms are defined as follows: 
"Approved" means certified as meeting the requirements of this chapter by the enforcing authority or its authorized agents, or by other officials designated by law to give approval on a particular matter dealt with by the provisions of this chapter with regard to a given material, mode of construction, piece of equipment or device. 
"Auxiliary locking device" means a secondary locking system added to the primary locking system to provide additional security. 
"Bolt" means a metal bar which, when actuated, is projected (or thrown) either horizontally or vertically into a retaining member, such as a strike plate, to prevent a door or window from moving or opening. 
"Bolt projection" or "bolt throw" means the distance from the edge of the door, at the bolt centerline, to the farthest point on the bolt in the projected position. 
"Burglary resistant glazing" means those materials as defined in UL Bulletin 972. 
"Commercial building" means a building, or portion thereof, used for a purpose other than dwelling. 
"Component" as distinguished from a part, means a subassembly which combines with other components to make up a total door or window assembly. For example, the primary components of a door assembly include: door, lock, hinges, jamb/wall, jamb/strike and wall. 
"Cylinder" means the subassembly of a lock containing the cylinder core, tumbler mechanism and keyway. A double-cylinder lock is one which has a key-actuated cylinder on both the exterior and interior of the door. 
"Cylinder core of cylinder plug" means the central part of a cylinder containing the keyway, which is rotated by a key to operate the lock mechanism. 
"Cylinder guard" means a tapered or flush metal ring or plate surrounding the otherwise exposed portion of a cylinder lock to resist cutting, drilling, prying, pulling, or wrenching with common tools. 
"Deadbolt" means a lock bolt which does not have a spring action as opposed to a latch bolt, which does. The bolt must be actuated by a key or a key and a knob or thumb turn and when projected becomes locked against return by end pressure. 
"Dead latch or deadlocking latch both" means a spring-actuated latch bolt having a beveled end and incorporating a plunger which, when depressed, automatically locks the projected latch bolt against return by end pressure. 
"Door assembly" means a unit composed of a group of parts or components which make up a closure for an opening to control passageway through a wall. For the purpose of this chapter, a door assembly consists of the following parts: door, hinges; locking device or devices; operation contacts (such as handles, knobs, push plates); miscellaneous hardware and closures; the frame, including the head, threshold and jambs plus the anchorage devices to the surrounding wall and a position of the surrounding wall extending thirty-six inches from each side of the jambs and sixteen inches above the head. 
"Door stop" means that projection along the top and sides of a door jamb which checks the door's swinging action. 
"Double-cylinder deadbolt" means a deadbolt lock which can be activated only by a key on both the interior and the exterior. 
"Dwelling" means a building or portion thereof designed exclusively for residential occupancy, including single-family and multiple-family dwellings. 
"Enforcing authority" means the building superintendent. 
"Flushpoint" means a manual, key or turn operated metal bolt normally used on inactive door(s) and is attached to the top and bottom of the door and engages in the head and threshold of the frame. 
"Fully tempered glass" means those materials meeting or exceeding ANSI standard Z 97.1—Safety Glazing. 
"Jamb" means the vertical members of a door frame to which the door is secured. 
"Jamb/Wall" means that component of a door assembly to which a door is attached and secured. The wall and jamb used together are considered a unit. 
"Key-in-knob" means a lockset having the key cylinder and other lock mechanisms contained in the knob. 
"Latch" or "latch bolt" means a beveled, spring-actuated bolt which may or may not have a deadlocking device. 
"Lock" or "Lockset" means a keyed device (complete with cylinder, latch or deadbolt mechanism, and trim such as knobs, levers, thumb turns, escutcheons, etc.) for securing a door in a closed position against forced entry. For the purpose of this chapter, a lock does not include the strike plate. 
"Locking device" means a part of a window assembly which is intended to prevent movement of the movable sash, which may be the sash lock or sash operator. 
"Multiple-family dwelling" means a building or portion thereof designed for occupancy by four or more families living independently of each other, including hotels, motels, apartments, duplexes and townhomes. 
"Panic hardware" means a latching device on a door assembly for use when emergency egress is required due to fire or other threat to life safety. Devices designed so that they will facilitate the safe egress of people in case of an emergency when a pressure not to exceed fifteen pounds is applied to the releasing device in the direction of exit travel. Such releasing devices are bars or panels extending not less than two-thirds of the width of the door and placed at heights suitable for the service required, not less than thirty, not more than forty-four inches above the floor. 
"Part" as distinguished from component, means a unit (or subassembly) which combines with other units to make up a component. 
"Primary locking device" means the single locking system on a door or window unit whose primary function is to prevent unauthorized intrusion. 
"Private or single-family dwelling" means a building designed exclusively for occupancy by one family. 
"Rail" means the horizontal member of a window or door. A meeting rail is one which mates with a rail of another sash or a framing member of the door or window frame when the sash is in the closed position. 
"Sash" means an assembly of stiles, rails, and sometimes, mullions assembled into a single frame which supports the glazing material. A "fixed sash" is one which is not intended to be opened. A "movable sash" is intended to be opened. 
"Sill" means the lowest horizontal member of a window frame. 
"Single cylinder deadbolt" means a deadbolt lock which is activated from the outside by a key and from the inside by a knob, thumbturn, lever, or similar mechanism. 
"Solid-core door" means a door composed of a solid wood or composed of compressed wood equal in strength to solid wood construction. 
"Stile" means a vertical framing member of a window or door. 
"Strike" means a metal plate attached to or mortised into a door or door jamb to receive and to hold a projected latch bolt and/or deadbolt in order to secure the door to the jamb. 
"Swinging door" means a door hinged at the stile or at the head and threshold. 
"UL listed" means tested and listed by Underwriters Laboratory, Inc. 
"Window assembly" means a unit which includes a window and the anchorage between the window and the wall. 
"Window frame" means that part of a window which surrounds and supports the sashes and is attached to the surrounding wall. The members include side jamb (vertical), head jamb (upper, horizontal), sill and mullions. 
(Prior code § 8128)  
15.08.040 - Fees. 
The city council shall, by resolution, establish filing and processing fees involving these regulations. 
(Prior code § 8126)  
15.08.050 - Keying requirements. 
Upon occupancy by the owner or proprietor, each single unit in a tract or commercial development, constructed under the same general plan, shall have locks using combinations which are interchange free from locks used in all other separate dwellings, proprietorships or similar distinct occupancies. Every applicant shall be required to provide the enforcing authority with written conformation of compliance with these requirements. 
(Prior code § 8135)  
15.08.060 - Frames, jambs, strikes and hinges. 
Installation and construction of frames, jambs, strikes and hinges shall be as follows: 
A.  Door jambs shall be installed with solid backing in such a manner that no voids exist between the strike side of the jamb and the frame opening for a vertical distance of six inches each side of the strike. 
B.  In wood framing, horizontal blocking shall be placed between studs at door lock height for three stud spaces each side of the door openings. Trimmers shall be full length from header to the floor with solid backing against sole plates. 
C.  Door stops on wooden jambs for in-swinging doors shall be of one-piece construction with the jamb. Jambs for all doors shall be constructed or protected so as to prevent violation of strike. 
D.  The strike plate for deadbolts on all wood-framed doors shall be constructed of minimum sixteen U.S. gauge steel, bronze or brass, and secured to the jamb by a minimum of two screws, which must penetrate at least two inches into solid backing beyond the surface to which the strike is attached. 
E.  Hinges for out-swinging doors shall be equipped with nonremovable hinge pins or a mechanical interlock to preclude removal of the door from the exterior by removing the hinge pins. 
(Prior code § 8136)  
15.08.070 - Windows and sliding glass doors. 
The following requirements shall be met for windows, sliding glass doors, other doors and locking devices: 
A.  Testing Standards. 
1.  Except as otherwise specified in Section 15.08.100 (Special residential building provisions) and Section 15.08.110 (Special commercial building provisions), all operable exterior windows and sliding glass doors shall comply with approved standards. 
2.  Louvered windows shall not be used when any portion of the window is less than twelve feet vertically or six feet horizontally from an accessible surface or any adjoining roof, balcony, landing, stair tread, platform, or similar structure. 
(Ord. 2166 § 8, 1997: prior code § 8137)  
15.08.080 - Garage-type doors—Rolling overhead, solid overhead, swing, sliding or accordion. 
The garage-type doors, rolling overhead, solid overhead, swing, sliding or accordion, shall conform to the following standards: 
A.  Wood doors shall have panels a minimum of three-eighths inch in thickness, with the locking hardware being attached to the support framing. Vertical support framing members shall be spaced at twenty-four inches maximum, on center. 
B.  Aluminum doors shall be a minimum thickness of .0215 inches and riveted together a minimum of eighteen inches on center along the outside seam. There shall be a full-width horizontal beam attached to the main door structure, which shall meet the pilot or pedestrian access, door framing within three inches of the strike area of the pilot or pedestrian access door. 
C.  Fiberglass doors shall have panels a minimum density of six ounces per square foot from the bottom of the door to a height of seven feet. Panels above seven feet and panels in residential structures shall have a density of not less than five ounces per square foot. 
D.  Doors utilizing a cylinder lock shall have a minimum five-pin tumbler operation with the locking bar or bolt extending into the receiving guide a minimum of one inch. 
E.  Doors that exceed sixteen feet in width shall have two lock receiving points; or, if the door does not exceed nineteen feet, a single bolt may be used if placed in the center of the door with the locking point located either at the floor or door frame header; or, torsion spring counter balance type hardware may be used. 
F.  Except in a residential building, doors secured by electrical operation shall have a keyed-switch to open the door when in a closed position, or by a signal locking device. 
G.  Doors with slide bolt assemblies shall have frames a minimum of .120 inches in thickness, with a minimum bolt diameter of one-half inch and protrude at least one and one-half inches into the receiving guide. A bolt diameter of three-eighths inch may be used in a residential building. The slide bolt shall be attached to the door with nonremovable bolts from the outside. Rivets shall not be used to attach slide bolt assemblies. 
H.  Except in a residential building, padlock(s) used with exterior-mounted slide bolt(s) shall have a hardened steel shackle locking both at heel and toe and a minimum five-pin tumbler operation with nonremovable key when in an unlocked position. Padlock(s) used with interior-mounted slide bolt(s) shall have a hardened steel shackle with a minimum four-pin tumbler operation. 
(Prior code § 8138)  
15.08.090 - Addition to California Building Code—Security bars, grills or screens. 
A.  Every person who owns, operates or maintains any hotel, apartment house or dwelling on which security bars, grills or screens exist, or are hereinafter installed, shall install or modify the security bars, grills or screens so that the same are removable or can be opened from the inside of the building without the need of a key, tool or excessive force. When in the removed or open position, the net unobstructed open area shall not be less than that which would exist if such bars, grills or screens were not in place. The provisions of this section shall apply only to the exterior doors and one window at least five square feet in size located in each bedroom or other room utilized for sleeping purposes. 
B.  Any existing facilities not in conformity with the provisions hereof shall be modified to conform to the requirements of this section within one year following the effective date thereof. 
(Prior code § 8141) 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 16, 3-10-2010)  
15.08.100 - Special residential building provisions. 
A.  Except for vehicular access doors, all exterior swinging doors of any residential building and attached garages, including the door leading from the garage area into the dwelling unit, shall be equipped as follows: 
1.  All wood doors shall be of solid-core construction with a minimum thickness of one and three-fourths inches, or with panels not less than nine-sixteenths inch thick. 
2.  A single or double door shall be equipped with a double or single cylinder deadbolt lock. If a double cylinder deadbolt lock is used, it shall comply with the California Building Code's existing requirements. The bolt shall have a minimum projection of one inch and be constructed so as to repel cutting tool attack. The deadbolt shall have an embedment of at least three-fourths inch into the strike receiving the projected bolt. The cylinder shall have a cylinder guard, a minimum of five-pin tumblers, and shall be connected to the inner portion of the lock by connecting screws of at least one-fourth inch in diameter. All installation shall be done so that the performance of the locking device will meet the intended anti-burglary requirements. A dual-locking mechanism constructed so that both deadbolt and latch can be retracted by a single action of the inside door knob or lever may be substituted provided it meets all other specifications for locking devices. 
3.  The inactive leaf of double door(s) shall be equipped with metal flush bolts having a minimum embedment of five-eighths inch into the head and threshold of the door frame. 
4.  Glazing in exterior doors or within forty inches of any locking mechanism shall be of fully tempered glass or rated burglary-resistant glazing, except when double-cylinder deadbolt locks are installed. 
a.  Except where clear vision panels are installed, all front exterior doors shall be equipped with a wide angle one hundred eighty degree door viewer. 
B.  Street numbers and other identifying data shall be displayed as follows: 
1.  All residential dwellings shall display a street number in a prominent location on the street side and/or alley side of the residence in such a position that the number is easily visible to approaching emergency vehicles. The numerals shall be no less than four inches in height and shall be of a contrasting color to the background to which they are attached. 
2.  There shall be positioned at each entrance of a multiple-family dwelling complex an illuminated diagrammatic representation of the complex which shows the location of the viewer and the unit designations within the complex. In addition, each individual unit within the complex shall display a prominent identification number, not less than four inches in height, which is easily visible to approaching vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic. 
3.  Buildings shall be numbered in such a manner and sequence to meet with the approval of the enforcing authority, including the police and fire departments. 
4.  Flag lots and driveways more than forty feet shall display street numbers in such a position that the number is easily visible to approaching emergency vehicles. 
5.  In multiple-family dwelling complexes, individual buildings shall have their respective street number ranges and/or letters as the case may be prominently displayed in a manner that facilitates emergency vehicles. An eight and one-half by eleven inch map of the complex shall be furnished to the police and fire departments prior to completion of construction. The maps shall include building identification and unit identification. 
C.  Lighting in multiple-family dwellings shall be as follows: 
1.  Aisles, passageways and recesses related to and within the building complex shall be illuminated with an intensity of at least .25 foot-candles at the ground level during the hours of darkness. Lighting devices shall be protected by weather and vandalism resistant covers. 
2.  Open parking lots and carports shall be provided with a maintained minimum one foot-candle of light on the parking surface during the hours of darkness. Lighting devices shall be protected by weather and vandalism resistant covers. 
3.  All required lighting shall be designed to turn on automatically. Luminaries shall be directed or shielded so as to not be directly visible from any dwelling unit or cause off-site glare or nuisances. 
(Prior code § 8139) 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 17, 3-10-2010)  
15.08.110 - Special commercial provisions. 
A.  Swinging exterior glass doors, wood or metal doors with glass panels, solid wood or metal doors shall be constructed or protected as follows: 
1.  Wood doors shall be solid-core construction with a minimum thickness of one and three-fourths inches. Wood panel doors with panels less than one-inch thick shall be covered on the inside with a minimum sixteen U.S. gauge steel, or its equivalent, which is to be attached with screws on minimum six-inch centers. Hollow steel doors shall be of a minimum sixteen U.S. gauge and have sufficient reinforcement to maintain the designed thickness of the door when any locking device is installed; such reinforcement being able to restrict collapsing of the door around the locking device. 
2.  Except when double cylinder deadbolts are utilized, any glazing utilized within forty inches of any door locking mechanism shall be constructed or protected as follows: 
a.  Fully tempered glass or rated burglary-resistant glazing; or 
b.  Iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth-inch material with a minimum two-inch mesh secured on the inside of the glazing may be utilized; or 
c.  The glazing shall be covered with iron bars of at least one-half inch round or one inch by one-fourth inch flat steel material, spaced not more than five inches apart, secured on the inside of the glazing. 
Paragraphs b and c of this subdivision shall not interfere with the operation of opening windows if such windows are required to be openable by the California Building Code. 
B.  All swinging exterior doors shall be equipped as follows: 
1.  A single or double door shall be equipped with a double or single cylinder deadbolt. If a double-cylinder deadbolt is used, it shall comply with the California Building Code existing requirements. The bolt shall have a minimum projection of one inch and be constructed so as to repel cutting tool attack. The deadbolt shall have an embedment of at least three-fourths inch into the strike receiving the projected bolt. The cylinder shall have a cylinder guard, a minimum of five-pin tumblers, and shall be connected to the inner portion of the lock by connecting screws of at least one-fourth inch in diameter. The preceding provisions do not apply where: 
a.  Panic hardware is required; or 
b.  An equivalent device is approved by enforcing authority. 
2.  Double doors shall be equipped as follows: 
a.  The inactive leaf of double door(s) shall be equipped with metal flush bolts having a minimum embedment of five-eighths inch into the head and threshold of the door frame. 
b.  Double doors shall have an astragal construction of steel a minimum .125 inches thick, which will cover the opening between the doors. The astragal shall be a minimum of two inches wide and extend a minimum of one inch beyond the edge of the door to which it is attached. The astragal shall be attached to the outside of the active door by means of welding or with non-removable bolts spaced apart on not more than ten-inch centers. The door to which such astragal is attached must be determined by the fire safety codes adopted by the City. 
C.  Aluminum-frame swinging doors shall be equipped as follows: 
1.  The jamb on all aluminum-frame swinging doors shall be so constructed or protected to withstand one thousand six hundred pounds of pressure in both a vertical distance of three inches and a horizontal distance of one inch each side of the strike, so as to prevent violation of the strike. 
2.  A single or double door shall be equipped with a double-cylinder deadbolt with a bolt projection exceeding one inch, or a hook-shaped or expanding dog bolt that engages the strike sufficiently to prevent spreading. The deadbolt lock shall have a minimum of five-pin tumblers and a cylinder guard. 
D.  Panic hardware, whenever required by the California Building Code or Title 19 of the California Administrative Code, shall be installed as follows: 
1.  Panic hardware shall contain a minimum of two locking points on each door; or 
2.  On single doors, panic hardware may have one locking point which is not to be located at either the top or bottom rails of the door frame. The door shall have an astragal construction of steel .125 inches thick, which shall be attached with non-removable bolts to the outside of the door. The astragal shall extend a minimum of six inches vertically above and below the latch of the panic hardware. The astragal shall be a minimum of two inches vertically above and below the latch of the panic hardware. The astragal shall be a minimum of two inches wide and extend a minimum of one inch beyond the edge of the door to which it is attached; or 
3.  Double doors containing panic hardware shall have an astragal attached to the doors at their meeting point which will close the opening between them, but not interfere with the operation of either door. 
E.  Horizontal sliding doors shall be equipped with a metal guide track at top and bottom and a cylinder lock and/or padlock with a hardened steel shackle which locks at both heel and toe, and a minimum five-pin tumbler operation with non-removable key when in unlocked position. The bottom track shall be so designed that the door cannot be lifted from the track when the door is in a locked position. 
F.  In office buildings (multiple occupancy), all entrance doors to individual office suites shall meet the construction and locking requirements for exterior doors. 
G.  Windows shall be deemed accessible if less than twelve feet above the ground. Accessible windows having a pane exceeding ninety-six square inches in an area with the smallest dimension exceeding six inches and not visible form a public or private thoroughfare shall be protected in the following manner: 
1.  Fully-tempered glass or burglary-resistant glazing; or 
2.  The following window barriers may be used, but shall be secured with non-removable bolts: 
a.  Inside or outside iron bars of at least one-half inch round or one by one-quarter inch flat steel material, spaced not more than five inches apart and securely fastened, or 
b.  Inside or outside iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth inch material with not more than a two-inch mesh and securely fastened. 
If a side or rear window is of the type that can be opened, it shall, where applicable, be secured on the inside with either a slide bar, bolt, crossbar, auxiliary locking device and/or padlock with hardened steel shackle, a minimum four-pin tumbler operation; 
The protective bars or grills shall not interfere with the operation of opening windows if such windows are required to be openable by the California Building Code. 
H.  All exterior transoms exceeding ninety-six square inches on the side and rear of any building or premises used for business purposes shall be protected by one of the following: 
1.  Fully-tempered glass or rated burglary-resistant glazing; or 
2.  The following barriers may be used but shall be secured with non-removable bolts: 
a.  Outside iron bars of at least one-half inch round or one by one-quarter inch flat steel material, spaced no more than five inches apart and securely fastened, or 
b.  Outside iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth inch with not more than a two-inch mesh and securely fastened. 
The protective bars or grills shall not interfere with the operation of opening the transoms if such transoms are required to be openable by the California Building Code or Title 19 of the California Administrative Code. 
I.  Roof openings shall be equipped as follows: 
1.  All skylights on the roof of any building or premises used for business purposes shall be provided with: 
a.  Rated burglary-resistant glazing; or 
b.  Iron bars of at least one-half inch round or one by one-fourth inch flat steel material under the skylight and securely fastened; or 
c.  A steel grill of at least one-eighth inch material with a maximum two-inch mesh under the skylight and securely fastened. 
2.  All hatchway openings on the roof of any building or premises used for business purposes shall be secured as follows: 
a.  If the hatchway is of wooden material, it shall be covered on the inside with at least sixteen U.S. gauge sheet metal, or its equivalent, attached with screws. 
b.  The hatchway shall be secured from the inside with a slide bar or slide bolts. 
c.  Outside hinges on all hatchway openings shall be provided with non-removable pins when using pin-type hinges. 
3.  All air duct or air vent openings exceeding ninety-six square inches on the roof or exterior walls of any building or premises used for business purposes shall be secured by covering the same with either of the following: 
a.  Iron bars of at least one-half inch round or one by one-fourth inch flat steel material spaced no more than five inches apart and securely fastened; or 
b.  Iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth inch material with a maximum two-inch mesh and securely fastened. 
If the barrier is on the outside, it shall be secured with bolts which are non-removable from the exterior. 
Paragraphs a and b of this subdivision must not interfere with venting requirements creating a potentially hazardous condition to health and safety or conflict with the provisions of the California Building Code or Title 19 or the California Administrative Code. 
J.  Permanently fixed ladders leading to roofs shall be fully enclosed with sheet metal to a height of ten feet. This covering shall be locked against the ladder with a case-hardened hasp, secured with non-removable screws or bolts. Hinges on the cover will be provided with non-removable pins when using pin-type hinges. If a padlock is used, it shall have a hardened steel shackle, locking at both heel and toe, and a minimum five-pin tumbler operation with non-removable key when in unlocked position. 
K.  A building located within eight feet of utility poles, or similar structures, which can be used to gain access to the building's roof, windows or other openings, shall have such access area barricaded or fenced with materials to deter human climbing. 
L.  The following standards shall apply to lighting, address identification and parking areas: 
1.  The address number of every commercial building shall be illuminated during the hours of darkness so that it shall be easily visible from the street. The numerals in these numbers shall be no less than six inches in height and be of a color contrasting to the background. In addition, any business which affords vehicular access to the rear through any driveway, alleyway or parking lot shall also display the same numbers on the rear of the building. 
2.  All exterior commercial doors, during the hours of darkness, shall be illuminated with a minimum of one foot-candle light. All exterior bulbs shall be protected by weather and vandalism resistant cover(s). 
3.  Open parking lots and access thereto, for use by the general public, shall be provided with a maintained minimum of one foot-candle light on the parking surface from dusk until the termination of business every operating day. 
4.  All required lighting shall be designed to turn on and off automatically. Luminaries shall be directed or shielded so as to not be directly visible from any dwelling unit or cause offsite glare or nuisance. 
(Prior code § 8140) 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 18, 3-10-2010)  
15.08.120 - Alternate materials and methods of construction. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this chapter, provided any such alternate has been approved by the enforcing authority, nor is it the intention of this chapter to exclude any sound method of structural design or analysis not specifically provided for in this chapter. Material, methods of construction, or structural design limitations provided for in this chapter are to be used unless an exception is granted by the enforcing authority. 
B.  The enforcing authority may approve any such alternate provided they find the proposed design to be satisfactory and the material and method of work is, for the purpose intended, at least equivalent to that prescribed in this chapter in quality, strength, effectiveness, burglary resistance, durability and safety. 
(Prior code § 8134)  
15.08.130 - Appeals. 
In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and methods of construction and to provide for reasonable interpretations of the provisions of this chapter, a board consisting of the fire chief, the city planner and the chief of police, or their appointed representatives, shall hear all disputes. The board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its hearings and will issue written findings and conclusions within ten days. Thereafter, if the applicant is not satisfied with the decision of the board, he or she may appeal that decision to the city council. 
(Prior code § 8132)  
15.08.140 - Enforcement—Authority. 
The building official, code enforcement supervisor subject to building division approval, or his/her authorized representatives are empowered and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter relating to physical security requirements for buildings in the city. Plans and specifications for proposed construction must be approved by the building official or his authorized representatives in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. No building permit is to be finally approved or utility release given unless the applicant for the permit has satisfied the enforcing authority that applicant has complied with this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8129) 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 19, 3-10-2010)  
15.08.150 - Enforcement—Right of entry. 
The enforcing authority shall have the right, and is authorized and empowered, to enter or go on or about any building or premises between eight a.m. and five p.m. for the purpose of inspecting the physical security of such building or premises, or for any other purposes consistent herewith. The enforcing authority shall be given prompt access to any area of the building or premises upon oral notification to the responsible person, and upon exhibiting suitable evidence of their identity and authority; provided, however, that except in an emergency situation, an inspection warrant issued pursuant to Title 13, part 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Sections 1822.50 to 1822.57, inclusive) shall first be secured when entry or access thereto is refused. 
(Prior code § 8130)  
15.08.160 - Violations—Penalty. 
A.  Subject to the scope of those provisions, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, move, improve, convert, or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable for each offense, by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or by confinement in jail for not more than six months, or by both fine and confinement in jail. 
(Prior code § 8131)  
Chapter 15.12 - CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE 
 
15.12.010 - Adoption. 
Subject to certain changes and amendments hereinafter set forth in this chapter, the city council does adopt, as the mechanical regulations for the city, the California Mechanical Code, 2016 edition with errata (Title 24, Part 4, California Code of Regulations), based on the 2015 Uniform Mechanical Code, as published by the California Building Standards Commission (hereinafter referred to as the "code") which provides for the protection of the public health and safety by prescribing minimum standards for the use, design and installation of heating and cooking equipment, boilers, and similar equipment, and requires a permit and inspection for the installation, alteration and replacement of such equipment. One copy of the code is on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection, and the same is made a part hereof as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2260 § 2, 2003: Ord. 2197 § 7, 1999: Ord. 2166 § 9, 1997: Ord. 2067 § 8, 1992: Ord. 2023 § 8, 1990: prior code § 8900 (a)) 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 21, 3-10-2010; Ord. No. 2347, § 2, 12-14-2011; Ord. No. 2356, § 6, 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2392, § 7, 1-25-2017)  
15.12.012 - Designation of enforcement. 
The building division is designated and authorized to enforce the regulations of this chapter. The code enforcement division is authorized to enforce the regulations of this chapter, subject to the approval of the building division. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 22, 3-10-2010)  
15.12.020 - CMC Section 107.7 amended—Board of appeals designated. 
Section 110.1 of the California Mechanical Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 107.7. In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and types of construction, and to provide a reasonable interpretation of the provisions of this Code, the City Council shall act as the Board of Appeals, as referred to in this Code. 
(Ord. 2166 § 10, 1997: prior code § 8900 (b)) 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 23, 3-10-2010; Ord. No. 2356, § 7, 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2392, § 8, 1-25-2017)  
15.12.030 - CMC Section 104.5 amended—Permit fees. 
Section 104.5 of the California Mechanical Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section 104.5. Any person desiring a permit required by this Code shall, at the time of filing an application therefore, pay a fee in the amount set by City Council Resolution. 
(Ord. 2166 § 11, 1997: prior code § 8900 (c)) 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 24, 3-10-2010; Ord. No. 2356, § 8, 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2392, § 9, 1-25-2017)  
Chapter 15.16 - CALIFORNIA HOUSING CODE 
 
15.16.010 - Adoption. 
Subject to certain changes and amendments hereinafter set forth in this chapter, the city council does adopt, as the housing regulations for the city, the California Building Code Volumes 1 and 2, 2016 edition with errata (Title 24, part 2, California Code of Regulations), based on the 2015 International Building Code, as published by the California Building Standards Commission (hereinafter referred to as the "code"), which provides minimum requirements for the protection of life, limb, property, safety and welfare of the general public and the owners and occupants of residential buildings. One copy of the code is on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection, and the same is made a part hereof as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2197 § 8, 1999: Ord. 2166 § 12, 1997: Ord. 2067 § 7, 1992: Ord. 2023 § 7, 1990: prior code § 8800 (a)) 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 26, 3-10-2010; Ord. No. 2347, § 3, 12-14-2011; Ord. No. 2356, § 9, 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2392, § 10, 1-25-2017)  
15.16.012 - Designation of enforcement. 
The building division is designated and authorized to enforce the regulations of this chapter. The code enforcement division is authorized to enforce the regulations of this chapter, subject to the approval of the building division. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 27, 3-10-2010)  
15.16.020 - Board of appeals designated. 
In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and types of construction, and to provide reasonable interpretation of the provisions of this code, the city council shall act as the board of appeals, as referred to in this code. 
Pursuant to MMC 15.04.031, the City Council shall serve as the "Housing Appeals Board" and the "Local Appeals Board," as those terms are defined in the CBC Section 108.8.2. 
(Prior code § 8800 (b)) 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 28, 3-10-2010)  
Chapter 15.20 - CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 
 
15.20.010 - Adoption. 
Subject to certain changes and amendments hereinafter set forth is this chapter, the city council does adopt as the plumbing regulations for the city, the California Plumbing Code, 2016 edition with errata (Title 24, Part 5, California Code of Regulations), based on the 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code, as published by the California Building Standards Commission (hereinafter referred to as the "code") which establishes the minimum regulations for the installation, alteration or repair of plumbing, gas and drainage systems and the inspection thereof. One copy of the code is on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection; and the same is made a part hereof as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2260 § 3, 2003: Ord. 2197 § 9, 1999: Ord. 2166 § 13, 1997: Ord. 2067 § 4 (part), 1992: Ord. 2023 § 4 (part), 1990: prior code § 8200 (a)) 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 30, 3-10-2010; Ord. No. 2347, § 4, 12-14-2011; Ord. No. 2356, § 10, 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2392, § 11, 1-25-2017)  
15.20.012 - Designation of enforcement. 
The building division is designated and authorized to enforce the regulations of this chapter. The code enforcement division is authorized to enforce the regulations of this chapter, subject to the approval of the building division. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 31, 3-10-2010)  
15.20.020 - CPC Section 104.5 amended. 
Section 104.5 of the California Plumbing Code is amended to read as follows: 
Any person desiring a permit required by this code shall, at the time of filing an application, pay a fee to the City in the amount set by City Council Resolution. 
(Ord. 2166 § 14, 1997: Ord. 2067 § 4 (part), 1992: Ord. 2023 § 4 (part), 1990: prior code § 8200 (b)) 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 32, 3-10-2010; Ord. No. 2356, § 11, 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2392, § 12, 1-25-2017)  
15.20.030 - Permit—Application—Issuance. 
A.  1.  Any person legally entitled to apply for and receive a permit shall make such application on forms provided for that purpose. He shall give a description of the character of the work proposed to be done, and the location, ownership, occupancy and use of the premises in connection therewith. 
2.  The building official may require plans, specifications or drawings and such other information as he may deem necessary. 
3.  If the building official determines that the plans, specifications, drawings, description or information furnished by the applicant is in compliance with this code, he shall issue the permit applied for upon payment of the required fee as specified in Section 15.20.020; 
B.  No permit shall be issued to any person to do or cause to be done any plumbing or drainage work regulated by this code, except to a person licensed to do such work by the state, or as otherwise specified in this section; 
C.  A permit may be issued to any properly licensed person not acting in violation of any current contractor licensing law for the installation, alteration or repair of water piping, fixtures, drainage piping, gas piping and building sewers; 
D.  Any permit required by this code may be issued to any person to do any plumbing or drainage work regulated by this code in a building if the person is the bona fide owner thereof; and provided, that the owner shall personally perform all labor in connection therewith. 
(Ord. 2197 § 10, 1999; Ord. 2166 § 15, 1997: prior code § 8201)  
15.20.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2392, § 13, adopted Jan. 25, 2017, deleted § 15.20.040, which pertained to automatic fire sprinkler system plan review fee and installation permit and derived from Ord. 2197 § 11, 1999: prior code § 8203.  
15.20.050 - Appeals. 
The city council shall act as a board of appeals in making a correct determination of any appeal arising from actions of the building official. Appeals shall be made in writing and the appellant may appear in person before the city council or be represented by an attorney and may introduce evidence to support his claims. Appeals shall be heard at reasonable times at the convenience of the city council but not later than thirty days after receipt thereof. The appellant shall cause to be made at his own expense any tests or research required by the city council to substantiate his claims. 
(Prior code § 8202)  
15.20.060 - Water piping prohibited within or under a concrete slab. 
No water piping shall be installed within any concrete slab or in the ground under a concrete slab within a building. 
Exceptions: 
a.  For use only at an island sink; the water piping shall be enclosed in a three-inch ABS/PVC sleeve for a maximum of eight feet. 
b.  Non-pressurized water piping to floor drains. 
(Ord. No. 2356, § 12, 2-26-2014)  
Chapter 15.24 - CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2347, § 5, adopted Dec. 14, 2011, changed the title of Ch. 15.24 from National Electric Code 2005 to read as set out herein. 
 
15.24.010 - Adoption. 
Subject to certain changes and amendments hereinafter set forth in this chapter, the city council does adopt as the electrical regulations for the City the California Electrical Code, 2016 edition with errata (Title 24, Part 3, California Code of Regulations), based on the 2011 National Electrical Code, as published by the California Building Standards Commission (hereinafter referred to as the "code"). The code provides minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, locations, operations, and maintenance of electrical systems, equipment and appliances. One copy of the code is on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection, and the same is made a part hereof as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2260 § 4, 2003: Ord. 2197 § 12, 1999: Ord. 2166 § 16, 1997: prior code § 8300 (a)) 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 34, 3-10-2010; Ord. No. 2347, § 6, 12-14-2011; Ord. No. 2356, § 13, 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2392, § 14, 1-25-2017)  
15.24.012 - Designation of enforcement. 
The building division is designated and authorized to enforce the regulations of this chapter. The code enforcement division is authorized to enforce the regulations of this chapter, subject to the approval of the building division. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 35, 3-10-2010)  
15.24.020 - CEC Administrative section. 
The following code provisions shall serve as the administrative requirements for implementation of the California Electrical Code, as adopted by the city. 
(Ord. 2166 § 17, 1997: prior code § 8300 (b)) 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 36, 3-10-2010)  
15.24.030 - Purpose and scope. 
The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property, and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation and maintenance of electrical systems, equipment and appliances; the provisions of this code shall apply to the construction, alteration, moving, repair, and use of any electrical wiring or equipment on any premises within the city of Montebello. The provisions of this code shall not apply to public utilities, electrical wiring for street lighting or traffic signals located principally in a public way, or to mechanical equipment not specifically regulated in this code. 
(Ord. 2166 § 18, 1997: prior code § 8300 (b) (1))  
15.24.040 - Building official as electrical safety engineer. 
The building official shall be the electrical safety engineer for the purpose of this code. 
(Ord. 2166 § 19, 1997: prior code § 8300 (b) (2))  
15.24.050 - Duties of electrical safety engineer. 
It shall be the duty of the electrical safety engineer to administer and enforce the provisions of this code in a manner consistent with the intent thereof. He shall, upon application, subject to approval of plans, grant permits for installation or alteration of electrical wiring, devices, appliances, and equipment. He shall make inspections and reinspections of the installation, maintenance and repair all electrical wiring, connections, fixtures, appliances, apparatus, machinery, equipment, and work inside, outside, overhead, or underground within his jurisdiction. When electrical equipment or wiring is installed, the person, firm, or corporation responsible for the electrical equipment or work shall make any corrections as required by the sections in this code, after being notified in writing to do so by the electrical safety engineer. If such work is not corrected within ten days, or longer periods as may be specified by the electrical safety engineer, said electrical safety engineer shall have authority to disconnect or order the discontinuance of electrical service to said electrical equipment and any person, firm, corporation, or political subdivision ordered to discontinue each electrical service shall do so within twenty-four hours and shall not reconnect or allow it to be reconnected until notified to do so by the electrical safety engineer. Refusal, failure, or neglect to comply with any such notice or order shall be considered a violation of this code. In cases of property, where electrical equipment may interfere with the work of the fire department, the electrical safety engineer shall have the authority to immediately disconnect or cause to be disconnected any of the electrical equipment. 
(Ord. 2166 § 20, 1997: prior code § 8300 (b) (3))  
15.24.060 - Delegation of duties. 
The electrical safety engineer may delegate any of his powers or duties to any of his inspectors. 
(Ord. 2166 § 21, 1997: prior code § 8300 (b) (4))  
15.24.070 - Interpretations, procedures, and appeals. 
The electrical safety engineer is authorized to determine the intent and meaning of any provision of this code. Such determination shall be made in writing and a record kept, which record shall be open to the public. Any decision of the electrical safety engineer under the provisions of this code or any interpretations by him of any provisions hereof, shall be final unless an appeal is made to the city council by filing a written request therefor, within ten days of such decision with the city clerk. A formal noticed hearing shall not be required provided the appellant or other interested person is given at least five days' written notice of the time and place of such hearing. 
(Ord. 2166 § 22, 1997: prior code § 8300 (b) (5))  
15.24.080 - Stop work orders. 
Whenever any work regulated by this code is being performed contrary to the provisions thereof, the electrical safety engineer shall order the work stopped, which shall be served on any person or persons engaged in doing or causing such work to be performed. Such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the electrical safety engineer to proceed with the work. 
(Ord. 2166 § 23, 199: prior code § 8300 (b) (6))  
15.24.090 - Reinspection. 
A reinspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made. 
This section is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of this code, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or reinspection. 
Reinspection fees may be assessed when the permit card is not property posted on the work site, the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the building official. 
To obtain a reinspection, the applicant shall file an application therefor in writing upon a form furnished for that purpose, and pay the reinspection fee in accordance with Section 15.24.160 of the Montebello Municipal Code. 
In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees have been paid. 
(Ord. 2166 § 24, 1997: prior code § 8300 (b) (7))  
15.24.100 - Right of entry. 
(a)  Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of or perform any duty imposed by this code or other applicable law, the electrical safety engineer or his authorized representative is authorized to enter such property at any reasonable time and to inspect the same and perform any duty imposed upon the electrical safety engineer by this code or other applicable law; provided that: 
(i)  if such property is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and request entry explaining his reasons therefor; and 
(ii)  if such property is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the property and request entry, explaining his reasons therefor. 
If such entry cannot be obtained because the owner or other person having charge or control of the property cannot be found after due diligence or if entry is refused, the electrical safety engineer or his authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure lawful entry and inspect the property; and 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the electrical safety engineer or his authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that the building or premises is hazardous, unsafe or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to safeguard the public health or safety, he shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect such property, and may use any reasonable means required to effect such entry and make such inspection, whether such property be occupied or unoccupied and whether or not permission to inspect has been obtained. If the property is occupied, he shall first present credentials to the occupant and demand entry, explaining his reasons therefor and the purpose of his inspection. 
(Ord. 2166 § 25, 1997: prior Code § 8300 (b) (8))  
15.24.110 - Permit required. 
(a)  Except as specifically exempted, no electrical system regulated by this code shall be installed, altered, repaired, replaced or remodeled unless a separate electrical permit for each building, structure, system or equipment has first been obtained from the building official. 
(b)  A separate permit shall be obtained for each building or structure, except that applications for R-1 and R-3 occupancies may include accessory buildings of U occupancy on a permit for a residential building; 
(c)  No person shall allow any other person to do or cause to be done any work under a permit secured by permittee except persons in his employ. 
(d)  The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this code. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorized is lawful; and 
(e)  The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans shall not prevent the electrical safety engineer from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans and specifications, or from preventing building operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of this code or of any other ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. 2197 § 13, 1999; Ord. 2166 § 26, 1997: prior code § 8300 (b) (9))  
15.24.120 - Expiration of permit. 
Every permit issued under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within one hundred eighty days from the date of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after work is commenced for a period of one hundred eighty days. Before such work can be recommended, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so. 
(Ord. 2166 § 27, 1997: prior code § 8300 (b) (10))  
15.24.130 - Work not requiring a permit. 
The following shall not require a permit: 
(a)  Minor repair work such as the replacement of lamps, switches, receptacle devices, sockets, taping bare joints and the like, or the connection of portable motors and appliances to suitable receptacles which have been permanently installed; 
(b)  Wiring for temporary theater, motion picture or television stage sets; 
(c)  Repair and replacement of fixed motors, transformers, apparatus, or appliances of the same type and rating in the same location; 
(d)  Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus, or equipment operating at less than twenty-five volts and not capable of supplying more than fifty watts of energy; 
(e)  Installation of temporary wiring for testing or experimental purposes within suitable facilities; 
(f)  Portable generators, motors, appliances, tools, receptacle outlets, and other portable equipment connected by means of a cord or cable having an attachment plug and used on construction sites; and 
(g)  Installation, alteration, repair or maintenance of electrical equipment installed by or for an electricity supply agency for the use of such agency in the generation, transmission, distribution or metering of electricity. 
(Ord. 2166 § 28, 1997: prior code § 8300 (b) (11))  
15.24.140 - Application for electrical permits. 
Application for electrical permits shall be made in writing on the form provided. The applicant shall be one of the following: 
(a)  A state licensed electrical, general, sign, or elevator contractor working within their respective classification as specified in the State Contractor License Board Rules and Regulations. 
(b)  The owner of a single-family dwelling for any electrical work at such dwelling used exclusively for living purposes including the usual accessory building and quarters in connection with such buildings; provided, that such person is the bona fide owner of such dwelling and accessory buildings and quarters, that the same are occupied by or designed to be occupied by said owner, that said single-family dwelling is the only dwelling on the lot or property; and provided, that said owner shall personally perform all labor in connection therewith. 
(Ord. 2166 § 29, 1997: prior code § 8300 (b) (12)) 
(Ord. No. 2356, § 14, 2-26-2014)  
15.24.150 - Plans. 
Plans, specifications, load schedules and calculations shall be submitted for plan check as required by the electrical safety engineer and shall be prepared by an architect, electrical engineer, or qualified electrician and shall be submitted for the following structures: 
(a)  New apartment buildings over two stories in height; 
(b)  Other new structures where the electrical service is rated in excess of four hundred amperes; and 
(c)  Unusual or complex installations, as determined by the electrical safety engineer. 
(Ord. 2166 § 30, 1997: prior Code § 8300 (b) (13))  
15.24.160 - Fees. 
(a)  Electrical Permit Fees. Any person desiring an electrical permit required by this code shall, at the time of filing an application, pay a fee to the city in an amount set by city council resolution. 
(b)  Penalty Fee. Any electrical installation of work done without first securing a permit, except as provided in Section 15.24.130, is subject to the full requirements of this code. The electrical safety engineer shall double the appropriate fees covering the work whenever said work is started prior to obtaining the required permit. The payment of such penalty shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this code in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed herein. 
(Ord. 2166 § 31, 1997: prior code § 8300 (b) (14)) 
(Ord. No. 2356, § 15, 2-26-2014)  
15.24.170 - Transfer. 
Permits are not transferable from one person to another or from one location to another. 
(Ord. 2166 § 32, 1997: prior code § 8300 (b) (15)).  
15.24.180 - Number of permits per job. 
Where one person, firm or corporation has an active electrical permit for a job, and another person, firm or corporation wishes to make application to do electrical rough wiring or installation of fixtures on the same job, a final inspection and approval of the original permittee's work shall be made before a permit will be granted to a second person, firm or corporation. 
(Ord. 2166 § 33, 1997: prior code § 8300 (b) (16))  
15.24.190 - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
The electrical safety engineer may suspend or revoke any permit issued under the provisions of this code whenever such permit is issued in error, or is issued on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or has been obtained by falsification or misrepresentation or when work is being done thereunder in violation of this or any other related ordinance or regulation. 
(Ord. 2166 § 34, 1997: prior code § 8300 (b) (17))  
Chapter 15.28 - CALIFORNIA SIGN CODE 
 
15.28.010 - Adoption. 
Subject to certain changes and amendments hereinafter set forth, the city council does adopt, as the sign regulations for the city, the California Building Code Volumes 1 and 2, 2016 edition with errata (Title 24, part 2, California Code of Regulations) including but not limited to Chapter 3 and Appendix H, based on the 2015 International Building Code, as published by the California Building Standards Commission (hereinafter referred to as the "code"), which provides minimum requirements for the protection of life, limbs, property, safety, and welfare of the general public and the owners of signs. One copy of the code is on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection, and the same is made a part hereof as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2197 § 14, 1999: Ord. 2067 § 6, 1992: Ord. 2023 § 6, 1990: prior code § 8600) 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 38, 3-10-2010; Ord. No. 2347, § 7, 12-14-2011; Ord. No. 2356, § 16, 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2392, § 15, 1-25-2017)  
15.28.012 - Designation of enforcement. 
The building division is designated and authorized to enforce the regulations of this chapter. The code enforcement division is authorized to enforce the regulations of this chapter, subject to the approval of the building division. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 39, 3-10-2010)  
15.28.020 - CBC Section 113.1 amended—Board of appeals designated. 
Section 113.1 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 113.1. Board of Appeals Designated. In order to determine suitability of alternate materials and types of construction, and to provide reasonable interpretation of the provisions of this Code, the City Council shall act as the Board of Appeals, as referred to in this Code. 
(Ord. 2197 § 15, 1999) 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 40, 3-10-2010; Ord. No. 2356, § 17, 2-26-2014)  
Chapter 15.32 - CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2336, §§ 41, 42, adopted March 10, 2010, repealed the former Ch. 15.32, §§ 15.32.010—15.32.710, and enacted a new Ch. 15.32 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.32 pertained to Uniform Fire Code and derived from Ord. 2190 § 1, 1999: Ord. 2136 § 1, 1996: Ord. 2089 § 1, 1993: prior code. 
 
15.32.010 - Adoption. 
Subject to certain changes and amendments hereinafter set forth in this chapter, the city council does adopt as the fire regulations for the city, the California Fire Code, 2016 edition with errata (Title 24, Part 9, California Code of Regulations), based on the 2015 International Fire Code, as published by the California Building Standards Commission (hereinafter referred to as the "code"). The code provides minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion. One copy of the code is on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection, and the same is made a part hereof as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010; Ord. No. 2347, § 8, 12-14-2011; Ord. No. 2356, § 18, 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2392, § 16, 1-25-2017)  
15.32.030 - Arson investigators. 
The fire chief may designate members of the Fire Prevention Bureau as arson investigators and as such they shall enforce the California Penal Code as it pertains to arson. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.040 - Recognized standards. 
Recognized standards includes: 
National Fire Protection Association—National Fire Code. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.050 - Fire protection systems. 
A permit shall be required for the installation of any device or system intended or represented as detecting, giving warning of fires, and/or transmitting fire alarms. Also for the installation of fire sprinkler systems, fire alarm systems, dry chemical fire extinguishing systems and/or other fire extinguishing systems. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.060 - Revocation, suspension or denial of permits—Criteria. 
The fire chief further shall have the power to revoke, suspend, or deny the granting of any permit required pursuant to the provisions of this code for any of the following reasons: 
A.  When deemed necessary for the protection of life, limb or property; or 
B.  For the violation of any provision of this code; or 
C.  For changing the occupancy, equipment, materials, processes, or other conditions in such a manner as to create a greater danger of fire or explosion or less protection than was present at the time of the issuance of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.080 - Permit fees. 
All applications for permits required pursuant to the provisions of this code shall be accompanied by the sums set forth and established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.090 - Plan check/field inspection fees. 
All plans submitted for approval and all field inspection requests must be accompanied by the fee established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.100 - Penalties. 
The permit fee as specified in this code shall be doubled, when work requiring a permit has been started or carried on prior to obtaining such permit and the applicant had knowledge that a permit was necessary. A person shall be deemed to have such knowledge if he is a state licensed contractor or previously has applied for a permit in the city of Montebello, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this code in the execution of work, nor from any other penalties prescribed in this code. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.110 - Issuing authority. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 12007 of the Health and Safety Code of the state and for the purposes of this article, the fire chief shall be designated as the "issuing authority." 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.120 - Plans required. 
For all work performed for which a permit is required under the California Fire Code, the permit shall be obtained by the occupant/owner from the Montebello Fire Department—Fire Prevention Bureau prior to any work performed. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.130 - Authority having jurisdiction defined. 
"Authority having jurisdiction" shall mean the organization, office or individual responsible for approving equipment, installation or procedure. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.140 - Chief of the bureau of fire prevention and corporate counsel defined. 
A.  "Chief of the bureau of fire prevention" is head of the fire prevention bureau, and may also be known as "fire marshal." 
B.  "Corporate counsel" shall mean the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.150 - Fire apparatus access. 
In all locations where access for fire apparatus for fire suppression or rescue purposes is unduly difficult or subject to obstruction, the chief of the fire department may designate fire lanes and cause them to be posted as such. No person shall obstruct such fire lanes in any manner that would deter or hinder the fire department from gaining immediate access and use of such designated fire lane. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.160 - Installation or maintenance of obstructions on roof, parapet wall or fire department access opening. 
Installation or maintenance of obstructions on the roof of any building, parapet wall, or fire department access opening. 
A.  Definition: 
1.  Barbed wire is twisted wires armed with barbs or sharpened points. 
2.  Fencing is a barrier made of posts, wire, cable, or boards, or other material to prevent escape or intrusion. 
3.  Fire department access opening is any opening in an exterior wall provided for fire department access as required by the chief or in lieu of providing automatic sprinkler protection. 
4.  Parapet wall is that part of any wall entirely above the roof line. 
5.  Razor ribbon (barbed) wire is continuous coil of metal ribbon with double-edged barbs. 
B.  Obstructions: 
No person shall install or maintain any wire, barbed wire, cable, fencing, aerial, antenna, or other obstructions of any roof of any building, parapet wall, or fire department access opening to the structure in such a manner as to obstruct or render egress or access hazardous in the event of fire or other emergency. 
C.  Exception: 
1.  Guy wire, rods, aerials or antenna masts may be attached to a roof structure having a slope of less than thirty degrees provided there is full clearance of seven feet or more between the roof and said obstruction. Further, guy wire or rods required to support aerial or antenna masts may be attached to a roof structure a lateral distance from the mast not in excess of one-sixth the height of the mast. 
2.  Metal bars, grills, grates or similar products manufactured to preclude human entry through windows or exterior doors in compliance with the building code. 
3.  This section shall not apply to screens, barricades or fences made of material which preclude human climbing and used to prohibit access to building roofs, balconies and utility poles or similar surfaces in compliance with the building code. 
4.  (a)  Razor ribbon wire may not be installed or maintained until a permit is first obtained from the building division and unless attached to: 
i.  A chain link fence with steel one and one-half inch (schedule 40) vertical posts not more than ten feet on center, with a top steel tension wire strand, or 
ii.  A concrete block wall with a top steel tension wire strand, or 
iii.  An ornamental iron fence with a top steel tension wire strand, or 
iv.  A security fence with steel one and one-half inch (schedule 40) vertical posts not more than ten feet on center and top steel tension wire strand; and provided that the razor wire is installed in a professional manner not less than seven feet to the bottom side of the razor ribbon wire, above the highest adjoining grade on either side of the fence, and further provided that the razor wire have a hog tie at the top tension wire and at the bottom loop of the razor wire on the security fence, a minimum of fourteen inches on center. 
4.  (b)  A fence of a temporary nature may be erected to protect areas such as construction sites; provided that all of the regulations of the ordinance codified herein regarding standards for vertical posts and security topping are met and the required permit is first secured. 
D.  Razor Ribbon Wire: 
Use of razor ribbon wire in any residential zone is prohibited. Where a residential zone abuts a zone where the installation of razor ribbon wire is not prohibited, no portion of such wire shall extend into, or in any way encroach upon the area or space within the residential zone or public right-of-way. 
E.  Storage on Roofs: 
No person shall cause to be placed or maintained upon any roof or balcony any materials or objects which may interfere with egress or fire department operations in case of fire. Any person who has installed or maintained any obstruction described and prohibited herein, shall have one hundred twenty days from the effective date of this subsection within which to comply with this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.170 - Fire hydrant placement. 
The fire chief shall designate the location of fire hydrants to be placed at the expense of developers. Such locations shall be selected by him in accordance with acceptable standards for fire prevention and fire suppression activities. Any person who is aggrieved by a decision made by the chief related to the location and/or number of fire hydrants required, shall have the right of appeal to the city council. Such an appeal shall be perfected by the filing with the city manager of a written letter of appeal not later than ten days after the giving of notice by the chief of his decision. In determining the number and placement of fire hydrants the chief and the city council shall consider acceptable fire suppression and prevention standards and practices and the physical circumstances relating to the area to be served by such fire facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.180 - Valuation of existing buildings. 
For purposes of this section, an existing building or structure shall be deemed to be valued based on current construction cost to replace the structure in kind. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.190 - Automatic fire extinguishing systems. 
Any new building constructed for any occupancy use and not otherwise required to be protected by this code, shall be protected by an approved automatic fire extinguishing system when the total floor area of such building exceeds four thousand square feet. This provision shall apply to any existing building, which after completion of any addition, will exceed four thousand square feet of floor area. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010; Ord. No. 2392, § 17, 1-25-2017)  
15.32.195 - Automatic fire extinguishing systems—Group R1 and R3 occupancy. 
Any new building constructed or to be used as a Group R1 or R3 occupancy as defined in the California Fire Code shall be protected by an approved automatic fire extinguisher system. This provision shall also apply to existing R1 and R3 building(s) exceed fifty percent of the total existing square footage of structure, prior to the addition. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.200 - Sprinkler systems. 
Within any mansard roof overhang attached to a building, a sprinkler system is required by this code. Where a sprinkler system is not required, a one-hour separation shall be provided for every fifty feet of linear travel. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.210 - Group A occupancies. 
Group A Occupancies. 
1.  Any new building to be used as a Group A Occupancy, as defined in the California Building Code, shall be protected by an approved automatic fire extinguishing system, when the total floor area exceeds four thousand square feet. This provision shall apply to any existing building when alterations and/or additions to such building causes total floor area to exceed four thousand square feet. 
Any existing building over four thousand square feet shall be provided with an approved automatic fire extinguishing system when alterations and/or additions to such building exceeds twenty-five percent of the value of said building. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.240 - Garages. 
An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed in all garages in Group R Division Occupancies when a standpipe system is required and when any portion of the building protected is in excess of one hundred fifty feet from a "water supply" as defined in the California Fire Code. A public fire hydrant shall be located within forty feet of said standpipe's fire department connection. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.250 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2392, § 18, adopted Jan. 25, 2017, deleted § 15.32.250, which pertained to supervision of automatic sprinkler systems and derived from Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010.  
15.32.260 - Cooking equipment. 
The phrase "commercial type cooking equipment" is deleted; and replaced with the following phrase: "commercial, industrial, institutional and similar type cooking equipment," shall be protected by an automatic fire extinguishing system. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.270 - Chimney spark arrestors. 
Chimney Spark Arrestors. Each chimney used in conjunction with any fireplace or any heating or cooking appliance in which solid or liquid fuel is used, upon or near any building or structure shall terminate in a substantially constructed spark arrestor having a wire mesh not exceeding one-quarter inch. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.280 - Alleys to be kept clean. 
Alleys to be Kept Clean. No person owning or occupying or having possession or control of any property bordering on any public alley in the city shall fail, refuse, or neglect to keep the portion of such alley between the centerline thereof and the property line of such property free from garbage, rubbish, and combustible materials or compounds and flammable liquids and other obstructions. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.290 - Housekeeping and fire nuisances. 
Housekeeping and Fire Nuisances. All buildings and premises governed by these regulations shall be maintained in good repair and in a clean and orderly manner, free from any condition that presents a fire hazard or a condition which would contribute to the rapid spread of fire provisions shall be made for the proper storage and disposal of waste materials and rubbish consistent with the following: 
1.  All basements, cellars, floors, closets, attics, and other similar places not open to continuous observation shall be kept free from combustible litter and rubbish at all times. 
2.  All combustible waste material and rubbish shall be stored in approved noncombustible containers, consistent with approved fire prevention practices until such time as waste material and rubbish are removed from the premises or otherwise properly disposed of. All such waste containers, other than convenience waste receptacles emptied at the close of each day, shall be provided with tight-fitting, noncombustible covers. 
3.  Ashes shall not be placed in or near combustible material but shall be placed in approved metal containers until removed from the premises or otherwise properly disposed of. 
4.  Boiler rooms, mechanical rooms, electric panel rooms, exit passageways, stairways, and corridors shall not be used for storage. 
5.  Electric motors, filters on heating equipment, and grease hoods shall be checked periodically and kept clean and maintained in a safe operating condition. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.300 - Storage and overnight vehicle parking. 
The storage and/or overnight parking of any motorized vehicle, which has a fuel tank capacity of more than one quart, and which contains a Class 1 flammable liquid fuel, is hereby prohibited within any residential structure. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.310 - Gas leaks or spills of combustible liquids. 
Any person who upon discovering or being notified of an uncontrolled or dangerous gas leak or spill of flammable or combustible liquids, or hazardous materials on the premises, which he owns, rents, operates, manages, controls, or occupies, shall immediately notify the fire department. The person will be responsible for the total cleanup and cost of said cleanup. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.330 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2392, § 19, adopted Jan. 25, 2017, deleted § 15.32.330, which pertained to door maintenance and derived from Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010.  
15.32.340 - Nonresidential buildings—Fire alarm systems. 
General. Any new buildings constructed as a non-residential occupancy exceeding two thousand five hundred square feet of floor area, or any existing non-residential building which presently does not exceed two thousand five hundred square feet of floor area but after addition exceeds, two thousand five hundred square feet of floor area which undergoes alterations or remodeling exceeding twenty-five percent of the square foot of said building shall be provided with an approved automatic fire detection and alarm system. Such system shall comply with the fire requirements of the National Fire Protection Association Standard 72 and Title 24, California Administrative Code governing installation and approval of such systems. Arrangements shall be made for the automatic transmission of the fire alarms from the building in which the fire alarm system is installed to the Montebello Fire Department in a manner and form acceptable to the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.350 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2392, § 20, adopted Jan. 25, 2017, deleted § 15.32.350, which pertained to fire alarm systems—monitoring, and derived from Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010.  
15.32.360 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2392, § 21, adopted Jan. 25, 2017, deleted § 15.32.360, which pertained to fire alarm systems—line use restrictions, and derived from Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010.  
15.32.390 - Pallet storage. 
All pallets must be stacked so that there is no visibility through the stacks to the adjacent aisles, or so organized to assure that no temporary organized living facilities or places of refuge are hidden from view. Pallets shall be stacked or piled with due regard to stability of piles, and in no case higher than fifteen feet. Where pallets are piled next to a property line, the distance from the pile or stack to the property line shall not be less than one-half the height of the stack, but in no case less than five feet. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.400 - Pallet storage[—Driveways; aisles]. 
Driveways or aisles between and around pallet stacks or piles shall be at least twenty feet in width and maintained free from accumulated rubbish, equipment or other articles or materials. Rows of pallets shall be no greater than three pallets or fifteen feet in width. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.410 - Pallet storage[—Fencing]. 
All lumber or pallet storage shall be surrounded with a suitable fence at least six feet high and stored five feet from property line or building, unless storage is within a building. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.430 - Spray finishing operations. 
All spray finishing operations shall be conducted within an approved spray booth and no spray painting shall be permitted outdoors, with the exception of the application of finishes to structural exteriors primarily intended to protect said structure. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.440 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2392, § 22, adopted Jan. 25, 2017, deleted § 15.32.440, which pertained to spray booths and derived from Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010.  
15.32.450 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2392, § 23, adopted Jan. 25, 2017, deleted § 15.32.450, which pertained to oil burning equipment, pumps, piping and valves installed inside buildings, and derived from Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010.  
15.32.460 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2392, § 24, adopted Jan. 25, 2017, deleted § 15.32.460, which pertained to low melting point materials and derived from Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010.  
15.32.470 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2392, § 25, adopted Jan. 25, 2017, deleted § 15.32.470, which pertained to fuel oil and derived from Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010.  
15.32.480 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2392, § 26, adopted Jan. 25, 2017, deleted § 15.32.480, which pertained to explosives—storage permits, and derived from Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010.  
15.32.490 - Explosive routes. 
Explosive routes. The following streets and portions of streets, and no others, may be used for the transportation of explosives: Washington Boulevard between Greenwood Avenue and the westerly city limits. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.500 - Explosives. 
The City Council of the City of Montebello hereby establishes the maximum quantity of explosives or blasting agents which may be loaded, unloaded, reloaded or temporarily retained at each terminal where such operations are permitted at two hundred forty thousand pounds aggregate gross weight or not more than eight explosive-laden vehicles at any one time. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.510 - Fireworks. 
The sale of fireworks shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 8.20 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.520 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2392, § 27, adopted Jan. 25, 2017, deleted § 15.32.520, which pertained to gasoline and derived from Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010.  
15.32.530 - Cleaning with flammable liquid. 
No person shall clean parts, products, or any other item within a building or within fifty feet of any building or structure with any flammable liquid having a flash point below one hundred degrees, unless it is used in a closed machine approved for the purpose, or in a separate well ventilated room constructed in accordance with Section 79.804. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.540 - Flammable and combustible liquid equipment. 
A.  Flammable combustible liquid equipment, pumps, piping and valves installed inside of buildings shall be protected against fire exposure in one of the following manners: 
1.  One-story buildings: Automatic fire sprinklers (Extra Hazard Rating) in all areas where equipment and piping is located; 
2.  All multistory buildings: Piping to be installed in noncombustible (one-hour rating) oil-tight enclosure or shaft with service opening) to the point where the piping enters the one-hour rated equipment room; 
3.  Remote controlled shutoff valves are required on all systems. 
B.  Low melting point material, including, but not limited to, aluminum, copper, brass, and bronze may be installed inside buildings in sizes no more than one-half inch (nominal) diameter. 
NOTE: Low melting material may not be used for "Class I flammable liquids." 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.550 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2392, § 28, adopted Jan. 25, 2017, deleted § 15.32.550, which pertained to vehicle impact protection and derived from Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010.  
15.32.560 - Storage of automotive crankcase drainage. 
Storage of automotive crankcase draining in portable tanks not to exceed five hundred fifty gallons. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.570 - Flammable liquids—Storage in certain places prohibited. 
In assembly buildings, hotels, apartment houses, one and two family dwellings and lodging houses, storage is prohibited. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Quantities not exceeding five gallons for maintenance purposes and operation of equipment when stored in approved containers and located in private garage or approved location. 
2.  Storage in excess of five gallons that is used for maintenance purposes and operation of equipment when stored in cabinets which comply with this code. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.580 - Flammable liquids—Empty containers and tanks storage. 
The storage of empty tanks and containers previously used for the storage of flammable or combustible liquids, unless free from explosive vapors, shall be handled as if filled; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to portable or safety containers. Tanks and containers when emptied shall have the covers or plugs replaced in openings. Such storage not be located within five feet of the nearest building or line of adjoining property which may be built upon and shall not exceed ten feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.590 - Flammable liquids—Storage in aboveground tanks outside buildings. 
The storage of flammable and combustible liquids aboveground tanks outside or inside buildings is prohibited within the city limits of the City of Montebello with the following exceptions. 
A.  The fire chief may grant the issuance of a permit for storage of flammable liquids in temporary outside aboveground tanks where: 
1.  Storage shall not exceed one hundred eighty days, and 
2.  The flammable liquids are to be used in conjunction with a construction project. The chief can condition the issuance of such permits to ensure fire safety. 
B.  Tanks legally in existence at the time of adoption of this code may continue in use. 
C.  Facilities receiving flammable or combustible products by pipeline from refinery(ies) outside the city limits. 
D.  Class III combustible liquid may be stored in an approved Underwriters' Laboratory (U.L.) listed double-walled storage tanks, not to exceed five hundred fifty gallons individual capacity as approved by the fire chief. Maximum aggregate volume shall be two thousand two hundred gallons. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.600 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2392, § 29, adopted Jan. 25, 2017, deleted § 15.32.600, which pertained to flammable liquids—labeling—portable containers, and derived from Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010.  
15.32.610 - Flammable liquids—Dispensing. 
Dispensing. Dispensing of Class I liquids shall be (1) from only original shipping containers with a capacity of five gallons or less, (2) from safety cans, (3) through closed piping systems or (4) from a portable tank or container by means of a listed pump or device drawing through an opening in the top of the tank or container. Class III-A liquids may be dispensed from a container by gravity through a listed self-closing valve or self-closing faucet. Class III liquids may also be dispensed using inert gas or water, provided the tank or container has been approved as a vessel for the use to which it is subjected. Dispensing of liquids by water pressure or inert gas is permitted only if controls, including pressure-relief devices, are provided to limit the pressure so it cannot exceed the design pressure of the vessel, tank or container. Air or oxygen shall not be used to pressurize any container for dispensing. Dispensing from underground storage tanks shall be in accordance with this code. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.620 - Fueling station attendants. 
Exceptions: Supervision by a qualified attendant is not required for a service station which is not open to the public and which is used only by an individual commercial, industrial, governmental or manufacturing establishment for fueling vehicles used in connection with its business. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.640 - State Health and Safety Code—Chapter 6.95 of Division 20—Implementation and enforcement. 
Pursuant to Section 25502(b) of the Health and Safety Code, the City assumes the responsibility for the implementation and enforcement of Chapter 6.95 of Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code of the State. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.650 - State Health and Safety Code—Chapter 6.95 of Division 20—Administration and enforcement. 
Pursuant to Section 255029(c) of the Health and Safety Code, the Fire Department and the police department are designated to administer and enforce the provisions of Chapter 6.95 of Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code of the State. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.660 - State Health and Safety Code—Chapter 6.95 of Division 20—Fees. 
By resolution, the City Council shall establish permit and other necessary fees for administering and enforcing Chapter 6.95 of Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code of the State. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.670 - New materials, processes or occupancies which may require permits. 
The city manager, the fire chief, and the chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which shall require permits in addition to those now enumerated in this chapter. The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall post such a list in a conspicuous place in his office and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.680 - Smoke detectors. 
To the extent that the provisions contained in this section are not regulated by preemptive state law the following shall be required. 
A.  Smoke detectors, which are approved by the California State Fire Marshal, shall be installed, made operable and maintained in each and every dwelling unit regardless of zone or primary use of the structure. For this purpose, a "dwelling unit" includes but is not limited to, house, mobile homes, apartment, condominiums, caretakers residences and hotel and motel units. 
B.  The owner of the dwelling shall be responsible for supplying smoke detectors and installing them as required by the state fire marshal and the city fire marshal. The owner shall also be responsible for necessary ongoing maintenance and/or replacement of smoke detectors; however, where the dwelling is occupied by a person other than the owner it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to inform the owner of any needed repair or maintenance. 
C.  Any violation of this section shall be an infraction violation of the municipal code. However, where a dwelling is occupied by a person other than the owner, the owner shall not be considered guilty of a violation if the occupant does not inform the owner of needed maintenance. In such situations, where the occupant is negligent in informing the owner of needed maintenance, the occupant shall be guilty of the infraction. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.690 - Enforcement. 
A.  The California Fire Code shall be enforced by the bureau of the fire prevention in the fire department of the city which is established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the fire chief. 
B.  The fire chief (or fire marshal) in charge of fire prevention shall be appointed by the fire chief. 
C.  The fire chief may designate such members of the fire department as fire inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The fire chief may recommend to the city manager the employment of technical inspectors. 
D.  Wherever the words "chief of the bureau of fire prevention" are used in the California Fire Code, they shall be held to mean the "fire marshal." 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.700 - Appeals. 
Whenever the fire chief shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code has been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal for the decision of the fire chief to the city council within thirty days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
15.32.710 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provision of the California Fire Code, as adopted by this chapter, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which to appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally and for each and every violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars nor more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment for not less than ten days nor more than ninety days or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violation or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 42, 3-10-2010)  
Chapter 15.36 - SEISMIC SAFETY CODE 
 
15.36.010 - Adoption. 
Subject to certain changes and amendments hereinafter set forth in this chapter, the city council does adopt as the seismic safety regulations for the city, the California Building Code, 2016 edition with errata (Title 24, Part 2, California Code of Regulations), including but not limited to Chapter 16, based on the 2015 International Building Code, as published by the California Building Standards Commission (hereinafter referred to as the "code"). The code provides minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the hazardous to life and property from seismic activity is made a part as though fully set forth in this chapter. One copy of the code is on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection, and the same is made a part hereof as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8250) 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 43, 3-10-2010; Ord. No. 2347, § 9, 12-14-2011; Ord. No. 2356, § 19, 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2392, § 30, 1-25-2017)  
15.36.012 - Designation of enforcement. 
The building division is designated and authorized to enforce the regulations of this chapter. The code enforcement division is authorized to enforce the regulations of this chapter, subject to the approval of the building division. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 44, 3-10-2010)  
15.36.020 - Scope. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter prescribe general design requirements applicable to all structures regulated by this code. The provisions of California Building Code Chapter 16, as added by this chapter, apply to all buildings constructed or under construction prior to October 6, 1933, or for which a building permit was issued prior to October 6, 1933, or for which a building permit was issued prior to October 6, 1933, which on January 1, 1986, have unreinforced masonry bearing walls as defined herein. 
B.  Exception. The provisions of California Building Code Chapter 16, as added by this chapter, shall not apply to detached one or two family dwellings and detached apartment houses containing fewer than five dwelling units and used solely for residential purposes. 
(Prior code § 8252) 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 45, 3-10-2010; Ord. No. 2356, § 20, 2-26-2014)  
15.36.030 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to promote public safety and welfare by reducing the risk of death or injury that may result from the effects of earthquakes on unreinforced masonry bearing wall buildings constructed before 1934. Such buildings have been widely recognized for their sustaining of life hazardous damage as a result of partial or complete collapse during past moderate to strong earthquakes. 
B.  The provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter establish minimum standards for structural seismic resistance for the purpose of reducing risk of life loss or injury and will not necessarily prevent loss of life or injury or prevent earthquake damage to an existing building which complies with these standards. This chapter does not require existing electrical, plumbing, mechanical or fire safety systems to be altered unless they constitute a hazard to life or property. 
C.  This chapter provides systematic procedures and standards for identification and classification of unreinforced masonry bearing wall buildings based on their present use. Priorities, time periods and standards are also established under which these buildings are required to be structurally analyzed and anchored. Where the analysis determines deficiencies, this chapter requires the building be strengthened or demolished. 
(Prior code § 8251)  
15.36.040 - CBC Section 1613.2 amended—Definitions. 
The following definitions are hereby added to Section 1613.2 of the California Building Code to read as follows: 
ESSENTIAL BUILDING is any building housing a hospital or other medical facility having surgery or emergency treatment areas, fire or police stations, municipal government disaster operation and communications centers. 
HIGH-RISK BUILDING is any building not classified an essential building having an occupant load of one hundred (100) occupants or more. 
EXCEPTION: A high-risk building shall not include the following: 
(a) Any building having exterior walls braced with masonry cross walls or wood-frame cross walls spaced less than forty (40) feet apart in each story. Cross walls shall be full story height with a minimum length of one and one-half (1½) times the story height. 
(b) Any building used for its intended purpose, as determined by the Building Official for less than twenty (20) hours per week. 
HISTORICAL BUILDING is any building designated as a historical building by an appropriate federal, state or city jurisdiction. 
LOW-RISK BUILDING is any building not classified as an essential building having an occupant load of less than twenty (20) occupants. 
MEDIUM-RISK BUILDING is any building not classified as a high-risk building or an essential building having an occupant load of twenty (20) occupants or more. 
UNREINFORCED MASONRY BEARING WALL is masonry wall having all of the following characteristics: 
(1) Provides the vertical support for a floor or roof. 
(2) The total superimposed load is over one hundred (100) pounds per linear foot. 
(3) The area of reinforcing steel is less than fifty (50) percent of that required. 
(Prior code § 8253) 
(Ord. No. 2356, § 21, 2-26-2014)  
15.36.050 - CBC Section 1613.7 added—Rating classifications. 
Section 1613.7 is added to the California Building Code to read: 
1613.7 Rating Classifications. The rating classifications as exhibited in Table 23-M are hereby established and each building within the scope of this Chapter shall be placed in one such rating classification by the Building Official. The total occupant load of the entire building as determined by Table 1604.5 shall be used to determine the rating classification. 
EXCEPTION: For the purpose of this Chapter, portions of buildings constructed to act independently when resisting seismic forces may be placed in separate rating classifications. 
(Prior code § 8254) 
(Ord. No. 2356, § 22, 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2392, § 31, 1-25-2017)  
15.36.060 - CBC Section 1613.2.1 added—General requirements. 
Section 1613.2.1 is added to the California Building Code to read: 
1613.2.1. General Requirements. 
The owner of each building within the scope of this section shall cause a structural analysis to be made of the building by a civil or structural engineer or architect licensed by the State of California, and if the building does not meet the minimum earthquake standards specified in this section, the owner shall cause it to be structurally altered to conform to such standards or cause the building to be demolished. 
The owner of a building within the scope of this section shall comply with the requirements set forth above by submitting one of the following to the Building Official for review within the stated time limits: 
(a) A structural analysis within ninety (90) days after the service of the order. Such analysis, which is subject to approval by the Building Official, shall demonstrate that the building meets the minimum requirements of this section. 
(b) A structural analysis and plans for the proposed structural alterations of the building necessary to comply to the minimum alterations of this section within ninety (90) days after the service of order. 
(c) Plans for the demolition or repair of the building within ninety (90) days after the service of the order. After plans are submitted and approved by the Building Official, the owner shall obtain a building permit, commence and complete the required construction or demolition within the time limits set forth in Table No. 23-N. These time limits shall begin to run from the date the order is served in accordance with Section 1613.2.2. 
(Prior code § 8255) 
(Ord. No. 2356, § 23, 2-26-2014)  
15.36.070 - CBC Section 1613.2.2 added—Administration. 
Section 1613.2.2 is added to the California Building Code to read: 
1613.2.2. Administration. 
(a) COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS. Whenever the Building Official has inspected or caused to be inspected any building and has found and determined that such building is within the scope of this Chapter, the Building Official shall commence proceedings to cause such building to be repaired and rehabilitated, or demolished, in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(b) CONTENTS OF NOTICE AND ORDER. The Building Official shall issue a notice and order directed to the record owner of the building and the person, if any, occupying or otherwise in real or apparent charge and control of the building. The notice and order shall contain: 
(1) The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises on which the building is located. 
(2) A statement that the Building Official has found the building to be within the scope of this Chapter. 
(3) An order to prepare and submit to the Building Official a structural analysis as required pursuant to Section 1613.2.1. 
(4) The rating classification of the building. 
(5) An order to secure permits, physically commence, and to complete all work necessary to meet the minimum seismic standards of this Chapter within the time limits set forth in Table No. 23-N. 
(6) A statement specifying the appeal rights of the owner as contained in subsection (d) of this section. 
(c) SERVICE AND RECORDATION OF NOTICE AND ORDER. The notice and order shall be served and recorded. 
(d) APPEAL FROM NOTICE AND ORDER. Any person entitled to service pursuant to this section may appeal the Building Official's initial determination that the building is within the scope of this Chapter to the City Council. Such appeal shall be filed with the City Council within sixty (60) days from the service date of the order and shall be limited solely to the issue of whether the designated building is within the scope of this Chapter. Such appeal shall be made in writing upon appropriate forms provided therefor by the Building Official, and the grounds thereof shall be stated clearly and concisely. 
(e) ENFORCEMENT. If the owner or other person in charge or control of the subject building fails to comply with any order issued by the Building Official pursuant to this Chapter within any of the time limits set forth in Section 1613.2.1, the Building Official shall order that the entire building be vacated and that the building remain vacated until such order has been complied with. If compliance with such order has not been accomplished within ninety (90) days after the date the building has been ordered vacated or such additional time as may have been granted by the City Council, the Building Official may order the demolition of the building in accordance with the provisions of the California Building Code. 
(Prior code § 8256) 
(Ord. No. 2356, § 24, 2-26-2014)  
15.36.080 - CBC Section 1613.8 added—Historical buildings. 
Section 1613.8 is added to the California Building Code to read: 
1613.8. Historical Buildings. 
(a) GENERAL. The standards and procedures established by this section shall apply in all aspects to a historical building except that as a means to preserve original architectural elements and facilities restoration, a historical building may, in addition, comply with the special provisions set forth in this section. 
(b) UNBURNED CLAY MASONRY OR ADOBE. Existing or re-erected walls of adobe construction shall conform to the following: 
(1) Unreinforced adobe masonry walls shall not exceed a height or height-to-thickness ration of five (5) for exterior bearing walls and must be provided with a reinforced bond beam at the top, interconnecting all walls. Minimum beam depth shall be six (6) inches and a minimum width of eight (8) inches less than the wall width. Minimum wall thickness shall be eighteen (18) inches for exterior bearing walls and ten (10) inches for adobe partitions. No adobe structure shall exceed one (1) story in height unless the historic evidence indicates a two (2) story height. In such cases, the height-to-thickness ration shall be the same as above for the first floor based on the total two (2) story height, and the second floor wall thickness shall not exceed the ratio five (5) by more than twenty (20) percent. Bond beams shall be provided at the roof and second-floor levels. 
(2) Foundation footings shall be reinforced concrete under newly reconstructed walls and shall be fifty (50) percent wider than the wall above, soil conditions permitting, except that the foundation wall may be four (4) inches less in width than the wall above if a rock, burned brick, or stabilized adobe facing is necessary to provide authenticity. 
(3) New or existing unstabilized brick and adobe brick masonry shall have an average compressive strength of two hundred twenty-five (225) pounds per square inch when tested in accordance with ASTM designation C 67. One (1) sample out of five (5) may have a compressive strength of not less than one hundred eighty-eight (188) pounds per square inch. Unstabilized brick may be used where existing bricks are unstabilized and where the building is not susceptible to flooding conditions or direct exposure. Adobe may be allowed a maximum value of three (3) pounds per square inch for shear with no increase for lateral forces. 
(4) Mortar may he of the same soil composition and stabilization as the brick in lieu of cement mortar. 
(5) Nominal tension stresses due to seismic forces normal to the wall may be neglected if the wall meets thickness requirements and shear values allowed by this subsection. 
(c) ARCHAIC MATERIALS. Allowable stresses for archaic materials not specified in this code shall be based on substantiating research data or engineering judgment, subject to the Building Official's satisfaction. 
(d) ALTERNATIVE MATERIALS AND SHBC ADVISORY REVIEW. Alternative materials, design or methods of construction will be considered as set forth in Section 1613.9. In addition, when a request for an alternative proposed design, material or method of construction is being considered, the Building Official may file written request for opinion to the State Historical Building Code Advisory Board for its consideration, advice or findings in accordance with the State Historical Building Code. 
(Prior code § 8257) 
(Ord. No. 2356, § 25, 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2392, § 32, 1-25-2017)  
15.36.090 - CBC Section 1613.8 added—Analysis and design. 
Section 1613.9 is added to the California Building Code to read: 
1613.9. Analysis and Design. 
(a) GENERAL. Every structure within the scope of this section shall be analyzed and constructed to resist minimum total lateral seismic forces assumed to act nonconcurrently in the direction of each of the main axes of the structure in accordance with the following equation: 
V = IKCSW ..... (12-1) 
The value of IKCS need not exceed the values set forth in Table No. 23-O based on the applicable rating classification of the building. 
(b) LATERAL FORCES ON ELEMENTS OF STRUCTURES. Parts or portions of structures shall be analyzed and designed for lateral loads in accordance with Sections 1613.9(a) of this code but not less than the value from the following equation: 
Fp = ICpSWp ..... (12-8) 
For the provisions of this subsection, the product of IS need not exceed the values as set forth in Table No. 23-P. 
EXCEPTION: Unreinforced masonry walls in buildings and having a Rating Classification of I may be analyzed in accordance with Section 1613.10. 
The value of Cp need not exceed the values set forth in Table No. 23-Q. 
(c) ANCHORAGE AND INTERCONNECTION. Anchorage and interconnection of all parts, portions and elements of the structure shall be analyzed and designed for lateral forces in accordance with Table No. 23-O of this Code and the equation Fp = ICpSWp as modified by Table No. 23-P. Minimum anchorage of masonry walls to each floor or roof shall resist a minimum force of two hundred (200) pounds per linear foot acting normal to the wall at the level of the floor or roof. 
(d) LEVEL OF REQUIRED REPAIR. Alterations and repairs required to meet the provisions of this Chapter shall comply with all other applicable requirements of this Code unless specifically provided for in this Chapter. 
(e) REQUIRED ANALYSIS. 
(1) General. Except as modified herein, the analysis and design relating to the structural alteration of existing structures within the scope of this Chapter shall be in accordance with the analysis specified in the California Building Code. 
(2) Continuous Stress Path. A complete, continuous stress path from every part or portion of the structure to the ground shall be provided for the required horizontal forces. 
(3) Positive Connections. All parts, portions or elements of the structure shall be interconnected by positive means. 
(f) ANALYSIS PROCEDURE. 
(1) General. Stresses in materials and existing construction utilized to transfer seismic forces from the ground to parts or portions of the structure shall conform to those permitted by the code and those materials and types of construction specified in Section 1613.10. 
(2) Connections. Materials and connectors used for interconnection of parts and portions of the structure shall conform to the code. Nails may be used as part of an approved connector. 
(3) Unreinforced Masonry Walls. Except as modified herein, unreinforced masonry walls shall be analyzed to withstand all vertical loads as specified in Chapter 21 of the California Building Code in addition to the seismic forces required by this division. The fifty (50) percent increase in the seismic force factor for shear walls as specified in Table No. 24-H of this Code may be omitted in the computation of seismic loads to existing shear walls. No allowable tension stress will be permitted in unreinforced masonry walls. Walls not capable of resisting the required design forces specified in this section shall be strengthened or shall be removed and replaced. 
EXCEPTIONS: 
(1) Unreinforced masonry walls in buildings not classified as a Rating Classification I pursuant to Table No. 23-M may be analyzed in accordance with Section 1613.10. 
(2) Unreinforced masonry walls which carry no design loads other than their own weight may be considered as veneer if they are adequately anchored to new supporting elements. 
(g) COMBINATION OF VERTICAL AND SEISMIC FORCES. 
(1) New Materials. All new materials introduced into the structure to meet the requirements of this section which are subjected to combined vertical and horizontal forces shall comply with building requirements of the California Building Code. 
(2) Existing Materials. When stresses in existing lateral force-resisting elements are due to a combination of dead loads plus seismic loads, the allowable working stress specified in the code may be increased one hundred (100) percent. However, no increase will be permitted in the stresses allowed in Section 1613.10, and the stresses in members due only to seismic and dead loads shall not exceed the values permitted by the California Building Code. 
(3) Allowable Reduction of Bending Stress by Vertical Load. In calculating tensile fiber stress due to seismic force, required by this Chapter, the maximum tensile fiber stress may be reduced by the full direct stress due to vertical dead loads. 
(Prior code § 8258) 
(Ord. No. 2356, § 26, 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2392, § 33, 1-25-2017)  
15.36.100 - CBC Section 1613.10 added—Materials of construction. 
Section 1613.10 is added to the California Building Code to read: 
1613.10 Materials of Construction. 
(a) GENERAL. All material permitted by this code, including their appropriate allowable stresses and those existing configurations of materials specified herein, may be utilized to meet the requirements of this division. 
(b) EXISTING MATERIALS. 
(1) Unreinforced Masonry Walls. Unreinforced masonry walls analyzed in accordance with this section may provide vertical support for roof and floor construction and resistance to lateral loads. 
Tension stresses due to seismic forces normal to the wall may be neglected if the wall does not exceed the height-or length-to-thickness ratio and the in-plane shear stresses due to seismic loads as set forth in Table No. 23-R. 
If the wall height-thickness ratio exceeds the specified limits, the wall may be supported by vertical bracing members designed in accordance with this Chapter. The deflection of such bracing member at design loads shall not exceed one tenth (1/10th) of the wall thickness. 
All vertical bracing members shall he attached to floor and roof construction for their design loads independently of required wall anchors. Horizontal spacing of vertical bracing members shall not exceed one-half (½) the unsupported height of the wall nor ten (10) feet. 
The wall height may be measured to bracing elements other than a floor or roof. Spacing of the bracing elements and wall anchors shall not exceed six (6) feet. Bracing elements shall be detailed to minimize the horizontal displacement of the wall by components of vertical displacements of the floor or roof. 
(2) Existing Roof, Floor, Walls, Footings and Wood Framing, Existing materials, including wood shear walls utilized in the described configuration, may be used as part of the lateral load resisting system: provided, that the stresses in these materials do not exceed the value shown in Table No. 23-S. 
(c) STRENGTHENING OF EXISTING MATERIALS. New materials, including wood shear walls, may be utilized to strengthen portions of the existing seismic resisting system in the described configurations; provided, that the stresses do not exceed the values shown in Table No. 23-S. 
(d) ALTERNATE MATERIALS. Alternate materials, designs, and methods of construction may be approved by the Building Official in accordance with the provisions of the California Building Code. 
(e) MINIMUM ACCEPTABLE QUALITY OF EXISTING UNREINFORCED MASONRY WALLS. 
(1) General Provisions. All unreinforced masonry walls utilized to carry vertical loads and seismic forces parallel and perpendicular to the wall plane shall be tested as specified in this subsection. All masonry quality shall equal or exceed the minimum standards established herein or shall be removed and replaced by new materials. Alternate methods of testing may be approved by the Building Official. The quality of mortar in all masonry walls shall be determined by performing in-place shear tests or by testing eight (8) inch diameter cores. Alternative methods of testing may be approved by the Building Official. Nothing shall prevent pointing with mortar of all the masonry wall joints before the tests are first made. Prior to any pointing, the mortar joints must be raked and cleaned to remove loose and deteriorated mortar. Mortar for pointing shall be Type S or N except masonry cements shall not be used. All preparation and mortar pointing shall be done under continuous inspection of a registered deputy building inspector. At the conclusion of the inspection, the inspector shall submit a written report to the licensed engineer or architect responsible for the seismic analysis of the building setting forth the result of the work inspected. Such report shall be submitted to the Building Official for approval as part of the structural analysis. All testing shall be performed in accordance with the requirements specified in this subsection by a testing agency approved by the Building Official. An accurate record of all such tests and their location in the building shall be recorded and these results shall be submitted to the Building Official for approval as part of the structural analysis. 
(2) Number and Location of Tests. The minimum number of tests shall be two (2) per wall or line of wall elements resisting a common force, or one (1) per fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet of wall surface, with a minimum of eight (8) tests in any case. The exact test or core location shall be determined at the building site by the licensed engineer or architect responsible for the seismic analysis of the subject building. 
(3) In-Place Shear Tests. The bed joints of the outer width of the masonry shall be tested in shear by laterally displacing a single brick relative to the adjacent bricks in the width. The opposite head joint of the brick to be tested shall be removed and cleaned prior to testing. The minimum quality mortar in eighty (80) percent of the shear tests shall not be less than the total of thirty (30) psi plus the axial stress in the wall at the point of the test. The shear stress shall be based on the gross area of both bed joints and shall be that at which movement of the brick is first observed. 
(4) Core Tests. A minimum number of mortar test specimens equal to the number of required cores shall be prepared from the cores and tested as specified herein. The mortar joint of the outer with of the masonry core shall be tested in shear by placing the circular core section in a compression testing machine with the mortar bed joint rotated fifteen (15) degrees from the axis of the applied load. The mortar joint tested in shear shall have an average ultimate stress of twenty (20) psi based on the gross area. The average shall be obtained from the total number of cores made. The average shall be obtained from the total number of cores made. If test specimens cannot be made from cores taken then shear value shall be reported as zero. 
(f) TESTING OF SHEAR BOLTS. One-fourth (¼) of all new shear bolts and dowels embedded in unreinforced masonry walls shall be tested by a registered deputy building inspector using a torque calibrated wrench to the following minimum torques: 
One-half (½) inch diameter bolts or dowels—forty (40) foot-lbs. 
Five-eighths (?) inch diameter bolts or dowels—fifty (50) foot-lbs. 
Three-fourths (¾) inch diameter bolts or dowels—sixty (60) foot-lbs. 
No bolts exceeding one-fourth (¼) inch shall be used. All nuts shall be installed over malleable iron or plate washers when bearing on wood, and heavy cut washers when hearing on steel. 
(g) DETERMINATION OF ALLOWABLE STRESSES FOR DESIGN METHODS BASED ON TEST RESULTS. 
(1) Design Shear Values. Design seismic in-place shear stresses shall be substantiated by tests performed as specified in Section 1613.10(e)(3) and (4). Design stresses shall be related to test results obtained in accordance with Table No. 23-U. Intermediate values between three (3) and ten (10) psi may be interpolated. 
(2) Design Compression and Tension Values. Compression stresses for unreinforced masonry having a minimum design shear value of three (3) psi shall not exceed one hundred (100) psi. Design tension values for unreinforced masonry shall not be permitted. 
(h) Five (5) percent of the existing rod anchors utilized as all or part of the required wall anchors shall be tested in pullout by an approved testing laboratory. The minimum number tested shall be four (4) per floor, with two (2) tests at walls with joist framing into the wall and two (2) tests at walls with joist parallel to the wall. The test apparatus shall be supported on the masonry wall of a minimum distance of the wall thickness from the anchor tested. The rod anchor shall be given a preload of three hundred (300) pounds prior to establishing a datum for recording elongation. The tension test load report shall be recorded at one-eighth (?) inch relative movement of the anchor and the adjacent masonry surface. Results of all tests shall be reported. The report shall include the test results as related to the wall thickness and joint orientation. The allowable resistance value of the existing anchors shall be forty (40) percent of the average of those tested anchors having the same wall thickness and joint orientation. 
(i) Qualification tests for devices used for wall anchorage shall be tested with the entire tension load carried on the enlarged head at the exterior face of the wall. Bond on the part of the device between the enlarged head and the interior wall face shall be eliminated for the qualification tests. The resistance value assigned the device shall be twenty (20) percent of the average of the ultimate loads. 
(Prior code § 8259) 
(Ord. No. 2356, § 27, 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2392, § 34, 1-25-2017)  
15.36.110 - CBC Section 1613.11 added—Information required on plans. 
Section 1613.11 is added to the California Building Code to read: 
1613.11 Information required on plans. 
(a) GENERAL. In addition to the seismic analysis required pursuant to this Chapter, the licensed engineer or architect responsible for the seismic analysis of the building shall determine and record the information required by this section on the approved plans. 
(b) CONSTRUCTION DETAILS. The following requirements with appropriate construction details shall be made part of the approved plans: 
(1) All unreinforced masonry walls shall be anchored at the roof level by tension bolts through the wall as specified in Table No. 23-T, or by approved equivalent at a maximum anchor spacing of six (6) feet. 
All unreinforced masonry walls shall be anchored at all floors with tension bolts through the wall or by existing rod anchors at a maximum anchor spacing of six (6) feet. All existing rod anchors shall be secured to the joists to develop the required forces. The Building Official may require testing to verify the adequacy of the embedded ends of existing rod anchors. Tests when required shall conform to Section 1613.10(h). 
When access to the exterior face of the masonry wall is prevented by proximity of an existing building, wall anchors conforming to Item 5 and 6 in Table 23-T may be used. 
Alternative devices to be used in lieu of tension bolts for masonry wall anchorage shall be tested as specified in Section 1613.10(i). 
(2) Diaphragm chord stresses of horizontal diaphragm shall be developed in existing materials or by addition of new materials. 
(3) Where trusses and beams other than rafters or joists are supported on masonry, ledges or columns shall be installed to support vertical loads of the roof or floor members. 
(4) Parapets and exterior wall appendages not capable of resisting the forces specified in this section shall be removed, stabilized or braced to ensure that the parapets and appendages remain in their original position. 
(5) All deteriorated mortar joints in unreinforced masonry walls shall be pointed with Type S or N mortar. Prior to any pointing, the wall surface must be raked and cleaned to remove loose and deteriorated mortar. All preparation and pointing shall he done under continuous inspection of a registered deputy building inspector certified to inspect masonry or concrete. At the conclusion of the project, the inspector shall submit a written report to the Building Official setting forth the portion of work inspected. 
(6) Repair details of any cracked or damaged unreinforced masonry wall required to resist forces specified in this division. 
(c) EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. The following existing construction information shall be made part of the approved plans: 
(1) The type and dimensions of existing walls and the size and spacing of floor and roof members. 
(2) The extent and type of existing wall anchorage to floors and roof. 
(3) The extent and type of parapet corrections which had been performed on the building subsequent to initial construction. 
(4) Accurately dimensioned floor plans and masonry wall elevations showing dimensioned openings, piers, wall thickness and heights. 
(5) The location of cracks and damaged portions of unreinforced masonry walls requiring repairs. 
(6) The type of interior wall surfaces and if reinstalling or anchoring of ceiling plaster is necessary. 
(7) The general condition of the mortar joints and if joints need pointing. 
(Prior code § 8260) 
(Ord. No. 2356, § 28, 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2392, § 35, 1-25-2017)  
15.36.120 - Table 23-M added to CBC Chapter 16—Rating classifications. 
Table 23-M is added to Chapter 16 of the California Building Code to read: 
TABLE NO. 23-M 
RATING CLASSIFICATIONS 
TYPE OF BUILDING 	CLASSIFICATION 
Essential building 	I 
High-risk building 	II 
Medium-risk building 	III 
Low-risk building 	IV 
 
(Prior code § 8261 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2356, § 29, 2-26-2014)  
15.36.130 - Table 23-N added to CBC Chapter 16—Time limits for compliance. 
Table 23-N is added to Chapter 16 of the California Building Code to read: 
TABLE NO. 23-N 
TIME LIMITS FOR COMPLIANCE 
RATING CLASSIFICATION 	COMPLETION OF ANALYSIS WITHIN 	OBTAIN BUILDING PERMIT WITHIN 	COMMENCE CONSTRUCTION WITHIN 	COMPLETE CONSTRUCTION WITHIN 
I 	90 days 	90 days* 	180 days** 	2 years** 
II 	90 days 	90 days* 	180 days** 	2 years** 
III & IV 	1 year 	90 days* 	180 days** 	3 years** 
 
* Measured from completion date of structural analysis. 
** Measured from the date of building permit issuance. 
(Prior code § 8261 (part)) 
(No. 2356, § 30, 2-26-2014)  
15.36.140 - Table 23-O added to CBC Chapter 16—Horizontal force factors based on rating classification. 
Table 23-O is added to Chapter 16 of the California Building Code to read: 
TABLE NO. 23-O 
HORIZONTAL FORCE FACTORS 
BASED ON RATING CLASSIFICATION 
RATING CLASSIFICATION 	IKCS 
I 	0.186 
II 	0.133 
III & IV 	0.100 
 
(Prior code § 8261 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2356, § 31, 2-26-2014)  
15.36.150 - Table 23-P added to CBC Chapter 16—Horizontal force factors "IS" for parts or portions of structures. 
Table 23-P is added to Chapter 16 of the California Building Code to read: 
TABLE NO. 23-P 
HORIZONTAL FORCE FACTORS "IS" 
FOR PARTS OR PORTIONS OF STRUCTURES 
RATING CLASSIFICATION 	IS 
I 	1.50 
II 	1.00 
III & IV 	0.75 
 
(Prior code § 8261 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2356, § 32, 2-26-2014)  
15.36.160 - Table 23-Q added to CBC Chapter 16—Horizontal force factor "Cp" for parts or portions of buildings or other structures. 
Table 23-Q is added to Chapter 16 of the California Building Code to read: 
TABLE NO. 23-Q 
HORIZONTAL FORCE FACTOR "Cp" FOR PARTS OR PORTIONS 
OF BUILDINGS OR OTHER STRUCTURES 
Part or Portion of Buildings 	Direction of Force 	Value of Cp 
Exterior bearing and nonbearing walls; interior bearing walls and partitions; interior nonbearing walls and partitions over ten (10) feet in height; masonry fences over 6 feet in height. 	Normal-to-flat 	0.20 
Cantilever parapet and other cantilever walls, except retaining walls. 	Normal-to-flat 	1.00 
Exterior and interior ornamentations and appendages. 	Any direction 	1.00 
When connected to a part of a building; towers, tanks, towers and tanks plus contents, racks over 8 feet 3 inches in height plus contents, chimneys, smokestacks and penthouses. 	Any direction 	0.20 
When connected to or part of a building; Rigid and rigidly mounted equipment and machinery and required for continued operation of essential occupancies. 	Any horizontal direction 	0.20 
Tanks plus effective contents resting on the ground floor. 	Any direction 	0.12 
Floors and roofs acting as diaphragms. 	In the plane of the diaphragm 	0.12 
Prefabricated structural elements, other than walls, with force applied at center of gravity of assembly. 	Any horizontal direction 	0.30 
Connections for exterior panels or elements. 	Any direction 	2.00 
 
Notes: 
(1) See Section 1613.9(b) for use of Cp. 
(2) When located in the upper portion of any building with a ratio of five (5) to one (1) or greater, the value shall be increased by fifty (50) percent. 
(3) For flexible and flexibly mounted equipment and machinery, the appropriate value for Cp shall be determined with consideration given to both the dynamic properties of the equipment and machinery and to the building or structure in which it is placed. 
(4) The Wp for storage racks shall be the weight of the racks plus contents. The value of Cp for racks over two (2) storage support levels in height shall be zero point sixteen (0.16) for the levels below the top two (2) levels. 
(5) The design of the equipment and machinery and their anchorage is an integral part of the design and specification of such equipment and machinery. The structure to which the equipment or machinery is mounted shall be capable of resisting the anchorage forces 
(6) Floors and roofs acting as diaphragms shall be designed for a minimum force resulting from a Cp of point twelve (.12) applied to the Wp unless a greater force results from the distribution of lateral forces in accordance with Section 1613.10(e). 
(Prior code § 8261 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2356, § 33, 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2392, § 36, 1-25-2017)  
15.36.170 - Table 23-R added to CBC Chapter 16—Allowable value of height-thickness ratio of unreinforced masonry walls with minimum quality mortar. 
Table 23-R is added to Chapter 16 of the California Building Code to read: 
TABLE NO. 23-R 
ALLOWABLE VALUE OF HEIGHT-THICKNESS RATIO OF 
UNREINFORCED MASONRY WALLS WITH MINIMUM QUALITY MORTAR 1,2 
	BUILDINGS WITH CROSSWALLS AS DEFINED BY SECTION 91.8803 	ALL OTHER BUILDINGS 
Walls of one-story buildings 	16 	13 
First-story wall of multistory buildings 	16 	15 
Walls in top story of multistory buildings 	14 	9 
All other walls 	16 	13 
 
1  Minimum quality mortar shall be determined by Laboratory testing in accordance with Section 1613.10(e). 
2  Table No. 23-R is not applicable to buildings of Rating Classification I. Walls of buildings within Rating Classification I shall be analyzed in accordance with Section 1613.9(f). 
(Prior code § 8261 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2356, § 34, 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2392, § 37, 1-25-2017)  
15.36.180 - Table 23-S added to CBC Chapter 16—Values for existing materials. 
Table 23-S is added to Chapter 16 of the California Building Code to read: 
TABLE NO. 23-S 
VALUES FOR EXISTING MATERIALS 
NEW MATERIALS OR CONFIGURATION OF MATERIALS 1 	ALLOWABLE VALUES 
1. HORIZONTAL DIAPHRAGMS 	
a. Roofs with straight sheathing and roofing applied directly to the sheathing. 	100 lbs. per foot for seismic shear. 
b. Roofs with diagonal sheathing and roofing applied directly to the sheathing. 	400 lbs. per foot for seismic shear. 
c. Floors with straight tongue-and-groove sheathing. 	150 lbs. per foot for seismic shear. 
d. Floors with straight sheathing and finished wood flooring. 	300 lbs. per foot for seismic shear. 
e. Floors with diagonal sheathing and finished wood flooring. 	450 lbs. per foot for seismic shear. 
f. Floors or roofs with straight sheathing and plaster applied to the joist or rafters. 2 	Add 50 lbs. per foot to the allowable values for items 1(a) and 1(c). 
2. SHEAR WALLS 	
Wood stud walls with lath and plaster. 	100 lbs. per foot each side for seismic shear. 
3. PLAIN CONCRETE FOOTINGS 	f'c = 1500 psi unless otherwise shown by tests. 
4. DOUGLAS FIR WOOD 	Allowable stress same as No. 1 D.F.L. 2 
5. REINFORCING STEEL 	fs = 18,000 lbs. per square inch maximum. 2 
6. STRUCTURAL STEEL 	fs = 20,000 lbs. per square inch maximum. 2 
 
1 Material must be sound and in good condition. 
2 Stresses given may be increased for combinations of loads as specified in Section 2330(g)2. 
(Prior code § 8261 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2356, § 35, 2-26-2014)  
15.36.190 - Table 23-T added to CBC Chapter 16—Allowable values of new materials used in conjunction with existing construction. 
Table 23-T is added to Chapter 16 of the California Building Code to read: 
TABLE NO. 23-T 
ALLOWABLE VALUES OF NEW MATERIALS USED IN CONJUNCTION WITH EXISTING CONSTRUCTION 
NEW MATERIALS OR CONFIGURATION OF MATERIALS 1 	ALLOWABLE VALUES 
1. HORIZONTAL DIAPHRAGMS 	
Plywood sheathing applied directly over existing straight sheathing with ends of plywood sheets bearing on joists or rafters and edges of plywood located on center of individual sheathing boards. 	Same as specified in Table No. 25-J of this code for blocked diaphragms. 
2. SHEAR WALLS 	
(a) Plywood sheathing applied directly over existing wood studs. No value shall be given to plywood applied over existing plaster or wood sheathing. 	Same as values specified in Table No. 25-K for shear walls. 
(b) Drywall or plaster applied directly over existing wood studs. 	75 percent of the values specified in Table No. 47-I. 
(c) Drywall or plaster applied to plywood sheathing over existing wood studs. 	33- 1/3 percent of the values specified in Table No. 47-I. 
3. SHEAR BOLTS 	
Shear bolts and shear dowels embedded a minimum of 8 inches into unreinforced masonry walls. Bolt centered in a 2-½ inch diameter bolt with dry-pack or nonshrink grout around circumference of bolt or dowel. 1, 3 	100 percent of the values for solid masonry specified in Table No. 24-G. No values larger than those given for ¾ inch bolts shall be used. 
4. TENSION BOLTS 	
Tension bolts and tension dowels extending entirely through unreinforced masonry walls secured with bearing plates on far side of wall with at least 30 square inches of area. 2, 3 	1200 lbs. per bolt or dowel. 
5. WALL ANCHORS 	
(a) Bolts extending to the exterior face of the wall with a 2-½ inch round plate under the head. Install as specified for shear bolts. Spaced not closer than 12 inches on centers. 1, 2, 3 	600 lbs. per bolt. 
(b) Bolts or dowels extending to the exterior face of the wall with a 2-½ inch round plate under the head and drill at an angle of 22-½ degrees to the horizontal. Installed as specified for shear bolts. 1, 2, 3 	1200 lbs. per bolt or dowel. 
6. INFILLED WALLS 	
Reinforced masonry infilled openings in existing unreinforced masonry walls with keys or dowels to match reinforcing. 	Same as values specified for unreinforced masonry walls. 
7. REINFORCED MASONRY 	
Masonry piers and walls reinforced per Section 2417 and 2418 	Same as values specified in Table No. 24-B 
8. REINFORCED CONCRETE 	
Concrete footings, walls and piers reinforced as specified in Chapter 26 and designed for tributary loads. 	Same as values specified in Chapter 26 of this code. 
9. EXISTING FOUNDATION LOADS 	
Foundation loads for structures exhibiting no evidence of settlement. 	Calculated existing foundation loads due to maximum dead load plus live load may be increased 25 percent for dead load, and may be increased 50 percent for dead load plus seismic load required by section. 
 
1  Bolts and dowels to be tested as specified in Section 1613.10. 
2  Bolts and dowels to be ½-inch minimum in diameter. 
3  Drilling for bolts and dowels shall be done with an electric rotary drill. Impact tools shall not be used for drilling holes or tightening anchor and shear bolt nuts. 
(Prior code § 8261 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2356, § 36, 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2392, § 38, 1-25-2017)  
15.36.200 - Table 23-U added to CBC Chapter 16—Allowable shear stress for tested unreinforced masonry walls. 
Table 23-U is added to Chapter 16 of the California Building Code to read: 
TABLE NO. 23-U 
ALLOWABLE SHEAR STRESS FOR TESTED 
UNREINFORCED MASONRY WALLS 
30 PERCENT OF TEST RESULTS IN PSI NOT LESS THAN 	AVERAGE TEST RESULTS OF CORES IN PSI 	SEISMIC IN-PLANE SHEAR BASED ON GROSS AREA 
30 plus axial stress 	20 	3 psi* 
40 plus axial stress 	27 	4 psi* 
50 plus axial stress 	33 	5 psi* 
100 plus axial stress 	67 or more 	10 psi max.* 
 
* Allowable shear stress may be increased by addition of 10 percent of the axial stress due to the weight of the wall directly above. 
(Prior code § 8261 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2356, § 37, 2-26-2014)  
15.36.210 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2392, § 39, adopted Jan. 25, 2017, deleted § 15.36.210, which pertained to UBC Section 3205(d) added—fire and draftstops, and derived from prior code § 8262.  
15.36.220 - Offers of dedication. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 17.22.210 (A) of the Montebello Municipal Code, repairs or alterations to structures made pursuant to this chapter shall not require an offer of dedication to the city. In the event that a building is totally demolished, dedication shall be required upon any reconstruction. 
(Prior code § 8261)  
Chapter 15.40 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
 
15.40.010 - Statutory authorization. 
The legislature of the state of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560 and 65800, conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the city of Montebello does adopt the following floodplain management regulations. 
(Ord. 2174A § 1, 1998: prior code § 9001.1)  
15.40.020 - Findings. 
A.  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contribute to the flood loss. 
(Ord. 2174A § 2, 1998: prior code § 9001.2)  
15.40.030 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
A.  Protect human life and health; 
B.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
C.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
D.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
E.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
F.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazards as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage; 
G.  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
H.  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. 2174A § 3, 1998: prior code § 9001.3)  
15.40.040 - Content and provisions. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions to: 
A.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
B.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve as such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
C.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channel, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters; 
D.  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
E.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. 2174A § 4, 1998: prior code § 9001.4)  
15.40.050 - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards, and areas of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazards within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. 2174A § 5, 1998: prior code § 9003.1)  
15.40.060 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
"Accessory use" means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
"Alluvial fan" means a geomorphological feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration. 
"Apex" means the point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front. 
"Appeal" means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
"Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, or AR/AH Zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flow is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
"Area of special flood hazard." See "special flood hazard area." 
"AR zone" means a special flood hazard area that results from the decertification of a previously accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in the process of being restored to provide a one-hundred-year or greater level of flood protection. 
"Base flood" means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter. 
"Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides. 
"Building." See "structure." 
"Developed areas" means an area of a community that is: 
1.  A primarily urbanized, built-up area that is minimum of twenty contiguous acres, has basic urban infrastructure, including roads, utilities, communications and public facilities, to sustain industrial, residential and commercial activities, and meets one of the following: 
a.  Within which seventy-five percent or more of the parcels, tracts or lots contain commercial, industrial or residential structures or uses; or 
b.  Is a single parcel, tract or lot in which seventy-five percent of the area contains existing commercial or industrial structures or uses; or 
c.  Is a subdivision developed at a density of at least two residential structures per acre within which seventy-five percent or more of the lots contain existing residential structures. 
2.  Undeveloped parcels, tracts or lots, the combination of which is less than twenty acres and contiguous on at least three sides to areas meeting the criteria of subsection 1 of this definition. 
3.  A subdivision that is a minimum of twenty contiguous acres that has obtained all necessary government approvals, provided that the actual "start of construction" of structures has occurred on at least 
a.  Ten percent of the lots or remaining lots of a subdivision; or 
b.  Ten percent of the maximum building coverage or remaining building coverage allowed for a single lot subdivision. 
and construction of structures is underway. Residential subdivision must meet the density criteria in subsection (1)(c) of this definition. 
"Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
"Encroachment" means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
"Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
"Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
"Flood, flooding or floodwater" means: 
1.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and 
2.  The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. 
"Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway. 
"Flood Hazard Boundary Map" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards. 
"Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
"Flood Insurance Study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
"Floodplain or flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See "flooding." 
"Floodplain administrator" is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
"Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
"Floodplain management regulations" means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
"Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. 
"Flood-related erosion" means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding. 
"Flood-related erosion area" or "flood-related erosion prone area" means a land area adjoining the shore of a lake or other body of water, which due to the composition of the shoreline or bank and high water levels or wind-driven currents, is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage. 
"Flood-related erosion area management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood-related erosion damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood-related erosion to emergency preparedness plans, flood-related erosion control works, and floodplain management regulations. 
"Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as "regulatory floodway." 
"Floodway encroachment lines" means the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state and local floodplain maps. 
"Floodway fringe" is that area of the floodplain on either side of the "regulatory floodway" where encroachment may be permitted. 
"Fraud and victimization" as related to Sections 15.40.280 through 15.40.300, variances, of this chapter, means that the variances granted must not cause fraud or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty to one hundred years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk damage from flood, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
"Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
"Governing body" means the local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. 
"Hardship" as related to Sections 15.40.280 through 15.40.300, variances, of this chapter means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The city requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
"Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of the structure. 
"Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Registry of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
"Levee" means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
"Levee system" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
"Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. (See "basement.") 
1.  An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to: 
a.  The wet floodproofing standard in Section 15.40.210C. 
b.  The anchoring standards in Section 15.40.190. 
c.  The construction materials and methods standards in Section 15.40.200. 
d.  The standards for utilities in Section 15.40.220. 
2.  For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see "basement"). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas. 
"Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
"Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
"Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
"Mudslides" (i.e., mudflow) describes a condition where there is a river, flow or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside, usually as a result of a dual condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on the ground, preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain. 
"Mudslide (i.e., mudflow) prone areas" means an area with land surfaces and slopes of unconsolidated material where the history, geology and climate indicate a potential for mudflow. 
"New construction," for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
"New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community. 
"Obstruction" includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carded by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
"One-hundred-year-flood" or "100-year flood." See "base flood." 
"Principal structure" means a structure used for the principal use of the property as distinguished from an accessory use. 
"Public safety and nuisance" as related to Sections 15.40.280 through 15.40.300, variances, of this chapter, means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal or basin. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
"Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
"Remedy a violation" means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
"Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
"Sheet flow area." See "area of shallow flooding." 
"Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area in the floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on a FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-A30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, AH, V1-V30, VE or V. 
"Start of construction" includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparations, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation of the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
"Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally aboveground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
"Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
"Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
2.  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
"Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
"Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
"Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
"Watercourse" means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. 2174A § 6, 1998: Ord. 2075 § 1, 1992: prior code § 9002)  
15.40.070 - Lands to which this ordinance applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city of Montebello. 
(Ord. 2174A § 7, 1998)  
15.40.080 - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated July 6, 1998, and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated July 6, 1998, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are adopted by reference and declared to be part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator. The study and FIRMs are on file at 1600 West Beverly Boulevard, Montebello, California 90640, City Hall, Department of Public Works counter for public viewing. 
(Ord. 2174A § 8, 1998: prior code § 9003.2)  
15.40.090 - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. 2174A § 9, 1998: prior code § 9003.3)  
15.40.100 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. 2174A § 10, 1998: prior code § 9003.4)  
15.40.110 - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
A.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
B.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
C.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. 2174A § 11, 1998: prior code § 9003.5)  
15.40.120 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. 2174A § 12, 1998: prior code § 9003.6)  
15.40.130 - Severability. 
This chapter and the various parts thereof are declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. 2174A § 13, 1998)  
15.40.140 - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 15.40.080. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
A.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures—in Zone AO, elevation of highest adjacent grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all structures; or 
B.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, if required in Section 15.40.210 C; and 
C.  All appropriate certifications listed in Section 15.40.160D of this chapter; and 
D.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(Ord. 2174A § 14, 1998: prior code § 9004.1)  
15.40.150 - Floodplain administrator—Designated. 
The city engineer is appointed to administer. implement and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. 
(Ord. 2174A § 15, 1998: prior code § 9004.2)  
15.40.160 - Floodplain administrator—Duties and responsibilities. 
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
A.  Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine that: 
1.  Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
2.  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; 
3.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and 
4.  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point. 
B.  Review and Use of Any Other Base Flood Date. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.40.080, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Section 15.40.180 through 15.40.270. Any such information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption. 
C.  Notification of Other Agencies. In alteration or relocation of a watercourse: 
1.  Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation; 
2.  Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and 
3.  Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of such watercourse is maintained. 
D.  Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following: 
1.  Certification required by Section 15.40.210A (lowest floor elevations); 
2.  Certification required by Section 15.40.210B (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures); 
3.  Certification required by Section 15.40.210C (wet floodproofing standard); 
4.  Certification of elevation required by Section 15.40.230B (subdivision standards); and 
5.  Certification required by Section 15.40.260A (floodway encroachments). 
E.  Map Determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 15.40.280 through 15.40.300. 
F.  Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 15.40.090. 
G.  AR Zone Duties. 
1.  Use the adopted official map or legal description of those designated developed areas within Zones AR, AR/AR 1-30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/A, AR/AO as defined in Section 15.40.060 to determine if a proposed project is in a developed area. 
2.  Determine the base flood elevation to be used for individual projects within the developed areas, areas not designated as developed areas, and dual zone areas. (See Section 15.40.270.) 
3.  Require the applicable standards in Sections 15.40.180 through 15.40.270. 
4.  Provide written notification to the permit applicant that the area has been designated as an AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO, or AR/A Zone and whether the structure will be elevated or protected to or above the AR base flood elevation. 
(Ord. 2174A § 16, 1998: prior code § 9004.3)  
15.40.170 - Appeals. 
The city council of the city of Montebello shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2174A § 17, 1998)  
15.40.180 - Standards of construction—Applicability. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the standards in Section 15.40.190 through 15.40.210 are required. 
(Ord. 2174A § 18, 1998: prior code § 9005.1)  
15.40.190 - Standards of construction—Anchoring. 
A.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
B.  All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 15.40.240. 
(Ord. 2174A § 19, 1998: prior code § 9005.2A)  
15.40.200 - Standards of construction—Materials and methods. 
All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed: 
A.  With materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
B.  Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
C.  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and 
D.  Within Zones AH, AO, AR/AH, or AR/AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from the proposed structures. 
(Ord. 2174A § 20, 1998: prior code § 9005.2B)  
15.40.210 - Standards of construction—Elevation and floodproofing. 
(See Section 15.40.060 definitions for "basement," "lowest floor," "new construction," "substantial damage," "substantial improvement." For AR zone requirements, see Section 15.40.270.) 
A.  Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement: 
1.  In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified. (The state of California recommends that in AO zones without velocities the lowest floor be elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height exceeding the depth number specified in feet in the FIRM by at least two feet, or elevated at least four feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.) 
2.  In an A zone, elevated to or above the base flood elevation, as determined by this community. (The State of California recommends the lowest floor be elevated at least two feet above the base flood elevation, as determined by the community.) 
3.  In all other zones, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. (The state of California recommends the lowest floor be elevated at least two feet above the base flood elevation.) 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
B.  Nonresidential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall either be elevated to conform with Section 15.40.210A or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities: 
1.  Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under Section 15.40.210A so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
2.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
3.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
C.  All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are useable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must exceed the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or 
2.  Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
D.  Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 15.40.240. 
(Ord. 2174A § 21, 1998: prior code § 9005.2C)  
15.40.220 - Standards for utilities. 
A.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
1.  Infiltration of floodwaters into the systems, and 
2.  Discharge from the systems into floodwaters. 
B.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. 2174A § 22, 1998: prior code § 9005.2D)  
15.40.230 - Standards for subdivisions. 
A.  All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood. 
B.  All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the lowest floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator. 
C.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
D.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
E.  All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. 2174A § 23, 1998: prior code § 9005.3)  
15.40.240 - Standards for manufactured homes. 
A.  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map, on sites located 
1.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
2.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
3.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
4.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation (the state of California recommends at least two feet above the base flood elevation) and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved (in dual zones only) on sites located in areas described in subsections (A)(1) through (A)(4) of this section within Zones AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO, or AR/A shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated in accordance with the elevation requirements prescribed in Section 15.40.270. 
B.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH and AE, on the community's flood insurance rate map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection A of this section will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation collapse and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the 
1.  Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation (the state of California recommends at least two feet above the base flood elevation), or 
2.  Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six inches in height above grade. 
C.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved (in dual zones only) within Zones AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO or AR/A shall be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation collapse and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the 
1.  Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the elevation requirements prescribed in Section 15.40.270, or 
2.  Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are not less than thirty-six inches in height above grade. 
(Ord. 2174A § 24, 1998: Ord. 2075 § 2 (part), 1992: prior code § 9005.4)  
15.40.250 - Standards for recreational vehicles. 
All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map will either: 
A.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days, and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions), or 
B.  Meet the permit requirements of Sections 15.40.140 through 15.40.170 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 15.40.240A. 
(Ord. 2174A § 25, 1998: Ord. 2075 § 2 (part), 1992: prior code § 9005.5)  
15.40.260 - Floodways. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.40.080 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
A.  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other new development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in [the base] flood elevation during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
B.  If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Sections 15.40.180 through 15.40.270. 
(Ord. 2174A § 26, 1998: Ord. 2075 § 2 (part), 1992: prior code § 9005.6)  
15.40.270 - AR zone areas. 
Within areas designated as AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO, or AR/A as established under Section 15.40.080, the following standards shall apply: 
A.  Developed Areas. All new construction in areas designated as developed areas shall meet the standards of Sections 15.40.180 through 15.40.270 using the lower of either the AR base flood elevation or the elevation that is three feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
B.  Areas Not Designated as Developed Areas. All new construction in areas that are not designated as developed areas: 
1.  Where the AR flood depth is equal to or less than five feet above the highest adjacent grade, shall meet the standards of Sections 15.40.180 through 15.40.270 using the lower of either the AR base flood elevation or the elevation that is three feet above the highest adjacent grade; or 
2.  Where the AR flood depth is greater than five feet above the highest adjacent grade, shall meet the standards of Sections 15.40.180 through 15.40.270 using the AR base flood elevation. 
C.  Dual Zone Areas. 
1.  All new construction in areas within Zone AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO, AR/A shall meet the standards of Sections 15.40.180 through 15.40.270 using the higher of either the applicable AR Zone elevation (as determined from subsections A or B of this section) or the base flood elevation (or flood depth) for the underlying A1-30, AE, AH, AO, or A Zone. 
2.  All substantial improvements to existing construction within Zones AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO, or AR/A shall meet the standards of Sections 15.40.180 through 15.40.270 using the base flood elevation (or flood depth) for the underlying A1-30, AE, AH, AO, or A zone. 
(Ord. 2174A § 27, 1998)  
15.40.280 - Nature of variances. 
A.  The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the general principal of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristics must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners. 
B.  It is the duty of the city to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if the variances are strictly limited, Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. 
(Ord. 2174A § 28, 1998: Ord. 2075 § 6 (part), 1992: prior code § 9006.1)  
15.40.290 - Variances—Appeal board. 
A.  In passing upon requests for variances, the city shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the: 
1.  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
2.  Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3.  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property; 
4.  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
5.  Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
6.  Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
7.  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
8.  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
9.  Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
10.  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of use, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and 
11.  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges. 
B.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that: 
1.  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars for one hundred dollars of insurance coverage; and 
2.  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the county recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
C.  The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the federal insurance administration, federal emergency management agency. 
(Ord. 2174A § 29, 1998: Ord. 2075 § 6 (part), 1992: prior code § 9006.1 (part))  
15.40.300 - Variances—Conditions. 
A.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Sections 15.40.140 through 15.40.270 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
B.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" (as defined in Section 15.40.060 of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
C.  Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
D.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the "minimum necessary" considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the city need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the city believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance. 
E.  Variances shall only be issued upon a: 
1.  Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional "hardship" (as defined in Section 15.40.060 of this chapter) to the applicant; and 
3.  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (as defined in Section 15.40.060 - see "Public safety or nuisance"), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in Section 15.40.060) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
F.  Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of Sections 15.40.300A through 15.40.300E are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance. 
G.  Upon consideration of the factors of Section 15.40.290A and the purpose of this chapter, the city may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2174A § 30, 1998: Ord. 2075 § 6 (part), 1992: prior code § 9006.2)  
Chapter 15.44 - MOVING OF BUILDINGS 
Section: 
 
15.44.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be construed as herein set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
"Structure" or "building" means any house or other building or structure erected or constructed or in existence prior to moving hereinafter referred to. 
(Prior code §§ 8400 and 8400.1)  
15.44.020 - Permit—Required. 
A.  No person shall move any building or structure or any portion thereof, to any location within the city from a location outside the city, or from one location to another within the city, unless and until the city council has first issued to the owner of the premises to which the building is to be moved, a permit to relocate the particular building upon these premises. Such permit shall be called a "relocation permit." The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative and in addition to all other requirements of this code. 
(Prior code § 8401 (part))  
15.44.030 - Exemption. 
When a building is to be moved from one location to another on the same lot, a relocation permit shall not be required. 
(Prior code § 8401 (part))  
15.44.040 - Permit—Application—Fee. 
Before any application for a relocation permit is accepted, a fee of seventy-five dollars for a building located outside the city or a fee of thirty-five dollars for a building located within the city shall be paid by the applicant to cover the cost to the city of the investigation of the conditions of the buildings to be moved and the inspection of the proposed new location. This application fee shall be in addition to the regular building permit fee. No part of the application fee shall be refunded. 
(Prior code § 8402)  
15.44.050 - Permit—Application—Form and content. 
A separate application must be made for each building or structure, or portion of a building or structure. No permit shall be issued until an application has been filed as herein provided. Every application to the city council for a relocation permit shall be in writing upon a form furnished by the city clerk, and shall set forth such information as may reasonably be required in order to carry out the purposes of this chapter, including the following: 
A.  A complete description of the building or structure to be moved; 
B.  A recent photograph of the building or structure; 
C.  The present location of the building or structure; 
D.  The street location or other identifying description of the location to which the building or structure is to be moved; 
E.  A description of the route over, along, across or upon which such building or structure, section or portion thereof, is to be moved, and the date and time when it is proposed to be moved; 
F.  A complete description of any proposed additions, alterations, repairs or improvements to be made to the building or structure, either before or after it is moved, and a statement of the approximate time when the same will be made; 
G.  The proposed use to which such building or structure will be put; 
H.  A termite inspection report; 
I.  Such other relevant information as the city council may require. 
(Prior code § 8403)  
15.44.060 - Permit—Application—Hearing. 
The city clerk, immediately upon receipt of any such application, shall set the same upon the agenda of the city council for hearing and shall give notice of the date, time and place of the hearing of such application by the city council in the same manner as prescribed for notice of a zoning variance. At such time and place the applicant and any protestants may appear and be heard in all matters relevant to the application. In the event the application shall not be heard by the city council at the time so designated, the city council may hear and consider such application at any subsequent date to which such hearing is continued. 
(Prior code § 8404)  
15.44.070 - Permit—Issuance—Determination—Conditions. 
A.  No permit shall be issued to relocate any building or structure which is so constructed or in such condition as to be dangerous; or which is infested with pests or unsanitary; or which is so dilapidated, defective, unsightly or in such condition of deterioration or disrepair, or of such appearance or architectural design that its location at the proposed site would cause depreciation of the value or enjoyment of the neighboring properties, or cause appreciable harm to or be materially detrimental to the property or improvements in the district within a radius of one thousand feet from the proposed site; or if the proposed use is prohibited by the zoning laws of the city; or if the structure is of a type prohibited, at the proposed location, by any fire district regulations, or by any other law or ordinance; provided, however, that if the condition of the building or structure, in the judgment of the city council and building inspector, admits of practicable and effective correction or repair, the permit may be issued upon condition as hereinafter provided. 
B.  If the unlawful, dangerous or defective condition of the building or structure proposed to be relocated is such that remedy or correction cannot practicably and effectively be made, the permit shall be denied. In order to determine any of the matters presented by the application, the city council may cause to be made any investigation required in its discretion. 
C.  If the city council shall deem it necessary or expedient to do so, it may, in granting any relocation permit, impose thereon such terms and conditions as it may deem reasonable and proper, including, but not limited to, the requirements of changes, alterations, additions or repairs to be made to or upon the building or structure, to the end that the relocation thereof will not be materially detrimental or injurious to public safety or public welfare or to the property and improvements, or either, in the district, as hereinbefore limited, to which it is to be moved. All repair of dry rot and termite damage shall be completed before moving. The terms and conditions upon which each permit is granted shall be written upon the permit or appended in writing thereto. 
(Prior code §§ 8405, 8406 and 8407)  
15.44.080 - Deposit. 
When a building is to be moved from a location within the city, to a location outside the city, a cash deposit or instrument of credit, in the amount of three hundred dollars shall be required to insure that all foundations, piers, concrete work, waste or rubbish of any kind be removed from the lot within ten days after the building or structure has been removed therefrom. If such work is not accomplished within the period of time, the city shall be empowered to remove all such debris, the cost of which shall be charged against the cash deposit or instrument of credit, and the deposit balance, if any, shall be remitted to the depositor. If any additional funds are expended in removing such debris, the same shall be a proper charge against the permit holder. 
(Prior code § 8401 (part))  
15.44.090 - Bond—Required. 
No relocation permit shall be issued unless the applicant therefor shall first post with the city council a bond executed by the owner of the premises where the building or structure is to be located, as principal, and by a surety company authorized to do business in this state, as surety. The bond, which shall be in form joint and several, shall name the city as obligee, and shall be in an amount equal to the cost, plus ten percent of the work required to be done in order to comply with all of the conditions of such relocation permit, as estimated by the building inspector. In lieu of a surety bond, the applicant may post a bond executed by the owner, as principal, and which is secured by a deposit of cash in the amount named above, and conditioned as required in the case of a surety bond. Such a bond as so secured is hereinafter called a "cash bond" for the purposes of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8408)  
15.44.100 - Bond—Conditions. 
Every bond posted pursuant to this chapter shall be conditioned as follows: 
A.  That each and all of the terms and conditions of this chapter and the relocation permit shall be complied with to the satisfaction of the city council; 
B.  That all of the work required to be done pursuant to the conditions of the relocation permit shall be fully performed and completed within the time limit specified in the relocation permit; or, if no time limit is specified, within ninety days after the date of its issuance. The time limit herein specified, or the time limited specified in any permit, may be extended for good and sufficient cause by the city council, but no time limit shall exceed six months from the date of issuance of the permit. No such extension of time shall be valid unless written, and no such extension shall release any surety upon any bond. 
(Prior code § 8409)  
15.44.110 - Bond—Terms. 
A.  The term of each bond posted pursuant to this chapter shall begin upon the date of the posting thereof and shall end upon the completion, to the satisfaction of the city council, of the performance of all the terms and conditions of the relocation permit. Such completion shall be evidenced by a statement thereof, signed by the building inspector, a copy of which will be sent to any surety or principal upon request. 
B.  When a cash bond has been posted, the cash shall be returned to the depositor, or to his successors or assigns, upon the termination of the bond, except any portion thereof that may have been used or deducted as elsewhere in this chapter provided. 
(Prior code § 8414)  
15.44.120 - Default in performance. 
A.  Notice. Whenever the city council shall find that a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of any permit, written notice thereof shall be given to the principal and to the surety on the bond. Such notice shall state the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof, and the period of time deemed by the city council to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work. 
B.  Duty of Surety. After receipt of such notice the surety must, within therein time specified, either cause the required work to be performed, or, failing therein, must pay over to the city council, the estimated cost of doing the work, as set forth in the notice, plus an additional sum equal to ten percent of the estimated cost. Upon the receipt of such moneys the city council shall proceed, by such mode as it deems convenient, to cause the required work to be performed and completed, but no liability shall be incurred therein other than for the expenditure of the same sum in hand therefor. 
C.  Cash Bond. If a cash bond has been posted, notice of default, as provided above, shall be given to the principal, and if compliance is not had within the time specified, the city council shall proceed without delay, and without further notice or proceedings whatever, to use the cash deposit or any portion of such deposit to cause the required work to be done, by contract or otherwise, in the discretion of the city council. The balance if any, of such cash deposit shall, upon the completion of the work, be returned to the depositor, or to his successors or assigns, after deducting the cost of the work plus ten percent thereof. 
D.  Option to Complete Structure or Clear Site. When any default has occurred, on the part of the principal under the preceding provisions, the surety shall have the option, in lieu of completing the work required, to demolish the building or structure, and to clear, clean and restore the site. If the surety shall fail to complete the work or demolish the building or structure and to clear, clean and restore the site as herein provided, the city council shall have the same option. 
(Prior code §§ 8410—8413)  
15.44.130 - Entry upon premises. 
The city council, the surety, and the duly authorized representatives of either, shall have access to the premises described in the relocation permit for the purpose of inspecting the progress of the work. In the event of any default in the performance of any term or condition of the relocation permit, the surety, or any person employed or engaged on its behalf, shall have the right to go upon the premises to complete the required work or to remove or demolish the building or structure. No person shall interfere with or obstruct the ingress to or from any such premises of any authorized representative or agent of any surety or of the city engaged in the work of completing, demolishing or removing any building or structure for which a relocation permit has been issued, after a default has occurred in the performance of the terms or conditions thereof. 
(Prior code § 8415)  
Chapter 15.48 - GRADING 
 
15.48.010 - Purpose of provisions. 
The purpose of the provisions of this chapter is to safeguard health, safety and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials and the location of work, as the same pertains to the grading and filling of land within the city. 
(Prior code § 8700 (part))  
15.48.020 - Provisions declared minimum necessary to achieve purpose. 
The city council declares the regulations and standards established herein to be minimum regulations necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and that when circumstances warrant, the city engineer shall recommend to the city council such additional standards, procedures, and other regulations as may be necessary 
(Prior code § 8700 (part))  
15.48.030 - Compliance with provisions required. 
No person shall commence, make, or cause to be made, nor shall the owner of any real property located in the city permit or allow any excavation or fill to be made upon any property within the city, without first complying with all applicable provisions of this code and all other applicable regulations of the city. 
(Prior code § 8701 (part))  
15.48.040 - Applicability of provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons, including any county, state or federal governmental agency, or any department, commission or board thereof, or a public utility, except the city; but, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, no such governmental agency or public utility shall be required to pay the city any fee. 
(Prior code § 8701 (part))  
15.48.050 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them herein, unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
"Approved soil testing agency" means an agency which the city engineer finds has technically qualified personnel and adequate facilities for the making of accurate soil tests in accordance with approved engineering practices. 
"Bond" means a form of security posted to guarantee the performance of an obligation, and shall consist of a corporate surety bond, cash, or an "instrument of credit" as that phrase is defined in Section 66499 of the Government Code of the state of California. 
"Building pad" means the aggregate portion or portions of a lot having a uniform grade of less than ten percent as a result of grading which is intended for a building or appurtenant uses. 
"Civil engineer" means a civil engineer dully licensed by the state of California. 
"Deleterious material" means all substances of an organic nature such as trees, brush, lumber, tires, paper, asphalt; also plastics, tin cans, barrels, metal drums, broken concrete, bottles, ashes, junk metal, and other types of trash. 
"Developer" means any person who is the owner or developer of any land within the city who proposes to develop the land in a manner which requires the issuance of a grading permit. 
"Diversion" or "to divert" means a change in the direction of the flow of surface, stream or storm waters. 
"Engineering geologist" means a qualified geologist capable of applying the geological sciences to civil engineering practice. 
"Excavation" means any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar or related material is cut into, dug, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed, and shall include the resultant excavation site condition. 
"Fill" means any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar or related material is deposited, placed, pushed, pulled or transported to a place other than the place from which it was excavated, and shall include the resultant fill side condition. 
"Grading" means an excavation or fill, or any combination thereof, and includes the site condition resulting from any excavation and/or fill. 
"Grading permit" means a permit required by this chapter for all proposed excavations and/or fills. 
"Grading plan" means a plan or map showing the property boundaries, existing contours and proposed final grades, retaining walls, drainage facilities and all other features, structures and designs pertinent to the proposed grading. 
"Hillside areas" means those portions of the city identified as hillside areas on that certain map entitled "City of Montebello, California, Hillside Areas," dated December 1, 1971, and filed with the city clerk, which is incorporated herein by this reference. 
"Hillside plan" means the same as hillside plan review described in Chapter 17.42 of this code. 
"Land surveyor" means a person who is licensed by the state of California. 
"Natural watercourse" means a ravine, swale, depression, cleft, etc., naturally occurring over and upon the land, which receives drainage from the adjoining land areas and conducts it away from its source. 
"Soils engineer" means a civil engineer duly licensed by the state of California who is experienced in soil mechanics. 
"Subdrain" means any type of perforated or permeable drainage pipe or facility installed to intercept and carry off water originating from springs and water seeps so as to lower the groundwater level in the vicinity of the drain. 
"Surface water drainage" means drainage from the surface of the land area which would naturally occur, or which will occur after the final inspection and approval of grading pursuant to this chapter. 
"Temporary storage fills" means soils stockpiled upon a land area for future site development or for temporary storage. 
(Ord. 2070 § 31, 1992; prior code § 8702)  
15.48.060 - Permit—Required. 
No person shall do any grading, nor shall the owner of any real property located in the city cause or allow any grading to be performed on any such land without first obtaining a grading permit therefor from the city engineer. 
(Prior code § 8703 (part))  
15.48.070 - Supervised grading permit—Required when. 
A supervised grading permit shall be issued and performed under the supervision of a civil engineer if such grading will result in any one or more of the following conditions: 
A.  Any excavation or fill exceeding a depth of three feet; 
B.  Any excavation or fill within any public easement or public area; 
C.  Any excavation or fill which will encroach upon, altar, or interfere with any natural watercourse; 
D.  Any excavation or fill which will divert the surface water drainage to or from any adjoining property; 
E.  Any excavation or fill which will not permit surface water to drain by overland flow at a minimum slope of one percent, to the nearest practical street, storm drain or natural watercourse; 
F.  Any excavation or fill in excess of five thousand cubic yards per lot or per acre, whichever may involve the smallest land area, provided the excavation or fill also results in any one or more of the preceding conditions: 
G.  Any excavation or fill in connection with oil and gas defined in Section 5.52.020; 
H.  Any excavation or fill where the city engineer determines that special conditions or potential hazards exist. 
(Prior code § 8703 (A))  
15.48.080 - Regular grading defined. 
All grading other than supervised grading shall be designated "regular grading." 
(Prior code § 8703 (B))  
15.48.090 - Exemptions. 
A.  The following work is specifically excepted from the provisions of this chapter: 
1.  An excavation below finished grade for basements or footings for buildings, swimming pools, walls or other similar structures constructed pursuant to a valid building permit issued by the city; and 
2.  Work on any public works project. 
B.  These exceptions shall not affect the applicability of this chapter to any fill constructed with materials removed from such excavations. 
(Prior code § 8703 (C))  
15.48.100 - Regular grading—Inspections—Timing. 
The city engineer upon notification from the permittee or his agent, shall inspect the grading at the following stages of the work and shall either approve the portion then completed or shall notify the permittee or his agent wherein it fails to comply with the requirements of this code: 
A.  Initial: When the site has been cleared of vegetation and unapproved fills and scarified, benched or otherwise prepared and before any fill is placed; 
B.  Rough: When rough grading has been completed and approximate final elevations have been established; drainage, terraces, swales and other drainage devices graded ready for paving; and berms installed at the top of slopes; 
C.  Final: When grading has been completed, all drainage devices installed, slope planting established and irrigation systems installed. 
(Prior code § 8703 (D))  
15.48.110 - Supervised grading—Inspection and reporting requirements. 
It shall be the responsibility of the engineer to supervise the grading operations and to coordinate site inspection and testing to assure compliance of the work with the approved grading plans, the recommendations of the soils engineer and/or geologist, and the requirements of this code. He shall submit periodic progress reports as required by the city engineer, and shall certify in writing to the satisfactory completion of the various stages of the work. The certification for that portion of the work concerning the preparation of the existing ground surface and placing and compaction of fills may be made by the soils engineer for the approved soil testing agency. The city engineer may require sufficient inspections by the geologist to assure that all geological conditions have been adequately considered and recommended and corrective measures incorporated in the work. All necessary reports, compaction data and soils engineering or engineering geological recommendations made during the grading operation shall be submitted to the city engineer by the supervising grading engineer. 
(Prior code § 8703 (E))  
15.48.120 - Permit—Application—Content. 
An application for a grading permit shall be accompanied by scale plans in triplicate. Except as may be waived by the city engineer upon a finding that the proposed work is minor in nature and would not create a hazardous or otherwise objectionable condition, the plans shall be prepared and signed by a registered civil engineer and shall show the following: 
A.  Property lines of the property on which the work is to be performed; 
B.  Location of any buildings or structures on the property where the work is to be performed, and the location of any building or structure on abutting land, which structures are within fifteen feet of the property line of the property on which the work is to be performed; 
C.  Elevations, dimensions, locations, extent and the slopes of all proposed work shown on a contour map, and a certification of the quality of excavation and fill involved; 
D.  Detail plans of all walls, cribs, drains, dams or other protective devices to be constructed in connection with or as part of the proposed work, together with a map showing the drainage area and calculated cubic-feet-per-second stormwater runoff of the area served by all drains; and 
E.  Additional information as the city engineer may require in order to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8703 (F))  
15.48.130 - Permit—Application—Soil and geology reports—Authority to require. 
If, in the opinion of the city engineer, the grading constitutes a potential hazard to person or property, he may require a soil report and/or a geological report before the issuance of a grading permit can be considered. 
(Prior code § 8703 (G))  
15.48.140 - Permit—Hillside areas—Hillside plan required—Exceptions. 
A hillside plan shall be submitted for approval as provided for in Chapter 17.42 of this code for all property located in any hillside area, prior to the issuance of a grading permit, except where the city engineer and planning director have both indicated, in writing, that the grading plan is in substantial compliance with a previously approved hillside plan or subdivision map recorded prior to the effective date of this section, or where the city engineer finds the grading plan will have no significant effect upon the conditions of the property. A supplemental hillside plan shall be required for any amendment or modification of an approved hillside plan. 
(Ord. 2070 § 32, 1992: prior code § 8704)  
15.48.150 - Permit—Conditional approval. 
A.  Whenever, in the judgment of the city engineer, the proposed grading would or could, directly or indirectly, create a hazard to human life, or endanger abutting or adjacent property, or any public facility, or result in the creation of a nuisance to adjacent properties, no permit shall be issued. If, in the opinion of the city engineer, the danger, hazard or nuisance could be eliminated by the imposition of reasonable conditions, he may conditionally issue such permit. 
B.  Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to: 
1.  Designation of the hours of operation or the period of the year during which the work under the grading permit may be performed; 
2.  Restrictions as to the size and type of equipment; 
3.  Designation of routes upon which materials may be transported, and other regulations pertaining to the use of public streets; 
4.  The manner of disposing of excavated material; 
5.  Requirements as to the laying of dust, the prevention of noises and other such situations which are or might be offensive or injurious to the neighborhood, the general public or any portion thereof; 
6.  Designation of maximum or minimum slopes to be used if the same vary from those prescribed in this chapter; 
7.  Regulations as to the degree of compaction of fill material; 
8.  Requirements as to paving private driveways and roads for drainage purposes; 
9.  Requirements for safe and adequate drainage of the site; 
10.  A requirement that approval of the city engineer be secured before any work which has been commenced may be discontinued; 
11.  A requirement that men and equipment be provided at the site during storms to prevent incomplete work from endangering life or property; 
12.  A requirement for fencing of excavations or fills which would be hazardous without such fencing; 
13.  Appropriate protective devices, such as walls, cribs, etc., may be required; and 
14.  Specific methods of performing the grading may be required. 
(Prior code § 8705)  
15.48.160 - Fees. 
A.  Plan Checking Fees. Before accepting a set of plans and specifications for checking, the city engineer shall collect a plan checking fee. The amount of the plan checking fee shall be as set by resolution of the city council. 
B.  Grading Permit Fees. A fee for each grading permit shall be paid to the city as set by resolution of the city council. 
C.  Fee for Excavation and Fill on the Same Site. For excavation and fill on the same site, the fee shall be based upon the volume of the excavation or the fill, whichever is greater. 
D.  Fees for Drainage and Protection Devices and for Landscaping and Irrigation. A fee shall be collected, as set by resolution of the city council, for plan check and inspection of protective and drainage devices of landscaping and irrigation. 
(Prior code § 8719)  
15.48.170 - Bond—Required. 
Before a grading permit is issued, the applicant shall file with the engineering department a bond guaranteeing compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and any conditions of approval upon the issuance of such permit. 
(Prior code § 8720 (part))  
15.48.180 - Bond—Type. 
All bonds shall be executed by the owner of the property where the work is to be undertaken, or by this contractor or agent, and by a corporate surety authorized to do business in the state, as surety, or in lieu thereof, the bond shall be a cash deposit or instrument of credit. 
(Prior code § 8720 (A))  
15.48.190 - Bond—Conditions. 
Every bond shall be conditioned that the permittee shall, and the surety shall, guarantee: 
A.  Compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter and all applicable laws and ordinances; 
B.  Compliance with all of the terms and conditions of the permit for excavation or fill and completion of work to the reasonable satisfaction of the city engineer; and 
C.  Completion of all work contemplated under the permit within the time limit specified in the permit. The city engineer may, for sufficient cause, extend the time specified in the permit, but no such extension shall release the surety from its obligations. 
(Prior code § 8720 (B))  
15.48.200 - Bond—Period and termination. 
The terms of each bond shall begin upon the date of filing with the city engineer and shall remain in effect until the completion of all work included in the permit to the satisfaction of the city engineer. All slope protection devices shall be in place, functional, clean and established. Such completion shall be evidenced by the issuance of a certificate of completion signed by the city engineer. An amount determined by the city engineer shall be posted as a guarantee and warranty of the work for a period of one year following the issuance of the certificate of completion against any defective work, or labor done, or any defective materials furnished. 
(Prior code § 8720 (C))  
15.48.210 - Bond—Amount. 
The amount of the bond shall be based upon the number of cubic yards of material in either excavation or fill, whichever is the greater amount, and shall include the estimated cost of all drainage or other protective devices as may be required and all landscaping and irrigation as may be required. The amount of the bond shall be based on an estimate approved by the city engineer. 
(Prior code § 8720 (D))  
15.48.220 - Liability insurance. 
If, in the opinion of the city engineer, the nature of a specific grading project is such that it might create a hazard to human life or endanger enjoining or adjacent property or any public property, the city engineer may, before issuing the permit, require that the applicant file a certificate showing that the applicant is insured against claims for damages for personal injury and property damage, including damage to city property, which may arise from or out of the performance of the work, whether such performance be by himself, his subcontractor or any person directly or indirectly employed by him, and the amount of such insurance shall be prescribed by the city engineer in accordance with the nature of the risks involved. Such insurance shall include protection against liability arising from completed operations and shall have the city as a coinsured. 
(Prior code § 8721)  
15.48.230 - Permit—Expiration—Renewal. 
Every permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire at the end of the period of time set forth in the permit. If the permittee is unable to complete the work within the specified time he shall, prior to expiration of the permit, present in writing to the city engineer a request for an extension of time, setting forth therein the reasons therefor. If, in the opinion of the city engineer, such an extension is reasonably necessary, he may grant additional time for the completion of the work. 
(Prior code § 8725)  
15.48.240 - Permit—Revocation. 
A.  Permits issued under this chapter may be revoked by the city engineer for any of the following reasons: 
1.  Violation of any condition of the permit; or 
2.  Violation of any provision of this chapter; or other applicable law; or 
3.  The existence of a condition or the doing of an act constituting or creating a nuisance or endangering the lives or property of others. 
B.  Written notice of revocation shall be served when the permittee by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the permittee at his last known address. Such notice shall contain a brief statement of the grounds relied upon for revoking the permit. All work shall be stopped as of the date of revocation as stated in the notice. 
(Prior code § 8724)  
15.48.250 - Temporary storage fills. 
A.  No temporary storage fill will be allowed except pursuant to a grading permit issued after the city engineer has found that such storage fill would not constitute a hazard to life or property, or become a public nuisance or health menace. 
B.  Temporary storage fills approved by the issuance of a grading permit shall be removed from the site within a period of time not to exceed six months from the date of issuance of the permit unless a lesser period of time is so stipulated in the permit, or unless the fill is graded and compacted under the authority granted by a subsequent or amended grading permit. A bond shall be required to insure the removal or elimination of such fill upon the expiration of time set forth in permit. 
C.  Temporary storage fills, as described herein, that are to be maintained for a duration of more than six months, shall require the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.70 of this code. 
(Ord. 2070 § 33, 1992; prior code § 8706)  
15.48.260 - Grading in relation to property lines. 
Where two or more contiguous lots are to be graded to different elevations, such as within a subdivision, the top of slope shall be located on property line wherever practicable. Boundaries of the site are excepted unless the adjoining property owner consents in writing to the construction of cut or fill slopes upon or immediately adjacent to his property. 
(Prior code § 8707)  
15.48.270 - Encroachment onto adjacent property—Consent of owner required. 
Whenever an excavation or fill requires encroachment onto adjacent property, the applicant shall obtain the written consent of the adjacent property owner, or his authorized representative, and shall file a copy of the consent with the engineering department before a permit for such grading may be issued. 
(Prior code § 8708)  
15.48.280 - Work hours. 
No grading, or other work in connection therewith, including the import or export of earth materials, shall be conducted between the hours of six p.m. and 7 a.m., nor on Sunday, except in cases of emergency, as determined by the city engineer. 
(Prior code § 8709)  
15.48.290 - Building pad development. 
Building pads shall be graded so as to provide a pad size of at least one-third of the minimum lot area required by the zoning regulations of the city, and for proper control and disposition of surface waters. 
A.  Drainage. 
1.  All building pads shall be uniformly sloped to the street at a minimum grade of two percent. A lesser slope may be permitted by the city engineer for sites graded in nonhillside areas or where special drainage provisions are made, provided such modifications will not result in unfavorable drainage conditions. 
2.  Drainage to locations other than public streets shall not be permitted unless a specific finding is made by the city engineer that drainage to the street would be impractical or hazardous. Alternate methods of drainage within subdivisions shall be subject to city council approval. 
B.  Berms. Compacted earth berms, curbs or swales shall be provided at the top of all slopes to prevent surface drainage from passing over the slope. 
C.  Drainage Around Buildings. Surface drainage shall be conducted around buildings by utilization of approved drainage facilities. 
(Prior code § 8710)  
15.48.300 - Responsibility for retaining services of soils engineer and engineering geologist—Reports. 
It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to obtain the services of a soils engineer and/or engineering geologist, if required by the city engineer or by this chapter. Whenever the terms "written certification," "approved in writing," etc., are used in this chapter, it shall be required that a soils engineer and/or engineering geologist prepare and sign such report, and that a copy be forwarded immediately upon completion to: 
A.  The permittee; 
B.  The city engineer (subsequently to be a matter of permanent record on file in the office of the city engineer); and 
C.  Other agencies as may be required by law. 
(Prior code § 8711)  
15.48.310 - Excavations—Allowable slope. 
No excavation shall be made with a cut face steeper in slope than one and one-half feet, measured horizontally, to one foot, measured vertically. The city engineer may permit the excavation to be made with a cut face steeper in slope than hereinbefore described if the applicant shows, through subsurface exploration by both a soils engineer and an engineering geologist, to the reasonable satisfaction of the city engineer, that the material composing the slope of the excavation and the underlying bedrock is capable of standing on a steeper slope. No slopes shall be cut steeper than the angle of the bedding in any rock or soil formation. If the material composing the slope is of such composition and character as to be unstable under the anticipated maximum moisture content, the slope angle shall be reduced to a stable value. This requirement shall be confirmed by the soils engineer's written certification following laboratory testing. 
(Prior code § 8712 (A))  
15.48.320 - Excavations—Exposed strata or bedding planes. 
Where the excavation exposes strata above the top of the cut slope which would permit the entry of water along bedding planes, the area shall be sealed with a compacted soil blanket having a minimum thickness of two feet. The soil for this blanket shall be relatively impervious and shall be approved by the soils engineer. 
(Prior code § 8712 (B))  
15.48.330 - Excavations—Top of cut slope. 
The top of cut slopes shall be commenced no closer to the grading site boundary line than one foot plus one-fifth in height of the cut, but need not exceed a horizontal distance of ten feet. A lesser distance may be approved by the city engineer if soils and geological reports indicate that the underlying soils are conducive to stable slope conditions. 
(Prior code § 8712 (C))  
15.48.340 - Excavations—Protective terraces or benches. 
A.  Five-foot wide terraces or benches shall be established at the top of a slopes where the tributary watershed is in excess of twenty-five feet measured horizontally from the top of the slope. 
B.  No cut slope shall exceed a vertical height of one hundred feet unless horizontal benches thirty-feet wide are installed at each one hundred-foot vertical interval. 
C.  Intervening terraces or benches shall be ten-feet wide and established at intervals not to exceed fifty feet measured vertically. 
D.  All terraces or benches shall be paved for drainage purposes. 
(Prior code § 8712 (D))  
15.48.350 - Fills—Allowable slope. 
No fill shall be made which creates an exposed surface steeper in slope than two feet, measured horizontally, to one foot measured vertically. The city engineer may permit a fill to be made which creates an exposed surface steeper in slope than hereinbefore described if the applicant shows, through the investigation and report of a soils engineer and an engineering geologist, to the reasonable satisfaction of the city engineer, that the strength characteristics of the material to be used in the fill are such as to produce an equivalent degree of slope stability and safety. 
(Prior code § 8713 (A))  
15.48.360 - Fills—Compaction. 
A.  All fills shall be compacted to a minimum of ninety percent relative density as determined by the ASTM test method D-1557-70. 
B.  Fills shall be tested for relative compaction by a soils testing agency approved by the city engineer. A certificate of compliance by such agency setting forth the compacted fill densities shall be filed with the engineering department before approval of any fill is given. 
C.  Fills in nonhillside areas which do not exceed twelve inches in depth need not be compacted, but such fills shall not change the existing drainage pattern of the area. 
(Prior code § 8713 (B))  
15.48.370 - Fills—Toe of fill slope. 
The toe of fill slopes shall be commenced no closer to the grading site boundary line than one-half the height of the fill, but need not exceed a horizontal distance of ten feet, except as the same may be modified in Section 15.48.380. 
(Prior code § 8713 (C))  
15.48.380 - Fills—Fill slopes adjacent to developed property. 
Where the applicant proposes to construct filled ground so as to raise the elevation of the property where it abuts previously improved property, retaining walls shall be required on the property line to a maximum height of the finished lot elevation, or six feet, whichever may be the lower. Should the height of the proposed fill exceed six feet, the fill slope shall commence at an elevation one foot below the top of the retaining wall. Provided, that: 
A.  If the city council finds: 
1.  That elimination of the requirement for retaining walls will not adversely affect the purpose and intent of this chapter, and will not adversely affect adjacent properties, and 
2.  That all abutting property owners consent in writing to the elimination of such retaining walls, the council shall waive the requirements of this section; 
B.  This requirement may be modified to provide for the installation of permanent drainage facilities between the constructed fill and the property line, if the city council finds the same reasonably necessary. 
(Prior code § 8713 (D))  
15.48.390 - Fills—Protective terraces or benches. 
A.  No fill slope shall exceed a vertical height of one hundred feet unless horizontal benches thirty feet wide are installed at each one-hundred-foot vertical level. 
B.  Intervening terraces or benches shall be five feet wide and established at intervals not exceeding twenty feet measured vertically. 
C.  All terraces or benches shall be paved for drainage purposes. 
(Prior code § 8713 (E))  
15.48.400 - Fills—Combined cut and fill slope. 
Where a combined cut and fill slope exceeds twenty-five feet in height, a drainage bench shall be placed at the top of the cut slope. The effect of surcharge of the fill under the underlying soil shall be considered by the soils engineer and engineering geologist, and specific recommendations shall be made relative to the setback between the cut and fill. 
(Prior code § 8713 (F))  
15.48.410 - Fills—Fill area. 
Areas which are to receive fill shall be investigated by the soils engineer and/or engineering geologist to determine the ability of the natural ground to support the fill, if the city engineer finds the same to be reasonably necessary. 
(Prior code § 8713 (G))  
15.48.420 - Fills—Subdrains. 
A.  In hillside areas, subdrains shall be constructed under all fills placed in natural watercourses. Subdrains shall be placed along the watercourse flow line and along the flow line of any branches tributary thereto. Additional subdrains shall be installed to collect all active or potential springs or seeps which will be covered by the fill. Subdrains shall be installed after the watercourse has been excavated to unyielding natural soil in preparation for receiving the fill. 
B.  The actual design and location of subdrains shall be based on the recommendation of the soils engineer and engineering geologist and subject to approval of the city engineer. 
(Prior code § 8713 (H))  
15.48.430 - Fills—Clearing, grubbing and preparing areas to be filled. 
A.  All vegetation, rubbish, uncontrolled fill and unstable soil shall be removed from the site so as to leave the area clean and free from all debris. All soft, spongy or other unsuitable material shall be removed to a depth required to produce a stable subgrade. 
B.  The ground surface shall be plowed or scarified to a depth of six inches until the surface is free form ruts, hummocks, or other uneven features which would tend to prevent uniform compaction. 
C.  Where fills are made on hillsides or slopes greater than one foot, measured vertically, to five feet, measured horizontally, steps or benches shall be cut into the original ground before filling is begun. The design of the steps or benches shall be subject to review and approval by the city engineer. 
D.  After the foundation area for the fill has been cleared and scarified, it shall be disced or bladed until it is uniform and free from large clods, brought to the proper moisture content, and compacted in the same manner and to the same degree as required for the fill material. 
(Prior code § 8713 (F))  
15.48.440 - Fills—Fill materials. 
Fill material shall consist of soils and materials selected and approved in writing by the soils engineer. The soils and materials used shall be essentially free of rocks greater than six inches in diameter and shall not contain paper, wood, glass, metal, cardboard or other deleterious substances. 
(Prior code § 8713 (J))  
15.48.450 - Fills—Placing, spreading and compacting fill material. 
A.  The selected fill material shall be placed in layers which when compacted shall not exceed six inches per layer. Each layer shall be spread evenly and shall be thoroughly mixed during the spreading to insure uniformity of material in each layer. 
B.  When moisture content of the fill material is below that specified by the soils engineer, water shall be added and thoroughly dispersed until the moisture content is as specified to permit the required degree of compaction. 
C.  When the moisture content of the fill material is above that specified by the soils engineer, the fill material shall be aerated by blading or other satisfactory methods until the moisture content is as specified. 
D.  After each layer has been placed, mixed and spread evenly, it shall be thoroughly compacted to not less than ninety percent of maximum dry density. Compaction shall be by means of tamping, sheepsfoot rollers, multiple-wheel pneumatic-tired rollers, or other approved methods that leave the fills free of cleavage planes. Compaction shall be accomplished while the fill material is at the specified moisture content and shall be over the entire fill area. 
E.  Field density tests shall be made at a frequency to be determined by the soils engineer, but in no case shall the tests be made at greater intervals than every two feet of fill measured vertically, and at least one test shall be made for each five hundred cubic yards of fill. Density readings shall be taken in the compacted soil below the disturbed surface. No additional layers of fill shall be spread until the field density tests indicate that the specified density has been obtained. 
F.  The fill operation shall proceed continuously until the fill has been brought to the finished slopes and grades as shown on the approved plans. 
G.  Where loose soil remains on the slope after the final elevation of the fill has been attained, this loose material shall either be removed or compacted so that the face of the finished slope shall have a density of no less than eighty-five percent. 
(Prior code § 8713 (K))  
15.48.460 - Supervision of work. 
Sufficient time shall be spent on the site by the soils engineer each day that fills are placed, or other pertinent work is accomplished, to permit him to certify that the proper compaction of all fills has taken place, and to the adherence with all other requirements of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8714)  
15.48.470 - Seasonal limits. 
A.  No fill material shall be placed, spread or rolled at such time or times that weather conditions are considered unfavorable by the city engineer. When the work is interrupted by heavy rain, fill operations shall not be resumed until field tests by the soils engineer indicate that the moisture content and density of the fill materials meet the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  The period between November 15th and April 15th is determined to be the period during which heavy rainfall normally occurs in the city. Previously authorized grading work which continues into the rainy season shall be protected by the installation of temporary erosion control devices. Plans for erosion control devices shall be submitted to the engineering department and design approval obtained not later than November 1st. The design and construction of desilting basins which discharge drainage onto the city streets or natural watercourses shall be under the control of the engineering department. All temporary erosion control devices, including the desilting basins, shall be installed not later than November 15th. 
C.  Grading work shall be limited or ceased if the city engineer finds that its continuance will constitute a hazard to person or property during the period November 15th through April 15th. 
(Prior code § 8715)  
15.48.480 - Slope planting and irrigation. 
A.  1.  The surface of all cut slopes more than five feet in height and fill slopes more than three feet in height shall be protected against damage by erosion by planting with grass or groundcover plants. Slopes exceeding fifteen feet in vertical height shall also be planted with shrubs spaced not to exceed ten feet on centers; or trees, spaced at not to exceed twenty feet on centers; or a combination of shrubs and trees at equivalent spacings, in addition to the grass or groundcover plants. The plants selected and planting methods used shall be suitable for the soil and climatic conditions of the site, and in accordance with standard specifications approved by resolution of the city council on file in the office of the city engineer. 
2.  Planting need not be provided for cut slopes rocky in character and not subject to damage by erosion, and any slopes protected against erosion damage by other methods when such methods have been specifically recommended by a soils engineer, engineering geologist, or equivalent authority and approved by the city engineer. 
B.  Slopes shall be prepared for planting in one of the following ways: 
1.  The slope surface may be prepared for planting by casting topsoil over the slope surface. The topsoil layer shall not exceed three inches in depth. 
2.  The slope may be scarified to a depth not to exceed three inches. 
3.  Loose material not to exceed three inches in depth may be left on the slope. 
C.  1.  All slopes required to be planted shall be provided with an approved system of irrigation designed to cover all portions of the slope, and plans therefor shall be submitted and approved prior to installation. A functional test of the system may be required. 
2.  The requirements for permanent irrigation systems may be modified upon specific recommendation of a landscape architect, or equivalent authority, that because of the type of plants selected, the planting methods used and the soil and climatic conditions at the site, irrigation will not be necessary for the maintenance of the slope planting. 
D.  The planting and irrigation systems required by this section shall be installed as soon as is practicable after rough grading. Prior to final approval of grading and before the release of the grading bond, the planting shall be well established and growing on the slopes, except as hereinafter set forth. 
E.  Temporary Planting. The city engineer shall permit the temporary planting of fill or cut slopes where, to require permanent planting, prior to the final approval of grading, would constitute a hardship to the owner or contractor; provided, that in addition to such temporary planting, the owner or applicant makes a cash deposit with the city, or instrument of credit, to insure that within a reasonable period of time permanent plantings an irrigation system will be installed in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(Prior code § 8716)  
15.48.490 - Excavations and fills in old dumpsites. 
A.  Extensive accumulations of deleterious materials encountered, or known to exist, in old dumpsites may be permitted to remain if, in the opinion of the city engineer, the deleterious materials will not constitute a hazard to life or property. 
B.  When a site is to be graded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and where extensive accumulations of deleterious materials are known to exist or are subsequently encountered during grading operations, such deleterious materials may be permitted to remain if, in the opinion of the city engineer, they will not constitute a hazard to life or property. In the event that the deleterious materials are permitted to remain, they shall be so placed upon he site as to avoid any hazardous condition and the grading plan shall be prepared or revised to correctly record the location and extent of the materials. The placing of such materials upon any site in the city is specifically prohibited after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, except as may be permitted pursuant to the zoning code of the city. 
(Prior code § 8717)  
15.48.500 - Drainage. 
All cut and fill slopes shall be provided with suitable drainage facilities designed to carry surface waters to the nearest practicable street, storm drain, or natural watercourse. Surface waters shall not be permitted to drain over cut or fill slopes unless nonerosive drainage facilities are provided. 
(Prior code § 8718)  
15.48.510 - Default of performance—Failure to comply with provisions. 
A.  Whenever the city engineer finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of the grading permit, or the permittee has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice thereof shall be given to the owner of the property, and in the event a corporate surety bond has been posted, to the surety company. Such notice shall state the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof and the period of time estimated by the city engineer to be reasonably necessary for the completion of the work. 
B.  1.  If a corporate surety bond has been posted, the owner of the property and/or surety shall, within the time specified in the notice of default, either cause the required work to be performed, or, failing therein, pay over to the city the estimated cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice, plus an additional sum for administrative costs equal to ten percent of the estimated cost of the work, but in no event shall the total cost exceed the principal sum of the bond. Upon the receipt of such money, the city engineer shall proceed by such method as he deems convenient to cause the required work to be performed and completed. 
2.  In the event of failure to complete the work within the time specified, or failure to pay to the city the estimated cost of the work plus administrative costs as set forth in the default notice, and if an immediate hazard to life or property exists due to failure to comply with the permit and the provisions of this chapter, the city engineer may order the work completed without further delay or notice of proceedings whatsoever, by contract or otherwise. The owner and the surety executing such bond shall continue to be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for payment of all necessary costs and expenses that may be incurred or expended by the city in causing any and all of such required work to be done. The surety and owner are bound by any extension of time required to complete such work. 
C.  If a cash bond or instrument of credit has been posted, the owner of the property shall, within the time specified in the notice of default, cause the required work to be performed. If the owner fails to comply within the time specified, the city engineer shall proceed without delay, and without further notice of proceedings whatsoever, to cause the required work to be done by contract or otherwise, at the discretion of the city engineer. The balance, if any, of such cash deposit, or instrument of credit, less ten percent of the cost of the work for administration shall, upon the completion of the work, be returned to the depositor or his successors or assigns. 
D.  In the event of default in the performance of any term or condition of the permit for the work, the surety or any person employed or engaged on its behalf, or the city engineer or any person employed or engaged on his behalf, shall have the right to go upon the grading site to complete the required work or make it safe. 
E.  No person shall interfere with or obstruct the ingress or egress to or from any such grading site by any authorized representative or agent of the surety or of the city engaged in completing the work required to be performed under the permit or in complying with the terms or conditions thereof. 
(Prior code § 8720 (E))  
15.48.520 - Inspections of excavations and fills. 
A.  The permittee or his agent shall notify the city engineer when the grading operation is ready for each of the following inspections: 
1.  Initial inspection: When the permittee is ready to begin work, but before any grading or clearing is started; 
2.  Clearing and grubbing inspection: After the natural ground is exposed and prepared to receive fill, but before any fill is placed; 
3.  Excavation inspection: After the excavation is started, but before the vertical depth of the excavation exceeds ten feet; 
4.  Fill inspection: After the fill emplacement is started, but before the vertical height of the lifts exceed ten feet; 
5.  Drainage device inspection: After forms and pipes are in place, but before any concrete is placed; 
6.  Rough grading inspection: When all rough grading has been completed. This inspection may be requested prior to the submittal of the soils and geological reports to the city engineer. However, the city engineer shall not approve the rough grading until he has received, reviewed and approved such reports; 
7.  Final inspection: When all work, including installation of all drainage structures and other protective devices, has been completed and the as-graded plan and required reports have been submitted to the city engineer. 
B.  The city engineer shall approve the work inspected or notify the permittee or owner wherein it fails to comply. Any portion of the work which does not comply with the permit and this chapter shall be corrected. 
(Prior code § 8722)  
15.48.530 - Correction of violations and hazards in the performance of grading operations. 
A.  If, at any stage of work on a grading project, the city engineer determines that the nature of the operation is such that further work is likely to endanger any person or property, either public or private, he may require, as a condition for the completion of such excavation or fill, that such reasonable precautions be taken as he determines to be necessary. 
B.  If the city engineer finds that the site or soil conditions are not as stated in the application for the grading permit, he may refuse to allow further work until a revised grading plan, conforming to the existing conditions, is prepared and approved. 
(Prior code § 8723)  
15.48.540 - Certificate of completion. 
A.  Issuance. If the terms and conditions of the grading permit and the provisions of this chapter have been met, the city engineer shall issue the permittee a certificate of completion. 
B.  Revocation. If, following the issuance of a certificate, the city engineer determines that there has been material noncompliance with the terms and conditions of the permit and this chapter, he shall advise the permittee in detail of such noncompliance and shall demand full compliance within a reasonable time. Failure to so comply shall be sufficient cause for revocation of the certificate. 
C.  City Engineer. The city engineer shall forward to the building department a copy of all certificates of completion, together with copies of all correspondence relating to such certificate. 
D.  Building Department. No occupancy permit for any building or structure on property excavated or graded pursuant to this chapter shall be issued by the building department until a certificate of completion has been issued hereunder. 
(Prior code § 8726)  
15.48.550 - Maintenance of grading and protective devices. 
The owner of any property, or any other person or agent in control of such property, shall continuously maintain in good condition and repair all grading, drainage, retaining walls, cribbing, drainage structures, planted slopes, irrigation systems, natural watercourses, surface water drainage, safety fences and other protective devices that exist on the property. The owner of property upon which a grading permit has been issued of such property, shall continuously maintain in good condition and repair all grading, drainages, retaining walls, cribbing, natural watercourses, surface water drainage, safety fences and other protective devices shown on the approved plans or drawings which accompany the grading permit issued for the work. The continuing abatement of dust shall also be required upon all sites. Whenever any grading drainage, protective or drainage devices, landscaping, irrigation system or other protective devices, on any property have been altered or have not been properly maintained, so that they constitute a hazard or menace to life, endanger property, affect the safety, usability or stability of a public way, or become a nuisance, the owner of the property upon which such excavation or fill and protective devices are located, or other person or agent in control of the property, shall immediately cause the repair or reconstruction of such drainage and/or protective devices so that they will conform to the requirements of this chapter; or otherwise repair, reconstruct, strengthen or eliminate such drainage and/or protective devices in a manner satisfactory to the city engineer so that they will no longer constitute a hazard, danger or nuisance. 
(Prior code § 8727)  
15.48.560 - Appeals. 
The applicant for a permit, or other person aggrieved by any action or decision of the city engineer, may appeal to the city council by filing with the city clerk a written notice thereof. The appellant shall be given a hearing before the city council, after which the city council shall have discretion to grant or deny the appeal, or modify the decision of the city engineer. The decision of the city council will be final. 
(Prior code § 8728)  
Chapter 15.52 - HOUSE NUMBERING 
 
15.52.010 - Numbers—Required. 
All buildings having an entrance upon any public street shall be numbered as in this chapter provided. 
(Prior code § 8500)  
15.52.020 - Numbers—Duty to designate. 
The city engineer shall designate the respective numbers for buildings having an entrance upon any public street heretofore or hereafter dedicated or established in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8501)  
15.52.030 - Numbers—Starting points. 
Whittier Boulevard shall be the starting point and dividing line for numbers on streets running in a northerly and southerly direction; Bluff Road shall be the starting point and dividing line for numbers on streets running in an easterly and westerly direction south of Whittier Boulevard; and First Street and the prolongation thereof shall be the starting point and dividing line for numbers on streets running in an easterly and westerly direction north of Whittier Boulevard, excepting Acco Street, Washington Boulevard, Anaheim-Telegraph Road and Slauson Avenue, which shall be numbered as set forth in Section 15.52.050. 
(Prior code § 8502)  
15.52.040 - Use of odd versus even numbers. 
The numbers on the northerly and easterly sides of streets shall be even numbers and the numbers on the southerly and westerly sides of the streets shall be odd numbers, excepting Acco Street, Washington Boulevard, Anaheim-Telegraph Road and Slauson Avenue, which shall be odd numbers on the northerly side, and even numbers on the southerly side of the street. 
(Prior code § 8503)  
15.52.050 - Methods of numbering. 
A.  Commencing with the respective starting points and dividing lines set forth in Section 15.52.030, the first even number shall be one hundred and the first odd number shall be one hundred one, and the numbering shall be progressive within each block allowing approximately twenty-five feet of frontage for each number. At the beginning of each successive block, the numbering shall recommence with the next succeeding multiple of one hundred, except Acco Street, Washington Boulevard, Anaheim-Telegraph Road and Slauson Avenue, which shall be numbered as follows: 
1.  Acco Street. Beginning with number 6823 on the northerly side of the street and number 6824 on the southerly side of the street at the westerly city limits, numbers shall increase easterly and uniformly to number 6927, on the north side, and Vail Avenue. 
2.  Washington Boulevard. Beginning with number 6865 on the northerly side of the street, and number 6868 on the southerly side of the street at the westerly city limits, numbers shall increase easterly and uniformly to number 6927, on the northerly side, and number 6928, on the southerly side of the street, at the westerly line of Vail Avenue. 
3.  Anaheim-Telegraph Road. Beginning with number 7101 on the northerly side of the street, at the westerly city limits, numbers shall increase easterly and uniformly to number 7821 at the easterly city limits. 
4.  Slauson Avenue: Beginning with number 8000 on the southerly side of the street at the southwesterly city limits, numbers shall increase northeasterly on the northerly side of the street, at the westerly city limits. 
B.  The city engineer shall designate the point of commencement of each block for the purposes of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8504)  
15.52.060 - Numbers required on buildings. 
A.  Residential Property. Every person who owns, or who is in possession of any building located on a lot classified, pursuant to Title 17 of this code, in zone R-A, R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4, shall place thereon the appropriate street number therefor, assigned by the city engineer pursuant hereto, as provided in Section 15.08.100 (B) (5). 
B.  C and M Zoned Properties. Every person who owns, or who is in possession of, any building located on a lot which is classified, pursuant to Title 17 of this code, in a zone other than those referred to in subsection A of this section, shall, within ninety days from and after the date of the adoption of this section, place and maintain on such building the appropriate street number therefor, assigned by the city engineer pursuant hereto, as provided in Section 15.08.110 (L) (1). 
(Prior code § 8505)  
15.52.070 - Other numbers prohibited. 
No person shall place or permit to remain upon any building belonging to him or in his possession or control any street number other than the appropriate number designated for the building pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8506)  
Chapter 15.56 - GROUNDWATER MONITORING WELLS 
 
15.56.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires a different meaning, the words, terms and phrases set forth in this section are defined as follows: 
"Applicant" means any person who applies for a permit under this chapter. 
"City" means the city of Montebello, California, acting by and through the city council. 
"City property" means streets, lands, and structures owned or controlled by the city within the city. 
"Permit" means the written, typewritten, or printed permission issued to an applicant by the city under the authority of this chapter and conditioned as provided in this chapter, and means and includes any amendment or supplement to the permit. 
"Permittee" means any person to whom a permit has been granted and issued under and pursuant to the terms of this chapter, and includes the assignee, or successor in interest thereof, when the assignment or transfer has been approved as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2195 § 1 (part), 1999)  
15.56.020 - Permit required. 
All persons before commencing the construction, modification or destruction of groundwater monitoring wells, shall make application to the director of public works for a groundwater monitoring well permit to do such work, on a form to be supplied by the city. No person shall do any work without first having obtained a permit from the city. 
(Ord. 2195 § 1 (part), 1999)  
15.56.030 - Permit—Application—Contents. 
A.  The applicant for such permit shall make, sign and file in the office of the director of public works, an application to be approved by the director of public works. 
B.  Applications filed under subsection A of this section, shall be accompanied by maps or drawings, or prints thereof, in duplicate, showing the location of the proposed installation, dimensions, and size of well, and types of vaults, valves and all connected appliances. The maps shall be drawn to a scale of not more than forty feet to the inch, and all prints thereof shall be to this scale. 
(Ord. 2195 § 1 (part), 1999)  
15.56.040 - Time limit to commence work. 
The work of constructing or installing any groundwater monitoring well, pursuant to the terms of this chapter, shall be commenced within thirty days from the date of granting the authority therefor; provided, however, that the director of public works may for good cause, grant an extension of time; and shall be diligently prosecuted until concluded. 
(Ord. 2195 § 1 (part), 1999)  
15.56.050 - Permit fees. 
Every applicant at the time of filing his application shall pay to the city such fees as shall be established from time to time, by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2195 § 1 (part), 1999)  
15.56.060 - Insurance and indemnity. 
The permittee agrees to indemnify and defend the city immediately upon demand and hold the city, its elected and appointed officers, agents, employees and volunteers harmless from any claim, demand or judgment, including but not limited to costs and attorney's fees, arising out of any injury to person or property alleged or asserted to have been occasioned, caused by, or contributed to by the encroachment, or by the manner in which it is designed, constructed, maintained or altered, and regardless of the theory of liability of the city. Permittee shall procure and maintain, at its cost, during the term of the permit and any renewals thereof, from an insurer admitted in California, comprehensive liability insurance, including products and complaint operations and hazards of explosion, collapse and damage to underground property, and upon request by city, such pollution liability as may be reasonably available, adequate and necessary to protect against future loss. Said insurance shall require thirty days' prior written notice from insurers to the city and permittee, before cancellation or change of coverage. 
(Ord. 2195 § 1 (part), 1999)  
15.56.070 - Bond. 
Each applicant shall provide one good and sufficient surety bond for faithful performance. The "performance bond" shall be one hundred percent of the cost of installing and destruction of each well. In lieu of such surety bond, the permittee may deposit with the city in equivalent amounts in cash or negotiable securities. 
(Ord. 2195 § 1 (part), 1999)  
15.56.080 - Permit—Conditions. 
The director of public works may attach such conditions to the granting of any permit under this chapter as may in his judgment seem best or necessary, to secure the proper performance of the work, or to protect the public interests in connection therewith. 
(Ord. 2195 § 1 (part), 1999)  
15.56.090 - Work performance restrictions. 
All work shall be done only by contractors licensed by the state. 
(Ord. 2195 § 1 (part), 1999)  
15.56.100 - Construction standards of groundwater monitoring well. 
All wells shall be constructed in accordance with the State Department of Water Resources, Bulletin 74-81 and 74-90, "Monitoring Well Standards," latest edition. 
(Ord. 2195 § 1 (part), 1999)  
15.56.110 - Abandonment of groundwater monitoring well. 
All wells shall be abandoned per state standards and to the satisfaction of the director of public works. 
(Ord. 2195 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Chapter 15.60 - CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE 
 
15.60.010 - Adoption. 
Subject to certain changes and amendments hereinafter set forth in this chapter, the city council does adopt as the green building regulations for the city, the California Green Building Standards Code, 2016 edition with errata (Title 24, Part 11, California Code of Regulations), and is also called the CALGreen Code, as published by the California Building Standards Commission (hereinafter referred to as the "code"). The code provides minimum standards for the purpose of improving public health, safety and general welfare by enhancing the design and construction of buildings through the use of building concepts having a positive environmental impact and encouraging sustainable construction practices in planning and design, energy efficiency, water efficiency and conservation, material conservation and resource efficiency and environmental air quality. One copy of the code is on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection, and the same is made a part hereof as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 46, 3-10-2010; Ord. No. 2347, § 10, 12-14-2011; Ord. No. 2356, § 38, 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2392, § 40, 1-25-2017)  
15.60.012 - Designation of enforcement. 
The building division is designated and authorized to enforce the regulations of this chapter. The code enforcement division is authorized to enforce the regulations of this chapter, subject to the approval of the building division. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 46, 3-10-2010)  
15.60.020 - Appeals. 
The city council shall act as a board of appeals in making a correct determination of any appeal arising from actions of the enforcing official. Appeals shall be made in writing and the appellant may appear in person before the city council or be represented by an attorney and may introduce evidence to support his claims. Appeals shall be heard at reasonable times at the convenience of the city council but not later than thirty days after receipt thereof. The appellant shall cause to be made at his own expense any tests or research required by the city council to substantiate his claims. 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 46, 3-10-2010)  
Chapter 15.64 - CALIFORNIA BUILDING STANDARDS ADMINISTRATIVE CODE 
 
15.64.010 - Adoption. 
Subject to certain changes and amendments hereinafter set forth in this chapter, the city council does adopt as the building standards administration regulations for the city, the California Building Standards Administration Code, 2016 edition with errata (Title 24, Part 1, California Code of Regulations), as published by the California Building Standards Commission (hereinafter referred to as the "code"). The code provides minimum standards for the administration of building standards within the city. One copy of the code is on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection, and the same is made a part hereof as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2347, § 11, 12-14-2011; Ord. No. 2356, § 39, 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2392, § 41, 1-25-2017)  
15.64.012 - Designation of enforcement. 
The building division is designated and authorized to enforce the regulations of this chapter. The code enforcement division is authorized to enforce the regulations of this chapter, subject to the approval of the building division. 
(Ord. No. 2347, § 11, 12-14-2011)  
15.64.020 - Appeals. 
The city council shall act as a board of appeals in making a correct determination of any appeal arising from actions of the enforcing official. Appeals shall be made in writing and the appellant may appear in person before the city council or be represented by an attorney and may introduce evidence to support his claims. Appeals shall be heard at reasonable times at the convenience of the city council but not later than thirty days after receipt thereof. The appellant shall cause to be made at his own expense any tests or research required by the city council to substantiate his claims. 
(Ord. No. 2347, § 11, 12-14-2011)  
Chapter 15.68 - CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE 
 
15.68.010 - Adoption. 
Subject to certain changes and amendments hereinafter set forth in this chapter, the city council does adopt as the residential regulations for the city, the California Residential Code, 2016 edition with errata (Title 24, Part 2.5, California Code of Regulations), based on the 2015 International Residential Code, as published by the California Building Standards Commission (hereinafter referred to as the "code"). The code provides minimum standards for dwellings within the city. One copy of the code is on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection, and the same is made a part hereof as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2347, § 12, 12-14-2011; Ord. No. 2356, § 40, 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2392, § 42, 1-25-2017)  
15.68.012 - Designation of enforcement. 
The building division is designated and authorized to enforce the regulations of this chapter. The code enforcement division is authorized to enforce the regulations of this chapter, subject to the approval of the building division. (Ord. No. 2347, § 12, 12-14-2011)  
15.68.020 - Appeals. 
The city council shall act as a board of appeals in making a correct determination of any appeal arising from actions of the enforcing official. Appeals shall be made in writing and the appellant may appear in person before the city council or be represented by an attorney and may introduce evidence to support his claims. Appeals shall be heard at reasonable times at the convenience of the city council but not later than thirty days after receipt thereof. The appellant shall cause to be made at his own expense any tests or research required by the city council to substantiate his claims. (Ord. No. 2347, § 12, 12-14-2011)  
Chapter 15.70 - CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE 
 
15.70.010 - Adoption. 
Subject to certain changes and amendments hereinafter set forth in this chapter, the city council does adopt as the energy regulations for the city, the California Energy Code, 2016 edition with errata (Title 24, Part 6, California Code of Regulations), as published by the California Building Standards Commission (hereinafter referred to as the "code"). The code provides energy standards within the city. One copy of the code is on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection, and the same is made a part hereof as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2356, § 41, 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2392, § 43, 1-25-2017)  
15.70.012 - Designation of enforcement. 
The building division is designated and authorized to enforce the regulations of this chapter. The code enforcement division is authorized to enforce the regulations of this chapter, subject to the approval of the building division. 
(Ord. No. 2356, § 41, 2-26-2014)  
15.70.020 - Appeals. 
The city council shall act as a board of appeals in making a correct determination of any appeal arising from actions of the enforcing official. Appeals shall be made in writing and the appellant may appear in person before the city council or be represented by an attorney and may introduce evidence to support his claims. Appeals shall be heard at reasonable times at the convenience of the city council but not later than thirty days after receipt thereof. The appellant shall cause to be made at his own expense any tests or research required by the city council to substantiate his claims. 
(Ord. No. 2356, § 41, 2-26-2014)  
Chapter 15.72 - EXPEDITED REVIEW OF SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM PERMITS 
 
15.72.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014, Cal. Gov. Code Section 65850.5) in order to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. The chapter encourages the use of solar energy systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. This chapter allows the city to achieve these goals while protecting the public health, welfare and safety. 
(Ord. No. 2373, § 2, 9-9-2015)  
15.72.020 - Applicability. 
This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city. Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit.  
15.72.030 - Definitions. 
Whenever any of the terms defined in this section are used in this chapter, each such term shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to it in this section: 
"Building department" means the building and safety division for the City of Montebello. 
"Building official" means the building official for the City of Montebello. 
"Electronic submittal" means the utilization of one or more of the following: 
1.  E-mail 
2.  The Internet 
3.  Facsimile 
"Reasonable restrictions" on a solar energy system means those restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits. 
"Restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance" means: 
1.  For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating systems: an amount exceeding ten percent of the cost of the system, but in no case more than one thousand dollars, or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding ten percent, as originally specified and proposed. 
2.  For photovoltaic systems: an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding ten percent as originally specified and proposed. 
"Small residential rooftop solar energy system" means all of the following: 
1.  A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty kilowatts thermal. 
2.  A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city and all state and city health and safety standards. 
3.  A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling. 
4.  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the city. 
"Solar energy system" means either of the following: 
1.  Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating. 
2.  Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating. 
"Specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
(Ord. No. 2373, § 2, 9-9-2015)  
15.72.040 - Requirements. 
All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the city. 
A.  Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code. 
B.  Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the public utilities commission regarding safety and reliability. 
(Ord. No. 2373, § 2, 9-9-2015)  
15.72.050 - Duties of the building department and building official. 
A.  All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available on the publicly accessible city website. 
B.  Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by e-mail, the internet, or facsimile shall be made available to all expedited solar energy system permit applicants. 
C.  An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature. 
D.  The building department shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. 
E.  The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plan(s), and checklist(s) shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. 
F.  All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy systems must comply with Government Code Sections 65850.55 and 66015 and Health & Safety Code Section 17951. 
(Ord. No. 2373, § 2, 9-9-2015)  
15.72.060 - Expedited permit review and inspection requirements. 
A.  The building department shall implement an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. 
B.  For an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system that meets the requirements of the approved checklist(s) and standard plan(s), the building department shall issue a building permit or other non-discretionary permit within three business days. The building official or designee may require an applicant to apply for a use permit if the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the city planning commission. 
C.  Review of the application shall be limited to the building official or designee's review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements. 
D.  If a use permit is required, the building official or designee may deny an application for the use permit if the building official or designee makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the city planning commission. 
E,  Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of Section 714 of the Civil Code defining restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance. 
F.  The city shall not condition approval of an application on the approval of an association, as defined in Section 4080 of the Civil Code. 
G.  If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. 
H.  Only one inspection shall be required and performed for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. A separate fire inspection may be performed. 
I.  The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections. 
J.  If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2373, § 2, 9-9-2015)  
Chapter 15.74 - CALIFORNIA REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE 
 
15.74.010 - Adoption. 
Subject to certain changes and amendments hereinafter set forth in this chapter, the city council does adopt as the referenced standards regulations for the city, the California Referenced Standards Code, 2016 edition with errata (Title 24, Part 12, California Code of Regulations), as published by the California Building Standards Commission (hereinafter referred to as the "code"). The code provides referenced standards within the city. One copy of the code is on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection, and the same is made a part hereof as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2356, § 42, 2-26-2014; Ord. No. 2392, § 44, 1-25-2017)  
Title 16 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 16.04 - PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.04.010 - Title. 
This title shall be referred to as the city's subdivision regulations. 
(Prior code § 9270.1)  
16.04.020 - Purpose. 
The provisions of this title are adopted pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act (Section 66410, et seq., of the Government Code, hereinafter "Act") for the purpose of regulating the design and improvement of divisions, and regulating other divisions of land within the city. 
(Prior code § 9270)  
16.04.030 - Designations. 
Pursuant to the Act, the following designations are made: 
A.  Development Review Committee. The development review committee, composed of the city manager and representatives of each city department, shall be an advisory agency within the meaning of the Act. It may review all tentative parcel maps, tentative subdivision maps, and waivers of parcel maps and shall report its recommendations to the city planner, who shall communicate the report to the planning commission and to the city council in instances where the city council is considering the application. 
B.  Planning Commission. The planning commission shall be an advisory agency within the meaning of the Act. It shall approve lot line adjustments and tentative parcel maps. It shall recommend the city council approval, conditional approval or disapproval of tentative subdivision maps required by the Act. 
C.  City Engineer. The city engineer shall approve or disapprove final parcel maps and final lot line adjustments. 
D.  City Council. The city council shall be the appeal board for tentative parcel maps, parcel maps, and lot line adjustments. It shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove tentative subdivision maps and final subdivision maps. 
E.  Exception. With respect to such subdivision as condominiums, community apartment projects and stock cooperatives, regardless of the number of units or parcels involved, the planning commission shall recommend approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the tentative map, and the city council shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative map and final map. 
(Prior code § 9270.2 (A))  
16.04.040 - Maps. 
For purposes of this title, the terms "tentative subdivision map," "final subdivision map" and "parcel map" shall refer, respectively, to the tentative map, final map and parcel map which are required by the Act and the term "tentative parcel map" shall refer to the tentative map which the Act authorizes the city to require in connection with a parcel map. Whenever the Act or this title requires a parcel map, a tentative parcel map shall first be prepared and submitted for approval in accordance with the provisions of the Act and this title. 
(Prior code § 9270.2 (B))  
Chapter 16.08 - ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.08.010 - Compliance with local law. 
No subdivision or other division of land governed by the Act or by this title shall be approved unless the same complies with applicable provisions of this code, ordinances and resolutions of the city. 
(Prior code § 9270.11)  
16.08.020 - Technical and inadvertent errors on map. 
Where the planning commission or city council finds that a map before it for consideration fails to meet or perform any of the requirements or conditions imposed by the Act or by this title and that such failure is the result of a technical and inadvertent error which does not materially affect the validity of the map, than it is not required by the Act to disapprove the map. 
(Prior code § 9270.12)  
16.08.030 - Revision or modification of subdivision maps. 
A.  Revision of Subdivision Maps Prior to Approval. After a subdivision map has been filed, as provided in this title, no revision shall be permitted prior to approval of the map, except upon the filing of a new subdivision map and the withdrawal of the previously filed map. 
B.  Revised Subdivision Maps After Approval. After approval or conditional approval of a subdivision map, any revised map shall comply with all regulations in effect at the time such revised map is filed. When a tentative subdivision map has been approved, no other subdivider shall file a different tentative subdivision map for the same parcel of land without the express written consent of the current property owner or the original subdivider unless such previous tentative subdivision map has been invalidated by action of the city council or by expiration of time. The approval or conditional approval of any revised tentative subdivision map shall nullify all currently active approved tentative subdivision maps that are applicable to the same parcel of land. 
C.  Changes in Tentative Subdivision Map. After the approval or conditional approval of a tentative subdivision map, if any change is made by the subdivider in the information shown on, or supplied with, the tentative subdivision map, such change shall be submitted in writing to the city council and approved by it prior to the recording of the final subdivision map. 
(Prior code § 9270.5)  
16.08.040 - Amendment of filed map. 
After a final map or parcel map is filed in the office of the county recorder, such map may be modified by a certificate of correction or an amending map as provided by the Act. 
(Prior code § 9270.23)  
16.08.050 - Contiguous lots held as one. 
Whenever an owner uses two or more contiguous lots for the purpose of constructing buildings or structures which cross existing lot lines, or where the use of contiguous lots is required to provide required off-street parking, open space, landscape area, or to satisfy other conditions attached to approval of a map or project, the following procedure shall apply: 
A.  The applicant shall supply the city engineer with the legal description of the subject lots, the owner's name, address and telephone number, evidence of title, the reason for the application and such other information as may be required. 
B.  The city engineer shall determine when any such application qualifies for this section. Such determination shall be final unless appealed within fifteen days in the manner outlined in Section 16.08.090. 
C.  The city engineer shall prepare a covenant and agreement to hold property as one parcel. The applicant and owner shall execute the notarized covenant and agreement, which shall be filed, together with any required fees, with the city engineer, for filing with the county recorder. The covenant and agreement shall not be released or modified unless a tentative parcel or final map is filed and approved in compliance with this title. 
(Prior code § 9270.20)  
16.08.060 - Merger of contiguous parcels. 
A.  Intent and Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a procedure by which the city may initiate the merging of two or more contiguous parcels. The parcels must be held in common. This procedure is adopted pursuant to Section 66451.10 through 66451.21, inclusive, of the California Government Code, State Subdivision Map Act ("Map Act"). 
B.  Applicability. Pursuant to Section 66451.11 of the Map Act, the director of planning may initiate a merger of parcels held by the same owner if any one of the contiguous parcels does not conform to the city's standards for minimum lot area, as provided by the zoning ordinance or applicable specific plan, and if the requirements of subsection C of this section are satisfied; providing, however, that the parcels shall not be merged if any one of the conditions set forth in subsection 66451.11 (A) through 66451.11 (E) inclusive, of the Map Act exists. 
C.  Requirements. Parcels proposed for merging must meet all of the following criteria: 
1.  At least one of the affected parcels is undeveloped by any structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an accessory structure, or is developed with a single structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a contiguous parcel. 
2.  With respect to any affected parcel one or more of the following conditions exists: 
a.  The parcel comprises less than five thousand square feet in area at the time of the determination of merger; 
b.  The parcel was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation; 
c.  The parcel does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply; 
d.  The parcel does not meet slope stability standards; 
e.  The parcel has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability; 
f.  Its development would create health and safety hazards; 
g.  The parcel is inconsistent with the city's general plan or any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size of density standards. 
D.  Notification of Intent to Merge. Prior to merging parcels, the director of planning shall cause to be mailed by certified mail to the then current record owner of the property a notice of intent to merge, notifying the owner that the affected parcels may be merged pursuant to this section. The notice shall give the owner the opportunity to request a hearing and present evidence that the property does not meet the criteria for merger. The notice of intent to merge shall be recorded with the Los Angeles County recorder on the date that notice is given to the property owner of record. 
E.  Determination of Ownership. For purposes of determining whether contiguous parcels are held by the same owner, ownership shall be determined as of the date that notice of intent to merge is recorded pursuant to subsection D of this section. 
F.  Owner's Request for Hearing. At any time within thirty days after recording of the notice of intent to merge, the owner of the affected parcels may file with the director of planning a request for a hearing on the proposed merger. 
G.  Determination When No Hearing Requested. If, within the thirty-day period specified in subsection F of this section, the owner does not file a request for hearing, the planning commission may make a determination that the affected parcels are or are not to be merged. If the parcels are to be merged, the planning commission shall cause to be recorded the notice of merger as provided for in subsection M of this section, no later than ninety days following the mailing of notice required by subsection D of this section. If the planning commission makes a determination of nonmerger, it shall release the notification of intent to merge in accordance with Subsection L of this section. 
H.  Procedure/Planning Commission Hearing. 
1.  Upon receiving a request for a hearing from the property owner of the affected property, the director of planning shall fix a time, date and place for a hearing to be conducted by the planning commission in accordance with Section 66451.15 of the Map Act. The hearing shall be conducted not more than sixty days following the director's receipt of the owner's request, but may be postponed or continued with the mutual consent of the planning commission and the property owner. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the property owner by certified mail. 
2.  At the hearing, the property owner shall be given the opportunity to present any evidence that the affected property does not meet the requirements for merger as set forth in subsection C of this section. 
I.  Findings. After completion of the hearing by the planning commission, or if no hearing is requested, after completion of the thirty-day period specified in subsection G of this section, the planning commission shall make the following findings in order to merge parcels: 
1.  The merged parcel complies with Section 66451.11 (a) of the Subdivision Map Act; 
2.  The merged parcel complies with Section 66451.11 (b) of the Subdivision Map Act; 
3.  The merged parcel complies with this section of the Montebello Municipal Code; 
4.  The merged parcel does not adversely affect the purpose and intent of the city's general plan or the public convenience or welfare. 
The planning commission may determine that the parcels are not to be merged, notwithstanding the fact that the affected parcels have met all the requirements set forth in subsection C of this section. 
J.  Procedure/Determination Following Hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing, the planning commission shall make a determination as to whether the affected parcels are or are not to be merged. The commission shall notify the owner of its determination no later than five working days after the determination has been reached. If notification cannot be made at the time of the hearing to the owner in person, notification shall be made by certified mail. A determination of merger shall be recorded within thirty days after the conclusion of the hearing, as provided for in Subsection M of this section. 
K.  Appeal of Planning Commission Action. The provisions of Chapter 17.78 regarding appeal of the commission's action and the effective date of approval, shall apply. 
L.  Release of Intent to Merge. If, in accordance with subsections C and H of this section, the planning commission determines that the parcels shall not be merged, it shall cause to be recorded with the recorder of the county of Los Angeles a release of the notice of intent to merge. The property owner shall be mailed a clearance letter. 
M.  Notice of Merger. A merger of parcels shall become effective upon recordation with the recorder of the county of Los Angeles of a notice of merger specifying the determination of the planning commission, the name(s) of the recorded owner(s) and a legal description of the parcels. 
(Ord. 2073 § 4, 1992: prior code § 9270.21)  
16.08.070 - Certificate of compliance. 
A.  Any person owning real property within the city may request the city engineer to determine whether such real property complies with the provisions of the Montebello Municipal Code and the State Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  Upon making such determination, the city engineer shall cause a certificate of compliance to be filed for record with the county recorder. The certificate of compliance shall identify the real property and shall state that the division of land complies with applicable provisions of the city municipal code and the State Subdivision Map Act. 
C.  If the city engineer determines that such real property does not comply with the provisions of the municipal code or State Subdivision Map Act, he may, as a condition to granting a certificate of compliance, impose such conditions as would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the current owner of record acquired the property, and which had been established at such time by ordinance. Upon making such a determination and establishing such conditions, the city engineer or authorized representatives shall cause a conditional certificate of compliance to be filed for record with the county recorder. Such certificate shall serve as notice to the property owner who has applied for the certificate pursuant to this section, a grantee of the property owner, or any subsequent transferee or assignee of the property that the fulfillment and implementation of such conditions shall be required prior to subsequent issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for development of the property. 
Compliance with such conditions shall not be required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval for development of such property is issued. 
D.  A recorded final map or parcel map shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein. 
E.  For the purposes of administration of this section, any parcel that is shown on the county assessor's maps prior to July 2, 1956, shall be considered as a conforming parcel. 
F.  A fee to be charged at actual cost shall be charged to the applicant for making the determination and processing the certificate of compliance. A deposit may be required to be applied toward this fee. 
G.  The city engineer's decision will be final unless appealed within fifteen days in the manner outlined in Section 16.08.090. 
(Prior code § 9270.22)  
16.08.080 - Fees. 
The city council shall establish, by resolution, appropriate fees for processing maps and other procedures required or authorized by the Act or this title. 
(Prior code § 9270.19)  
16.08.090 - Appeals. 
Appeals of decisions or actions made by the city engineer, city planner assistant city manager/community services and development or other city staff may be made as follows: 
A.  Appeal of City Staff Decision. 
1.  Any interested person may appeal the action of the city staff with reference to a parcel map, lot line adjustment, certificate of compliance or other matter addressed in this title by filing a written letter of appeal with the secretary of the planning commission, describing therein the basis for such appeal. 
2.  Upon receipt of a timely filed appeal, the secretary of the planning commission shall place the matter on the planning commission agenda. 
3.  At the time that such appeal is reviewed by the planning commission, it shall consider the application, the staff report and all other relevant evidence presented by the applicant or any other relevant evidence presented by any other interested person concerning such parcel maps, lot line adjustment or certificate of compliance. 
B.  Appeal of Planning Commission Decision. 
1.  Any interested person may appeal the action of the planning commission with reference to a parcel map, lot line adjustment, certificate of compliance or other matter addressed in this title by filing a written letter of appeal with the city clerk, describing therein the basis for such appeal. The city clerk shall not accept such a letter of appeal unless a filing and processing fee, as set by city council resolution, has been paid, and such letter of appeal is filed with the city clerk within not to exceed fifteen calendar days following the planning commission's action. Upon receipt of a timely filed appeal, the city clerk shall place the matter on the city council's agenda. 
2.  At the time that such appeal is reviewed by the city council, it shall consider the application, the staff report and other relevant evidence presented by the applicant or any other interested person concerning such parcel maps, lot line adjustment or certificate of compliance and shall be governed by the same standards as with the planning commission. 
(Prior code § 9270.24)  
Chapter 16.12 - TENTATIVE MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.12.010 - Procedures. 
In addition to the provisions of the Act which govern tentative subdivision maps, the following procedures shall apply. 
(Prior code § 9270.3 (part))  
16.12.020 - Preparation and processing. 
A tentative subdivision map shall be prepared and processed in accordance with the Act and the provisions of the code. 
(Prior code § 9270.3 (D) (1))  
16.12.030 - Application for approval—Filing. 
Application for approval of tentative subdivision maps shall be filed with the city planner on forms approved by him. Not less than thirty prints, plus a reproducible copy, of the map and application shall be submitted. No such application will be accepted for filing unless all filing and processing fees are paid or deposited simultaneously therewith. 
(Prior code § 9270.3 (D) (2))  
16.12.040 - Size. 
The tentative map shall be of sufficient size as determined by the city planner to clearly show the entire subdivision on one sheet. In no case shall the scale be less than one hundred feet to the inch. 
(Prior code § 9270.3 (D) (3))  
16.12.050 - Required information. 
Each tentative subdivision map shall contain the following information: 
A.  Tract number assigned by the county engineer; 
B.  Name and address of the owner or owners whose property is proposed to be subdivided, the name and address of the registered civil engineer, licensed surveyor, architect or other person who prepared the map, and the name and address of the subdivider if the owner is not the subdivider; 
C.  North point, scale, and date of preparation of the tentative map; 
D.  Boundary line of the subdivision; 
E.  The location, width, approximate grade and centerline radii of all streets within the boundaries of the proposed subdivision, and the location and width of proposed alleys and/or public service easements, labeled in a manner so as to make them easily identifiable by reference (e.g., "A Street"); 
F.  Name, location and width of adjacent streets; 
G.  Lot number, lot lines and approximate dimension of each lot, and drainage direction of each lot; 
H.  Approximate location and width of watercourses or areas subject to inundation from floods, and the location of structures, railroads and other permanent physical features; 
I.  Description of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision or legal description of the property comprising the subdivision; 
J.  Width and location of all existing or proposed public or private easements; 
K.  Classification of lots as to intended residential, commercial, industrial or other uses; 
L.  Proposed location, direction of flow, and disposal point for storm drains and appurtenant structures; 
M.  Proposed location, size, direction of flow and disposal point for sanitary sewer facilities; 
N.  Contours, street profile and cross sections, together with the location of all cut and fill slope or a separate tentative grading plan, if necessary in the opinion of the city engineer; 
O.  Approximate location of existing buildings and permanent structures, labeled as to whether they will remain or be removed; 
P.  Location of existing trees within proposed rights-of-way to be dedicated, labeled as to whether they will remain or be removed; 
Q.  Location of existing and abandoned oil wells; 
R.  Size of subdivision in acres and the size of each lot larger than one-half acre in size; 
S.  Any other information relevant to the area, its improvement and design, which in the opinion of the city planner is required for proper consideration of such map. 
(Prior code § 9270.3 (D) (4))  
16.12.060 - Supplemental information. 
The tentative subdivision map shall show or be accompanied by reports and written statements from the subdivider giving essential information regarding the following matters: 
A.  Source of water supply; 
B.  Type of street improvement and utilities which the subdivider proposes to install; 
C.  Protective covenants to be recorded. 
(Prior code § 9270.3 (E))  
16.12.070 - Noticed public hearing. 
Tentative subdivision map applications shall be noticed for public hearing before the planning commission and the city council pursuant to the provisions of the Act. In addition to notice by publication, written notice shall be mailed, not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing, to the owners of property within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the proposed subdivision, using names and addresses from the last equalized assessment roll, or alternatively, from such other records as, in the opinion of the city planner contain more current information. 
(Prior code § 9270.3 (A))  
16.12.080 - Planning commission recommendation. 
A.  Where the planning commission finds that the proposed subdivision, together with its design and improvement, is consistent with the general plan and with any applicable specific plan and satisfies the other requirements of the Act and of this title, it may recommend approval of the map. Where the planning commission finds that certain improvements or dedications are required to properly service a parcel proposed to be created, it may recommend conditional approval of the tentative map to insure that all such improvements and dedications will be made in accordance with city standards. 
B.  Where the planning commission finds that any of the lots proposed to be created would not comply with the Montebello Municipal Code, or that any facts exist which would, under the Act, require disapproval of a subdivision map, it shall recommend denial of the application. 
(Prior code § 9270.3 (B))  
16.12.090 - City council action. 
The city council shall consider the application, the staff report, and all relevant evidence presented by the applicant and by other interested persons, and shall be governed in its action by the same standards as the planning commission in making its recommendation. 
(Prior code § 9270.3 (C))  
16.12.100 - Approval—Expiration. 
A.  The approval or conditional approval of a tentative subdivision map shall be valid for the term provided for in the State Map Act. 
B.  The expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall terminate all proceedings and no final map or parcel map of all or any portion of the real property included within such tentative map shall be filed without first processing a new tentative map. 
(Prior code § 9270.3 (F))  
16.12.110 - Approval—Extensions. 
A.  The subdivider or his engineer may request an extension of the expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved tentative subdivision map by written application to the community development department. The application shall be filed not less than forty-five days before the map is to expire and shall state the reasons for requesting the extension. 
B.  The city engineer shall review the request and submit a report together with the application for the extension to the city council for approval, conditional approval or denial. The resolution adopted by the city council approving or denying the requested extension shall specify the new expiration date of the tentative subdivision map, to a period or periods not exceeding the limits for such extensions as stated in the Map Act. 
(Prior code § 9270.3 (G))  
Chapter 16.16 - FINAL MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.16.010 - Conformity to tentative map—Filing—Recording. 
The subdivider shall cause the proposed subdivision to be accurately surveyed substantially in accordance with the approved or conditionally approved tentative subdivision map and file with the county engineer a final map of the subdivision conforming in all particulars to the Subdivision Map Act of this title. He shall also file with the city a sufficient number of prints thereof to furnish the several interested city departments and other public agencies with a copy and for checking and filing purposes. After the final map is approved by the city council and signed by the city engineer and city clerk, the subdivider shall cause the final map to be recorded. 
(Prior code § 9270.4 (A))  
16.16.020 - Street naming and numbering. 
Prior to the recording of a final subdivision map, street names and addresses shall be secured and approved in accordance with the city's policy on street naming and numbering as adopted by the city council. 
(Prior code § 9270.4 (B))  
16.16.030 - Multiple final maps. 
A.  Where a final map is recorded for only a portion of a tentative subdivision map, the map shall contain a reference to the tentative map from which it is derived. 
B.  If a final subdivision map is to be recorded for the entire tentative tract map, the final map shall so state. 
C.  Where final subdivision maps have been recorded for portions of a tentative map, the final map for the final increment of the tentative subdivision map shall contain the same number as the tentative map. 
(Prior code § 9270.4 (C))  
16.16.040 - Required information. 
In addition to the requirements of the Act, the final map shall contain the following: 
A.  If more than three sheets are used, an index showing the entire subdivision, with lots, streets, etc., shall be included on the title sheet, if there is room, or on the second sheet; 
B.  The number of the tract, and a statement as to whether it is the first, successive, or final increment of an approved tentative tract of a different number; 
C.  Date of preparation, north point and scale; 
D.  A description of the land being subdivided; 
E.  Location and names, without abbreviations, of all: 
1.  Proposed streets, highways, alleys and public service easements; 
2.  Proposed public areas and all other easements; 
3.  Adjoining and nearby streets, alleys and easements; 
F.  Dimensions shall be in feet and decimals of a foot, to the closest hundredth; 
G.  The dimensions of all lots; 
H.  1.  Each lot shall be numbered, 
2.  Each block may be lettered or numbered, 
3.  Each lot shall be shown entirely on one sheet; 
I.  Centerline data on streets, easements, alleys, etc., including bearings, distances and curve data; 
J.  The exterior boundary of the land included in the subdivision shall be indicated by distinctive symbols, and clearly so designated; 
K.  If any portion of the land within the boundaries shown on any final map or approved map is subject to inundation or flood hazard by storm waters, such fact and an identification of the affected portion shall be clearly shown on such final map or approved map by a prominent note on each sheet of such map whereon any such portion shall be shown; 
L.  The subdivider shall furnish the city engineer with certification from a licensed engineer as to whether the property when improved will be subject to floodwaters of inundation or if the depth of the groundwater is less than ten feet from the ground surface. If either or both of these conditions is found to exist, the city engineer shall so inform the State Real Estate Commissioner; 
M.  In the event that a dedication of right-of-way for storm drainage purposes is not required, the city engineer may require that the location of any watercourse, channel, stream or creek, be shown on the final map or approved map; 
N.  Ditto marks shall not be used on the final map. All figures, numbers and writing shall be of such size and clarity so that copies made from the original will be legible. 
(Prior code § 9270.6)  
Chapter 16.20 - PARCEL MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.20.010 - Requirement. 
For purposes of this title, a tentative parcel map shall be required for the subdivision of a lot which was shown as a unit or contiguous units on the equalized assessment roll of the county of Los Angeles which was in effect on the second day of July, 1956, or which was created subsequent to July 2, 1956, by a division of land approved by the city. 
(Prior code § 9270.7 (part))  
16.20.020 - Application—Filing. 
All applications for parcel maps shall be filed, together with a tentative parcel map, with the city planner on forms provided for such purposes. 
(Prior code § 9270.7 (A))  
16.20.030 - Preparation and processing. 
A tentative parcel map shall be prepared and processed in accordance with the Act and the provisions of this code. 
(Prior code § 9270.7 (E) (1))  
16.20.040 - Filing. 
Application for tentative parcel maps shall be filed with the city planner on forms approved by him. No such application will be accepted for filing unless all filing and processing fees are paid. 
(Prior code § 9270.7 (E) (2))  
16.20.050 - Size. 
The size of such tentative map shall be of sufficient size as determined by the city planner to clearly show the entire subdivision on one sheet. In no case shall the scale be less than one hundred feet to the inch. 
(Prior code § 9270.7 (E) (3))  
16.20.060 - Required information. 
Each map shall contain the information required of a tentative subdivision map. 
(Prior code § 9270.7 (E) (4))  
16.20.070 - Noticed public hearing. 
Tentative parcel map applications including appeals, or parcel map applications where no tentative parcel map is required, shall be noticed for public hearing pursuant to the provisions of the Act. In addition to the notice by publication, written notice shall be mailed, not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing, to the owners of property within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of he proposed subdivision, using names and addresses from the last equalized assessment roll, or, alternatively, from such other records as, in the opinion of the city planner, contain more current information. 
(Prior code § 9270.7 (B))  
16.20.080 - Planning commission action. 
A.  Where the planning commission finds that the proposed parcel map, together with its design and improvement, is consistent with the general plan and with any applicable specific plan, and satisfied the other requirements of the Act and of this title, it may approve the map. Where the planning commission finds that certain improvements or dedications are required to properly service a parcel proposed to be created, it may approve the parcel map conditionally, to insure that all such improvements and dedications will be made in accordance with city standards. 
B.  Where the planning commission finds that any of the parcels proposed to be created would not comply with the Montebello Municipal Code, or that any facts exist which would, under the Act, require disapproval of a subdivision map, it shall deny the application. 
C.  The decision of the planning commission shall be final in the absence of an appeal. 
(Prior code § 9270.7 (C))  
16.20.090 - Appeal of planning commission decision. 
A.  Any interested person may appeal the action of the planning commission with reference to a parcel map application by filing a written letter of appeal with the city clerk, describing the basis for such appeal. The city clerk shall not accept such a letter of appeal unless a filing and processing fee, as set by city council resolution, has been paid, and such letter of appeal is filed with the city clerk within fifteen calendar days following the planning commission's action. 
B.  Upon receipt of a timely filed appeal, the city clerk shall place the matter on the city council's agenda. 
C.  At the time that such appeal is reviewed by the city council, it shall consider the application, the staff report and all other relevant evidence presented by the applicant or any other interested person concerning such parcel maps and shall be governed by the same standards as was the planning commission. 
(Prior code § 9270.7 (D))  
16.20.100 - Expiration. 
A.  The approval or conditional approval of a tentative parcel map shall be valid for the term provided for in the State Map Act. 
B.  The expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map shall terminate all proceedings and no parcel map of all or any portion of the real property included within such tentative map shall be filed without first processing a new tentative parcel map. 
(Prior code § 9270.7 (F) (1) and (2))  
16.20.110 - Extension. 
Upon application of the subdivider filed prior to the expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map, the time at which such map expires may be extended by the planning commission for a period or periods not exceeding the limits for such extensions as stated in the Map Act. If the planning commission denies a subdivider's application for extension, the subdivider may appeal to the city council within fifteen days after the planning commission has denied the extension. 
(Prior code § 9270.7 (F) (3))  
16.20.120 - Final parcel maps. 
The final parcel map shall contain all the same information and data as required on a final subdivision map, and shall be prepared following the format as described in the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Prior code § 9270.8)  
16.20.130 - Waiver of parcel map requirement. 
A.  A subdivider may apply for waiver of the requirement for a parcel map which is imposed by the Act or by this title, upon submission of documents and data necessary for the city to make its determination and payment of the required fee. 
B.  The planning commission shall consider such application at a duly noticed public hearing and may waive the requirement if it finds that the proposed subdivision complies with all applicable requirements established by the Act and by this title, including, but not limited to, area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability and environmental protection. 
C.  The planning commission's action may be appealed by any interested person within fifteen days by the filing of a written appeal with the city clerk which shall set forth the basis for the appeal and shall be accompanied by payment of the required fee. Upon receipt of a duly filed appeal, the city clerk shall set the matter for noticed hearing before the city council. The city council shall be governed in its action by the same standards as with the planning commission, and its decision shall be final. 
D.  Where the city waives the parcel map requirement, it shall cause a certificate of compliance to be filed as set forth in the Act. 
E.  Waiver of the parcel map requirement shall not affect the requirement for a tentative parcel map. 
(Prior code § 9270.9)  
Chapter 16.24 - VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.24.010 - Authority—Citation. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1) of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code, State of California (hereinafter referred to as the "Vesting Tentative Map Statute") and may be cited as the vesting tentative map regulations. 
(Ord. 2043 § 4 (part), 1991: prior code § 9270.25 (A))  
16.24.020 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures necessary for the implementation of the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act (Government Code Section 66410 et. seq.) and the subdivision regulations of the city. Except as otherwise provided hereinafter, the provisions of the subdivision ordinance shall apply to the vesting tentative map regulations. 
B.  The regulations set forth in this chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public heath, safety and general welfare, and for the promotion of orderly growth and development. By this chapter, the city intends to accomplish the following objectives: 
1.  To establish a procedure for the approval of tentative tract maps that will provide certain statutorily vested rights to a subdivider; 
2.  To insure the city acts in a manner consistent with the Subdivision Map Act when city approves or conditionally approves a vesting tentative tract map; 
3.  To insure that the city has maximum discretion, consistent with Section 66498.1 of the California Government Code, in the imposition of conditions occurring subsequent to the approval of the vesting tentative tract map. 
(Ord. 2043 § 4 (part), 1991: prior code § 9270.25 (B))  
16.24.030 - Scope. 
A.  Whenever a provision of the subdivision regulations of the city requires the filing of a tentative map or parcel map, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction. 
(Ord. 2043 § 4 (part), 1991: prior code § 9270.25 (D))  
16.24.040 - Definitions. 
A.  "Vesting tentative map" means a tentative map, as defined in the Subdivision Map Act, that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "VESTING TENTATIVE MAP" at the time it is filed. 
B.  All other definitions set forth in the Subdivision Map Act and the subdivision regulations of the city of Montebello are applicable herein. 
(Ord. 2043 § 4 (part), 1991: prior code § 9270.25 (C))  
16.24.050 - Filing. 
A.  A vesting tentative map shall be filed on the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data, and reports and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in the subdivision regulations for a tentative map except as provided below: 
1.  At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "VESTING TENTATIVE MAP"; 
2.  A complete set of architectural plans setting forth the exterior design, materials to be used, building envelope, elevations, height and size of the building(s), number of units, driveways, and any proposed exterior walls; 
3.  Location and use of building(s); 
4.  Landscape and irrigation plans, indicating all plant materials, automatic irrigation systems, lighting, walls and fences; 
5.  Grading and drainage plans including, but not limited to, existing ground contours out to at least fifty feet beyond property lines and across the full width of any public rights-of-way, proposed pad elevations and slope banks, and proposed drainage pattern and type of drainage systems; 
6.  Geological studies and soils report; 
7.  Flood control information; 
8.  Hydrology study; 
9.  Utility plans indicating the design of all proposed public improvements including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, water distribution system and sewer plan setting forth the sewage disposal system. 
B.  All applicants for vesting tentative maps shall concurrently submit applications for all other discretionary approvals, including, but not limited to, design review, conditional use permits and variances. 
(Ord. 2043 § 4 (part), 1991: prior code § 9270.25 (E))  
16.24.060 - Fees. 
All persons submitting a vesting tentative map shall pay the fees for processing subdivision maps as required by Section 16.08.030. 
(Ord. 2043 § 4 (part), 1991: prior code § 9270.25 (I))  
16.24.070 - Development rights. 
A.  The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right in the subdivider, or assignee, to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards of the city in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is deemed complete. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a permit, approval, extension or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following standards are determined: 
1.  A failure to do so would place the residents of a subdivision or immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both; 
2.  The condition or denial is required in order to comply with state or federal law. 
C.  Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with the zoning ordinance in existence at the time, that inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The city may deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned on the subdivider, or his/her designee, obtaining the necessary change in the zoning ordinance to eliminate the inconsistency. If a change in the zoning ordinance is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall confer the vested right to proceed with the development, notwithstanding subsection A of this section, in substantial compliance with the change in the zoning ordinance and the map, as approved. 
D.  Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, a property owner or his/her designee may seek approvals or permits for development which depart from the ordinances, policies, and standards described herein and such approvals or permits may be granted or issued to the extent that the departures are authorized under applicable law. 
(Ord. 2043 § 4 (part), 1991: prior code § 9270.25 (F))  
16.24.080 - Term of vested rights. 
A.  The approval or conditional approval of vesting tentative maps shall expire at the end of the same time period established by the Montebello subdivision regulations and other applicable law for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval for tentative maps and shall be subject to the same extensions allowed for such maps. 
B.  The vested rights conferred by a vesting tentative map shall last for a period of one year from the date of recordation of a final map. An additional one-year extension may be granted by the planning commission upon application by the subdivider. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal to the city council within fifteen calendar days of such a decision. 
C.  Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project by a single vesting tentative map, the one-year period described in subsection A of this section, shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded. 
D.  The initial time period set forth in subdivision B of this section, shall be automatically extended by any time used thereafter by the city for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review if such time exceeds thirty days, from the date a complete application for such permit or review is filed. 
E.  If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in this chapter, the vested rights conferred by this chapter shall continue until the expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit. 
F.  Any subdivider holding an unexpired building permit may apply for extension of time within which he must commence work under that permit when he is unable to commence work within the time required by this chapter for good and satisfactory reasons. The building official may extend the time for beginning construction by the subdivider for a period not to exceed one hundred eighty days upon written request by the subdivider showing that circumstances beyond his control have prevented action from being taken. 
(Ord. 2043 § 4 (part), 1991: prior code § 9270.25 (G))  
16.24.090 - Amendment to an approved vesting tentative map. 
A.  Any time prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as described in Section 16.24.080 the subdivider or his designee may apply for an amendment to the vesting tentative map. 
B.  The review of any proposed amendments shall be conducted pursuant to the provisions of Section 16.08.030. 
(Ord. 2043 § 4 (part), 1991: prior code § 9270.25 (H))  
Chapter 16.28 - LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS 
Sections: 
 
16.28.010 - Filing and preparation. 
For two or more adjacent parcels where lot lines are to be adjusted in a manner such that a greater number of parcels than originally existed are not created, a lot line adjustment may be filed. A lot line adjustment will not be allowed in any case where the planning commission determines that there is an intent on the part of the applicant to avoid the subdivision process or that there is a potential to create an additional number of parcels. 
A.  A tentative map shall be prepared of a size determined by the city planner as sufficient to clearly show the information required to present the case to the planning commission. 
B.  An application for lot line adjustment shall be filed with the city planner on forms approved by him along with required filing and processing fees. 
C.  Size of Map and Information. Each map shall be on an eight and one-half inch by fourteen inch or larger sheet of paper with the following information included within a one-half inch marginal line around the sheet: 
1.  The name, address and phone number of each owner; 
2.  The name, address and phone number of the person who prepared the map; 
3.  North point, scale and date of preparation; 
4.  Boundary lines of the existing legal lots, with bearings and distance of the proposed lot line adjustments; 
5.  The location of existing buildings and structures with dimensions to the proposed, adjusted lot line; 
6.  Improvements proposed and dimensions with respect to the proposed adjusted lot line; 
7.  Names and dimensions of all adjacent streets; 
8.  The existing and proposed drainage pattern of each parcel; 
9.  Location of existing and abandoned oil wells; 
10.  Any other information relevant to the area, its improvement and design, which in the opinion of the city planner is required for proper consideration of such map. 
(Prior code § 9270.10 (A))  
16.28.020 - Planning commission action. 
A.  Where the planning commission finds that the proposed lot line adjustment, together with its design and improvement, is consistent with the general plan and with any applicable specific plan, and satisfies the other requirements of the Act and of this title, it may approve the lot line adjustment. Where the planning commission finds that certain improvements or dedications are required to property service a parcel, it may approve the lot line adjustment conditionally to insure that all such improvements and dedications will be made in accordance with city standards. 
B.  Where the planning commission finds that any of the parcels would not comply with the Montebello Municipal Code, or that any facts exist which would under the Act, require disapproval of a lot line adjustment, it shall deny the application. 
C.  The decision of the planning commission shall be final in the absence of an appeal. 
(Prior code § 9270.10 (B) (1))  
16.28.030 - Appeal of planning commission decision. 
Any interested person may appeal the action of the planning commission with reference to a lot line adjustment application by filing a written letter of appeal with the city clerk, describing the basis for such appeal. The city clerk shall not accept such a letter of appeal unless a filing and processing fee, as set by city council resolution has been paid, and such letter of appeal is filed with the city clerk within fifteen days following the planning commission's action. Upon receipt of a timely filed appeal, the city clerk shall place the matter on the city council's agenda. 
(Prior code § 9270.10 (B) (2))  
16.28.040 - Final processing and recording. 
Subsequent to the approval or conditional approval of the lot line adjustment by the planning commission or city council: 
A.  All conditions of approval shall be complied with or provided for within one year of the date of conditional approval; 
B.  All processing shall be completed sufficient to execute and record with the county recorder a lot line adjustment agreement, prepared in a form approved by the city, within one year, or within an authorized extension up to eighteen months (in addition to the one year provided in subsection A of this section) of the approval of the lot line adjustment by the planning commission or city council. 
(Prior code § 9270.10 (B) (3))  
Chapter 16.32 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 
 
16.32.010 - Standards. 
All subdivision improvements required by the city shall be constructed in accordance with standards which have been adopted by resolution of the city council and printed in booklet form, three copies of which are available for public use and examination in the office of the city clerk. General standard specifications employed by the city shall be complied with whenever applicable. 
(Prior code § 9270.13 (A))  
16.32.020 - Required improvements. 
No subdivision or other division of land shall be approved unless it is conditioned upon construction of off-site and on-site improvement, including, but not limited to the following: 
A.  An adequate distribution system designed and constructed for the purpose of supplying domestic water for use on each lot proposed to be created; and 
B.  An adequate sewage system designed and constructed to serve each lot; and 
C.  An adequate storm water drainage system designed and constructed to serve each lot; and 
D.  An adequate public and/or private street and alley system designed and constructed to serve each lot; and 
E.  An adequate system designed and constructed to provide each lot all necessary utilities, including, but not limited to, facilities for water, natural gas, electricity and telephone service; and 
F.  Any and all other public improvements necessary to provide services to each lot. 
(Prior code § 9270.13 (B))  
16.32.030 - Construction plans required. 
Construction of improvements shall not commence until plans have been submitted to and approved by the city engineer. 
(Prior code § 9270.13 (C))  
16.32.040 - Supplemental improvements. 
For any subdivision, a requirement may be imposed that improvements to be installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision shall contain supplemental size, capacity or number for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, and that such improvements be dedicated to the public. Where such a requirement is imposed, the provisions of Section 66485 et seq. of the Act shall apply. 
(Prior code § 9270.13 (D))  
16.32.050 - Installation and dedication of water system. 
For any subdivision, a requirement may be imposed that the subdivider install a water system which meets city standards to serve the subdivision. The water system shall be dedicated to the city. 
(Prior code § 9270.13 (E))  
16.32.060 - Dedications. 
A.  No subdivision or other division of land contemplated by the Act or this title shall be approved, unless the subdivider dedicates to the city, or, at the option of the city, sufficient interests in real property located within the subdivision or other division of land to accommodate all streets, alleys, drainage facilities, sewage facilities, public utility easements and such other easements as may be deemed necessary to properly service the lots proposed to be created. This includes, but it not limited to, dedication, or irrevocable offers of dedication, of access rights and abutter's rights of whatever kind or nature. Where appropriate, the waiver of direct access rights, as contemplated by Section 66476 of the Act may be required, if the public interest necessitates such waiver, as determined by the city council. 
B.  The precise areas proposed for such dedication or offers of dedication, shall be established as conditions of approval on the tentative map for such subdivision or other division of land. 
(Prior code § 9270.14)  
16.32.070 - Reservation of land. 
For any subdivision, a requirement may be imposed that areas of real property be reserved for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public use. When such a requirement is imposed, the provisions of Section 66479 et seq. of the Act shall apply. 
(Prior code § 9270.15)  
16.32.080 - Grading and erosion control. 
Every map approved pursuant to the provisions of the Act or of this title shall be conditioned upon compliance with the requirements for grading and erosion control, including the prevention of sedimentation or damage to off-site property, as set forth in Title 15 of this code. 
(Prior code § 9270.16)  
16.32.090 - Soils report. 
A preliminary soils report, in accordance with Section 66490 of the Act, shall be required for each subdivision. Where the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, a soils investigation of each lot in the subdivision may be required and subsequent actions shall be taken in accordance with Section 66491 of the Act. 
(Prior code § 9270.17)  
16.32.100 - Improvement security. 
Where improvements are required for a division of land which is not a subdivision of five or more lots, in accordance with Section 66411.1 of the Act, the city may require the subdivider to execute an agreement that construction requirements will be fulfilled by a time therein specified. Such an agreement may be required for other subdivision improvements which are not completed and accepted at the time of parcel or final map approval and for which an agreement is not mandated by Section 66462 of the Act. All such agreements shall be secured as specified by Section 66499 et seq. of the Act. 
(Prior code § 9270.18)  
Title 17 - ZONING  
Chapter 17.02 - PURPOSE AND INTENT 
 
17.02.010 - Title. 
The provisions of this title shall be referred to as the "zoning code." 
(Prior code § 9210.1)  
17.02.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the regulations contained in this title that classify, designate, regulate and restrict the use of buildings, land and structures, is to permit the most compatible use of land within the city, consistent with the needs of residential, commercial and industrial developments, and the promotion of the public health, safety, welfare and general prosperity of the city and its residents. 
(Prior code § 9210.2)  
17.02.030 - Applicability of provisions to city owned or leased property. 
The regulations contained in this title shall not apply to city owned or leased property, when actually in use by the city. 
(Prior code § 9210.10)  
17.02.040 - Regulations deemed minimum standards. 
In applying these regulations to uses within the city, the same shall be deemed to be the minimum standards required for the promotion of the public health, safety, interest and welfare, unless the context of a specific regulation provides otherwise. 
(Prior code § 9210.4)  
17.02.050 - Reference to other laws—Applicability to amendments. 
Whenever reference is made to other provisions of this or any other law, the reference shall apply to present and future amendments unless otherwise stated. 
(Prior code § 9210.5)  
17.02.060 - Continuations of existing permits. 
Any zone variances, zone exceptions, conditional or special use permits, unclassified use permits and/or precise plans (hereafter "zoning device") issued by the city, or by the county, shall remain in full force and effect; provided, that each zoning device is subject to provisions of Chapter 17.54 of this code. Notwithstanding any other provisions, no use authorized by such previously granted zoning device, which is in compliance with all conditions of approval, shall be deemed nonconforming for any purpose, except as specifically set forth herein. 
(Prior code § 9210.7)  
17.02.070 - Process regarding pending proceedings. 
If, as of the effective date of these regulations, legislative or administrative action is pending involving the former zoning regulations of the city, such action shall be taken according to the provisions of this title, and shall be finally processed, as far as possible, in accordance with the provisions hereof, except that any project for which a valid building permit application has been received, such project may proceed as provided for by the Uniform Building Code. 
(Prior code § 9210.8)  
17.02.080 - Effective date. 
The effective date of each of the regulations shall be the date of the city council ordinance which adopted such regulations unless a later date is specified in a particular regulation. 
(Prior code § 9210.9)  
Chapter 17.04 - ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
17.04.010 - Designation. 
In order to classify, regulate, restrict and segregate the uses of land and buildings, to regulate and restrict the height and bulk of buildings and to regulate the area of yards and other open spaces about buildings, and to regulate the density of population, twelve classes of zones are by this title established to be as follows: 
R-A 	Residential Agricultural zone 
R-1 	One-family residential zone 
R-2 	Two-family residential zone 
R-3 	Multiple-family residential zone 
R-4 	High-density residential zone 
C-R 	Commercial restricted zone 
C-1 	Neighborhood commercial zone 
C-2 	General commercial zone 
C-3 	Heavy commercial zone 
C-M 	Heavy commercial—limited industrial zone 
M-1 	Light manufacturing zone 
M-2 	Heavy manufacturing zone 
 
(Prior code § 9211)  
17.04.020 - More restrictive uses defined. 
"More restrictive uses" as employed in this title means the following: 
A.  Those uses first permitted in the R-1 zone are the more restrictive. 
B.  All other uses are less restrictive in the order they are first permitted in the zones, in the sequence shown: R-2, R-3, R-4, C-R, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-M, M-1 and M-2. 
C.  Uses permitted in the R-A zone are to be as restrictive as those permitted in the R-1 zone, except that uses pertaining to animals shall not be considered as more restrictive uses for purposes of this title. 
(Prior code § 9211.1)  
17.04.030 - Location and boundaries. 
The location and boundaries of the various zones are shown and delineated on the zoning map of the city, which is made a part of this title by reference as though fully set forth herein. 
(Prior code § 9211.2)  
17.04.040 - Division of zoning map. 
The zoning map may, for convenience, be divided into parts, and each part may, for purposes of more readily identifying areas within the zoning map, be subdivided into units, and these parts and units may be separately employed for purposes of amending the zoning map or for any official reference to the zoning map. 
(Prior code § 9211.3)  
17.04.050 - Changes in boundaries. 
Changes in the boundaries of the zones shall be made by ordinance adopting an amended zoning map, or part of the map, or unit of a part of the zoning map. These maps, when adopted, shall be published in the manner prescribed by law and become a part of this title. 
(Prior code § 9211.4)  
17.04.060 - Uncertainty of boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zone shown upon a zoning map or any part or unit, the following rules apply: 
A.  Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following street and alley lines or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be the zone boundaries. 
B.  In the case of unsubdivided property, and where a zone boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundaries, unless the same are indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the zoning map. 
C.  Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the street or alley will acquire the classification of the property to which it reverts. 
D.  Areas of dedicated streets or alleys and railroad rights-of-way, other than such as are designated on the zoning map as being classified in one of the zones provided in this title, shall be deemed to be the unclassified and, in the case of streets, permitted to be used for purposes lawfully allowed, and in the case of railroad rights-of-way, permitted to be used solely for the purpose of accommodating tracks, signals, other operative devices and the movement of rolling stock. 
(Prior code § 9211.5)  
17.04.070 - Classification of annexed lands and unclassified property. 
A.  Any property which, for any reason, is not designated on the zoning map or in this title as being classified in any of the zones established herein, shall be deemed to be temporarily zoned R-1 until the land is classified after being processed as an amendment to the zone plan pursuant to this title and Chapter 1, Title 7 of the Government Code. 
B.  Areas annexed to the city shall be classified in the zone under this title most comparable to the zone classification for the annexed area in the county at the time of annexation, unless the city council adopts a different classification in the manner provided for zone changes in this title. Such zone changes, variances or conditional use permits may be initiated and heard prior to the effective date of annexation. Any zone changes, variances or conditional use permits granted would be in effect upon annexation. 
(Prior code § 9211.6)  
17.04.080 - Limitation on land use. 
Except as provided in this title, no building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used for any purpose except as specifically provided and allowed in the zone in which the building and land are located. 
(Prior code § 9211.7)  
17.04.090 - Compliance with code requirements. 
Compliance with the provisions of the zoning code shall not, in any case, be deemed to be a waiver of the requirements of Chapters 5.04 and 12.16 of this code, or any other provision of the municipal code, requiring the issuance of a license or permit, or both, for the conduct of a business or any other activity. 
(Prior code § 9211.8)  
17.04.100 - Precedence of approved redevelopment and specific plans. 
Whenever any lot in the city has been included within the area of an approved redevelopment plan, or included within the boundaries of a specific plan, adopted pursuant to Section 65450 et seq. of the Planning and Zoning Law of the state, approved redevelopment plans and/or specific plans take precedence over the zoning code where there is a conflict between standards specified in the plan and standards specified in the zoning code. 
(Prior code § 9211.9)  
Chapter 17.06 - ADMINISTRATION, LICENSING AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
17.06.010 - Enforcement agency. 
The planning division of the city is designated as the agency to enforce the provisions of this title, and is authorized to use all reasonable means necessary to do so. 
(Prior code § 9212.5)  
17.06.020 - Administrative interpretation. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the city planner, where necessary, to interpret the provisions of this title to assure adherence to the city council's purpose and intent in adopting the provisions in this title. All interpretations shall be in written form and shall be kept on permanent record by the city planner. 
B.  Any person who does not agree with the city planner's interpretation may, in writing, request that the interpretation be reviewed by the planning commission. 
(Prior code § 9212)  
17.06.030 - Clarification of ambiguity. 
If an ambiguity is found with reference to these regulations, including, but not limited to, the appropriate zone classification of a particular use, the commission shall consider the matter and recommend to the city council the clarification of the ambiguity. When such a commission recommendation has been approved by the city council, the recommendation will be in force and effect and shall govern the interpretation of the affected provisions. 
(Prior code § 9212.1)  
17.06.040 - Certificate of occupancy. 
No certificate of occupancy (as defined in the Uniform Building Code, as adopted by Chapter 15.04 of this code) shall be issued for any building, structure or use of land, unless the same complies with all applicable provisions of this title. Temporary certificates may be issued providing no such certificate is issued for a period of more than thirty days. 
(Prior code § 9212.3)  
17.06.050 - No conflicting licenses or permits shall be issued. 
All departments, officials or public employees with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses where required by law shall conform to the provisions of this title. No such license or permit for uses, buildings or purposes, where the same would be in conflict with the provisions of this title, shall be issued. Any such license or permit, if issued in conflict with these provisions, shall be null and void. 
(Prior code § 9212.4)  
17.06.060 - Violations—Misdemeanors. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this title (except those enumerated in 17.06.070) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or both. 
(Prior code § 9212.6)  
17.06.070 - Violations—Infractions. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the following provisions of this title shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine as referenced in Section 1.12.020 of this code. 
A.  R-A, R-1 and R-2 zones: 
1.  Garage sales conducted on nondesignated weekends (see Section 17.10.230), 
2.  Storage of commercial vehicles, 
3.  Parking vehicles in front or side yards (see residential zoning requirements chart), 
4.  Repair, dismantling or storage of vehicles (Section 17.10.210), 
5.  Outdoor storage areas; 
B.  R-3 and R-4 zones: 
1.  Garage sales conducted on nondesignated weekends (see Section 17.10.230), 
2.  Storage of commercial vehicles, 
3.  Parking in driveways (parking for five or more vehicles), Section 17.10.210, 
4.  Parking vehicles in front or side yards (see residential zoning requirements chart), 
5.  Repair, dismantling or storage of vehicles (Section 17.10.210), 
6.  Outdoor storage area; 
C.  C-R, C-1, C-2, C-3 and C-M zones: 
1.  Uses requiring a temporary use permit (see index of permitted uses and Chapter 12.16 of this code), 
2.  All uses to be conducted inside of a building (see index of permitted uses); 
D.  M-1 and M-2 zones: None; 
E.  Off-street parking: 
1.  Maintenance of off-street parking areas including required landscaping (Section 17.52.260), 
2.  Maintenance of striping, directional signs, screening and all other required improvements (Section 17.52.260), 
3.  Stacked parking (Section 17.52.280), 
4.  Charging for use of required parking (Section 17.52.290), 
5.  Storage of vehicles (Section 17.52.300); 
F.  General provisions: 
1.  Vision clearance, corner and reversed corner lots (Section 17.50.040); 
G.  Signs: 
1.  Prohibited signage: 
a.  Moving, animated or flashing illuminated signs, 
b.  Flags, pennants, banners, paper or wind-driven signs, 
c.  Portable signs, 
d.  Inflatable signs, 
2.  Placing signs on public street or parkways. 
(Amended during 9/96 supplement; Ord. 2141 §§ 16, 17, 1996; prior code § 9212.7)  
17.06.080 - Violations—Each day a separate offense. 
Each person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day any violation of any provision of this title, is committed, continued or permitted, and shall be punishable as provided for in this title. Any use, occupation, building or structure maintained contrary to the provisions of this title shall constitute a public nuisance. 
(Prior code § 9212.8)  
Chapter 17.08 - DEFINITIONS 
 
17.08.005 - Purpose. 
For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this code, the words, phrases and terms included here shall be deemed to have the meanings ascribed to them as set forth in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 9220)  
17.08.010 - Abut, adjoining or contiguous. 
"Abut," "Adjoining" or "contiguous" means two or more lots or parcels of land sharing a common boundary line. 
(Prior code § 9220.1 (1))  
17.08.015 - Access. 
"Access" means a means of pedestrian or vehicular entry or exit from property. 
(Prior code § 9220.1 (2))  
17.08.020 - Accessory building. 
"Accessory building" means a detached building, or structure, the use of which is subordinate and incidental to that of the main building, structure or use on the same lot. Such buildings, except garages, shall be limited in size to five hundred square feet. Any such building used for human habitation shall include accessory buildings, family rooms, rumpus rooms, guest rooms (houses), or any other room which may be used for living purposes. 
(Prior code § 9220.1 (3))  
17.08.022 - Accessory dwelling unit. 
"Accessory dwelling unit" means an independent dwelling unit located in any of the residential zones, and in the case of single-family zoning districts (R-1 and R-A zones), on a lot that has only one previously-existing single-family dwelling unit prior to the addition of the accessory dwelling unit which is smaller than and visually subordinate to the previously existing single-family dwelling unit, and which may be an internal remodeling of, or attached to or detached from the previously existing single-family dwelling unit. Accessory dwelling units may also be referred to as "second dwelling units" within this title, and both terms may be used interchangeably herein. 
(Ord. 2274 § 1, 2004: Ord. 2109 § 5, 1994)  
17.08.025 - Accessory use. 
"Accessory use" means a use customarily incidental and related, but clearly subordinate to the principal use allowed on the lot. The use of the accessory building must not alter the character of the use of the principal building. 
(Prior code § 9220.1 (4))  
17.08.030 - Adjacent. 
"Adjacent" means lots or objects which are located in close proximity to each other (separated only by an alley, street, highway or recorded easement). 
(Prior code § 9220.1 (5))  
17.08.035 - Adjoining room. 
"Adjoining room" means any room in which one half of the area of the common wall with another room is open and unobstructed and provides an opening of not less than one-tenth of the floor area of the interior room or twenty-five square feet, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. 2022 § 5 (b), 1990: prior code § 9220.1 (6))  
17.08.040 - Airport. 
"Airport" means any area of land or water which is used or intended to be used for the landing and take off of aircraft and any related areas used or intended to be used for airport buildings or other airport facilities or rights-of-way, together with all airport buildings and facilities. Airport includes heliport and helistop. 
(Prior code § 9220.1 (7))  
17.08.045 - Alley. 
"Alley" means a secondary public or private way, that affords a means of access to abutting property. 
(Prior code § 9220.1 (8))  
17.08.050 - Amendment. 
"Amendment" means a change in wording, context or substance of this code, or a change in the zoning maps, which are part of this code when adopted by ordinance of the city council in the manner prescribed by law. 
(Prior code § 9220.1 (9))  
17.08.055 - Amusement arcade. 
"Amusement arcade" means any place or premises where the game area of coin-operated amusement game machines exceeds twenty-five percent of the total floor area of any use. If amusement game machines occupy less than twenty-five percent of the total floor area, they shall be considered an accessory use. 
(Prior code § 9220.1 (10))  
17.08.060 - Amusement game machine. 
"Amusement game machine" means a coin-operated machine or device which, whether mechanical, electrical or electronic, shall be ready for play by the insertion of a coin, token or similar object, and may be operated by the public for use as a game, entertainment or amusement. It includes devices commonly referred to as pinball machines and video game machines. 
(Prior code § 9220.1 (11))  
17.08.065 - Apartment. 
"Apartment" means a room or suite of two or more rooms in a multiple dwelling structure, suitable for occupancy as a rental residence. 
(Prior code § 9220.1 (12))  
17.08.070 - Apartment, bachelor. 
"Bachelor apartment" means a dwelling unit in an apartment building that combines sleeping, living, cooking and dining facilities into not more than two rooms. 
(Prior code § 9220.1 (13))  
17.08.075 - Area. 
"Area" means net area unless otherwise specified. 
(Prior code § 9220.1 (14))  
17.08.080 - Area, net. 
"Net area" means that area of a lot or parcel of land exclusive of: 
A.  Public alleys, highways or streets; or 
B.  Proposed public facilities such as alleys, highways, streets or other necessary public sites when included within a proposed development project; or 
C.  Other public or private easements where the owner of the parcel does not have the right to use the entire surface of the land. 
(Prior code § 9220.1 (15))  
17.08.085 - Assessor. 
"Assessor" means the assessor of the county of Los Angeles. 
(Prior code § 9220.1 (16))  
17.08.090 - Bedroom. 
"Bedroom" means a room marketed, designed or otherwise likely to function primarily for sleeping. 
(Prior code § 9220.2 (1))  
17.08.095 - Building. 
"Building" means any structure having a roof, but excluding all forms of vehicles even though immobilized. 
(Prior code § 9220.2 (2))  
17.08.100 - Building, enclosed. 
"Enclosed building" means a building enclosed on all sides. 
(Prior code § 9220.2 (3))  
17.08.105 - Building floors. 
For purposes hereof, the number of floors in a building shall be counted from the lowermost floor to the uppermost floor and shall include subterranean off-street parking areas. 
(Prior code § 9220.2 (4))  
17.08.110 - Building height. 
"Building height" means the vertical distance, measured in feet, from the highest point of the building or structure, to the ground level grade. 
(Prior code § 9220.2 (5))  
17.08.115 - Building, principal. 
"Building" means a building or buildings in which is conducted, or in which is intended to be conducted, the main or principal use of the lot on which it is located. 
(Prior code § 9220.2 (6))  
17.08.120 - Building site. 
"Building site" means: 
A.  The ground area of one lot; or 
B.  The ground area of two or more lots when used in combination for a building or group of buildings, together with all open spaces required by this code. 
(Prior code § 9220.2 (7))  
17.08.125 - Cabana. 
"Cabana" means an accessory building used in conjunction with a swimming pool and containing only dressing rooms and shower facilities. 
(Prior code § 9220.3 (1))  
17.08.130 - Carport. 
"Carport" means a permanently roofed structure with not more than two enclosed sides, used or intended to be used for automobile shelter and storage. 
(Prior code § 9220.3 (2))  
17.08.132 - Catering truck service yard (heavy trucking). 
"Catering truck service yard" means a facility that allows for the overnight storage of catering/lunch trucks, ice cream trucks, or similar type of vehicles, and may include a commissary, wash racks, and maintenance facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2342, § 3, 6-22-2011)  
17.08.135 - Cemetery. 
"Cemetery" means land used or intended to be used for the burial or interment of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes. Cemetery includes columbaria, crematories and mausoleums, and may include mortuaries and chapels when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery. 
(Prior code § 9220.3 (3))  
17.08.140 - Child care center. 
See Day care/Nursery school. 
(Prior code § 9220.3 (4))  
17.08.145 - City. 
"City" means the city of Montebello. 
(Prior code § 9220.3 (5))  
17.08.150 - Club, private. 
"Private club" means any building or premises used by an association of persons (whether incorporated or not) organized for some common purpose, but not including a group organized solely or primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise. 
(Prior code § 9220.3 (6))  
17.08.155 - Code. 
"Code" means the Montebello Municipal Code. 
(Prior code § 9220.3 (7))  
17.08.160 - Commission. 
"Commission" means the planning commission of the city of Montebello, California. 
(Prior code § 9220.3 (8))  
17.08.165 - Condominium. 
"Condominium" shall be the same as defined in Civil Code Section 1350. 
(Prior code § 9220.3 (9) (part))  
17.08.170 - Condominium, air space. 
"Air space condominium" means a condominium unit in which the individual ownership interest consists of a fee simple, estate for life, or estate for years in the air space enclosed by the unit, extending to but excluding the unfinished interior walls, ceilings, and floors of the unit. 
(Prior code § 9220.3 (9) (a))  
17.08.175 - Condominium, townhouse. 
"Townhouse condominium" means a condominium unit consisting of an independent building with exterior walls, situated upon a separate parcel of land which is at least coextensive with the perimeter of the unit. The individual ownership interest in a townhouse condominium consists of a fee simple, estate for life, or estate for years in the entire unit, including the exterior walls and the underlying land. The definition herein shall not preclude an individual unit in a townhouse condominium project from being attached to another unit. 
(Prior code § 9220.3 (9) (b))  
17.08.180 - Corner lot. 
See Lot, corner. 
(Prior code § 9220.3 (10))  
17.08.185 - County. 
"County" means the county of Los Angeles. 
(Prior code § 9220.3 (11))  
17.08.190 - Court. 
"Court" means an open space, bounded on two or more sides by the walls of a building. 
(Prior code § 9220.3 (12))  
17.08.195 - Day care/Nursery school. 
"Day care/Nursery school" means a facility with an organized program for daytime supervision and care of children. 
(Prior code § 9220.4 (1))  
17.08.200 - Dedication. 
"Dedication" means the transfer of property interests from private to public ownership for a public purpose. 
(Prior code § 9220.4 (2))  
17.08.205 - Disabled vehicle. 
"Disabled vehicle" means a vehicle which is not operable by reason of the removal of, or damage to, integral component parts. 
(Prior code § 9220.4 (3))  
17.08.210 - Disassemble. 
"Dissemble" means the same as dismantle. 
(Prior code § 9220.4 (4))  
17.08.215 - Dismantle. 
"Dismantle" means the removal or stripping of one or more integral component parts from a vehicle. 
(Prior code § 9220.4 (5))  
17.08.220 - Driveway. 
"Driveway" means paved access to an off-street parking facility. 
(Prior code § 9220.4. (6))  
17.08.225 - Drive-in establishment. 
"Drive-in establishment" means any use that provides for the delivery of any goods or services directly to the occupants of motor vehicles by any means including service windows and personal service by employees. 
(Prior code § 9220.4 (7))  
17.08.230 - Dump. 
"Dump" means an area devoted to the disposal of refuse and salvage, including incineration, reduction or the dumping of ashes, garbage, combustibles or noncombustibles or offal. 
(Prior code § 9220.4 (8))  
17.08.235 - Duplex. 
"Duplex" means two-family dwelling. 
(Prior code § 9220.4 (9))  
17.08.240 - Dwelling, attached. 
"Attached dwelling" means two or more adjoining dwelling units, each of which is separated from the others by one or more unpierced walls from ground to roof, and each containing only one kitchen. 
(Prior code § 9220.4 (12))  
17.08.245 - Dwelling, multiple-family. 
"Multiple-family dwelling" means two or more dwelling units, each of which is attached side to side, each one sharing common wall(s) with the other(s), and each containing only one kitchen. (See Triplex.) Prior code § 9220.4 (13))  
17.08.250 - Dwelling, single-family detached. 
"Single-family detached dwelling" means a building designed for occupancy by one family and containing one dwelling unit having no roof, wall or floor common with any other dwelling unit, and containing only one kitchen. 
(Prior code § 9220.4 (11))  
17.08.255 - Dwelling unit. 
"Dwelling unit" means any building or portion thereof which is designated or used for residential purposes for not more than one family, and containing only one kitchen. 
(Prior code § 9220.4 (10))  
17.08.260 - Educational institution. 
"Educational institution" means any public or private school, giving general academic instruction. 
(Prior code § 9220.5 (1))  
17.08.265 - Efficiency living unit. 
"Efficiency living unit" means any room having cooking facilities and used for combined living, dining and sleeping purposes. 
(Prior code § 9220.5 (2))  
17.08.270 - Electric distribution substation. 
"Electric distribution substation" means the electric power equipment which receives electric energy at a subtransmission voltage, and transforms it to a lower voltage for distribution for general customer use. 
(Prior code § 9220.5 (3))  
17.08.275 - Electric transmission substation. 
"Electric transmission substation" means the electric power equipment which receives electric energy at a very high voltage from its source of generation, by means of a network of high-voltage lines, and which by means of transformers transforms to a lower subtransmission voltage for the purpose of supplying electric power to large individual customers, or interconnections with other power-producing agencies or electric distribution substations for transformation to still lower voltage for distribution to smaller individual use. 
(Prior code § 9220.5 (4))  
17.08.280 - Explosives. 
"Explosives" means any explosive substance as defined by the city fire marshal. 
(Prior code § 9220.5 (5))  
17.08.285 - Factory-built housing. 
"Factory-built housing" means residential buildings (including those for institutional care) which are wholly or in part at an off-site location such that all concealed parts or systems cannot be inspected without damage, disassembly or destruction of the parts or units. These units are regulated by the State Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 19990. "Factory-built housing" does not include a mobile home, mobile accessory building, recreation vehicle or commercial coach. 
(Prior code § 9220. 6 (1))  
17.08.290 - Family. 
"Family" means an individual; two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption; or any other bona fide single housekeeping unit consisting of a group of persons, all of whom voluntarily reside together in one dwelling on a relatively permanent basis and share the use of the entire dwelling unit. 
(Prior § 9220.6 (2))  
17.08.295 - Floor area, gross. 
"Gross floor area" means the total horizontal area of all the floors in a building included within the surrounding walls, exclusive of vent shaft and courts. 
(Prior code § 9220.6 (3))  
17.08.300 - Floor area ratio. 
"Floor area ratio" means a ratio derived by dividing the total floor area of all buildings (excluding subterranean parking area more than fifty percent below ground level) by the base site area. 
(Prior code § 9220.6 (4))  
17.08.305 - Garage. 
"Garage" means any building with not less than three enclosed sides and a door which can be closed, which is used or intended to be used for motor vehicle shelter or storage. 
(Prior code § 9220.7 (1))  
17.08.310 - Grade, ground level. 
"Ground level grade" means the average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of a building. In case walls are parallel to and within five feet of a sidewalk, the aboveground level shall be measured at the sidewalk. 
(Prior code § 9220.7 (2))  
17.08.315 - Guesthouse. 
"Guesthouse" means an accessory dwelling unit used by persons employed on the premises or temporarily by guests of the occupants of the main dwelling unit. Such units shall have no kitchen facilities, no more than two rooms, and not be rented or used permanently as another dwelling unit. 
(Prior code § 9220.7 (3))  
17.08.320 - Height. 
See Building height. 
(Prior code § 9220.8 (1))  
17.05.325 - Heliport. 
See Airport. 
(Prior code § 9220.8 (2))  
17.08.330 - Home for the aged. 
See Senior citizen's housing. 
(Prior code § 9220.8 (3))  
17.08.331 - Home occupation. 
"Home Occupation" means an occupation, calling, trade or profession carried on by a resident in a dwelling unit, which serves as the primary place of business and is accessory to the residential use. The home occupation shall not change the integrity and residential character of the property or its neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 2360, § 3, 6-25-2014)  
17.08.335 - Hospital. 
"Hospital" means an institution staffed and equipped to provide the various types of intensified hospital care, including, but not limited to, short-term care in acute medical, surgical and obstetrical services, but shall not include the treatment, other than on an emergency interim basis, of alcoholic or mental patients. 
(Prior code § 9220.8 (4))  
17.08.340 - Hospital, mental. 
"Mental hospital" means an institution licensed by state agencies under provisions of law to offer facilities, care and treatment for cases of mental and nervous disorders above the age of five years but not licensed to provide facilities and services in surgery, obstetrics and general medical practice. 
(Prior code § 9220.8 (5))  
17.08.345 - Hospital, small animal. 
"Small animal hospital" means an establishment in which veterinary services, clipping, bathing, boarding and other services are rendered to dogs, cats and other small animals and household pets. 
(Prior code § 9220.8 (6))  
17.08.350 - Hotel. 
"Hotel" means any building, group of buildings, or portion of any building with guestrooms, which have no cooking facilities, and which rooms are designed, intended to be used or are used, rented or hired out as temporary overnight accommodations for guests. 
(Prior code § 9220.8 (7))  
17.08.355 - Household. 
"Household" means all of the persons living together in a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. 
(Prior code § 9220.8 (8))  
17.08.360 - Household pets. 
"Household pets" means any domesticated animal, maintained in residence with people. This definition excludes poultry and fowl. 
(Prior code § 9220.8 (9))  
17.08.364 - Impound yard. 
"Impound yard" means a facility where impounded vehicles whether operative or inoperative are temporarily stored pending their transfer to another location and which does not involve the business operator assuming title to any of the vehicles. No junkyards, parts salvage or sale, or similar activities are permitted as impounding. 
(Ord. 2180 § 5, 1998)  
17.08.365 - Institution. 
"Institution" means an establishment maintained and operated by a society, corporation, individual, foundation or public agency for the purpose of providing charitable, social, education, or similar services to the public, groups or individuals. 
(Prior code § 9220.9)  
17.08.370 - Junk and salvage yard. 
"Junk salvage yard" means premises used for the keeping or storage of junk, including, but not limited to, iron and scrap metals, paper, rags, glass, wood and similar materials and includes the dismantling of machinery or the storage or keeping for sale of parts and equipment resulting from dismantling or wrecking operations. Junk and salvage yard also includes the baling of cardboard, cardboard boxes, paper and cartons. 
(Prior code § 9220.10)  
17.08.375 - Kennel. 
"Kennel" means any place in or at which four or more dogs or cats over the age of four months are kept for the purpose of sale or in connection with boarding care or breeding, whether or not any fee is charged. 
(Prior code § 9220.11 (1))  
17.08.380 - Key lot. 
See Lot, key. 
(Prior code § 9220.11 (2))  
17.08.385 - Kitchen. 
"Kitchen" means any room or space designed to be used or used for the cooking and preparation of food. 
(Prior code § 9220.11 (3))  
17.08.390 - Land reclamation project. 
"Land reclamation project" means a project established to restore otherwise unsuitable land to useful purposes through the use of fill materials such as rubbish, waste soil and other unwanted materials. Land reclamation project includes a dump or waste disposal facility. 
(Prior code § 9220.12 (1))  
17.08.395 - Landscaping. 
"Landscaping" means the planting and maintaining of some combination of live trees, shrubs, vines, groundcovers, flowers or lawns. In addition, the combination or design may include natural features such as rock and stone, and structural features, including fountains, reflecting pools, artwork, screens, walls, fences and benches. 
(Prior code § 9220.12 (2))  
17.08.400 - Lot or parcel of land. 
"Lot or parcel of land" means: 
A.  A parcel of real property which is shown as a lot on a final subdivision map recorded in the office of the county recorder pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act; or 
B.  A parcel of land, the dimensions or boundaries of which are defined by a duly recorded record of survey map; or 
C.  A parcel of land, the dimensions or boundaries of which are defined by a duly recorded lot split or parcel map. 
(Prior code § 9220.12 (3))  
17.08.405 - Lot area. 
"Lot area" means the area contained within the boundary lines of a lot. For lots included in a lot split or subdivision, any portion of a lot which is subject to an easement held by the city for any public purpose is excluded if the easement is part of the required front yard area. (See Exhibit 17.08.405.) 
(Prior code § 9220.12 (4)) 
EXHIBIT 17.08.405 
LOT DIMENSIONS 
   
17.08.410 - Lot, corner. 
"Corner lot" means a lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection. (See Exhibit 17.08.410.) 
(Prior code § 9220.12 (5)) 
EXHIBIT 17.08.410 
LOT TYPES 
   
17.08.415 - Lot depth. 
"Lot depth" means the mean horizontal distance between the front lot lines and rear lot lines measured at right angles to the front lot lines. (See Exhibit 17.08.405.) 
(Prior code § 9200.12 (6))  
17.08.420 - Lot, interior. 
"Interior lot" means a lot other than a corner lot, reversed corner lot, or through lot. (See Exhibit 17.08.410.) 
(Prior code § 9220.12 (7))  
17.08.425 - Lot, key. 
"Key lot" means the first lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot whether or not separated by an alley. (See Exhibit 17.08.410.) 
(Prior code § 9220.12 (8))  
17.08.430 - Lot line, front. 
"Front lot line" means in the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street. In the case of a corner lot, the front lot line shall be the line separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street. (See Exhibit 17.08.405.) 
(Prior code § 9220.12 (9))  
17.08.435 - Lot line, rear. 
"Rear lot line" means that lot line which is parallel to and the most distant from the front lot line of the lot. In the case of an irregular, triangular, or gore-shaped lot, a line ten feet in length, entirely within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum possible distance from the front line shall be considered to be the rear lot line. (See Exhibit 17.08.405) 
(Prior code 9220.12 (10))  
17.08.440 - Lot line, side. 
"Side lot line" means any lot line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
(Prior code 9220.12 (11))  
17.08.445 - Lot, reversed corner. 
"Reversed corner lot" means a corner lot, the side lot line of which is a continuation of the front lot line of a lot or parcel of land which adjoins the rear lot line of the reversed corner lot. (See Exhibit 17.08.410.) 
(Prior code § 9220.12 (12))  
17.08.450 - Lot, through. 
"Through lot" means an interior lot having frontage on two streets. If the whole of any through lot is improved as one building site, the main building shall conform to the zone classification of the frontage occupied by such main building, and no accessory building shall be located closer to either street than the distance constituting the required front yard on such street. (See Exhibit 17.08.410.) 
(Prior code § 9220.12 (13))  
17.08.455 - Lot width. 
"Lot width" means the distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the line measuring the lot depth. The lot width of a required front yard setback, measured at the rear of the setback, shall not be less than the lot width required for the zone. (See Exhibit 17.08.405.) 
(Prior code § 9220.12 (14))  
17.08.460 - Machine shop. 
"Machine shop" means a workshop in which metal and other substances are cut, shaped, etc. by machine tools (e.g. lathes). 
(Prior code § 9220.13 (1))  
17.08.465 - Market value. 
See Fair market value. 
(Prior code § 9220.13 (2))  
17.08.470 - May. 
"May" is permissive. 
(Prior code § 9220.13 (3))  
17.08.475 - Medical clinic. 
"Medical clinic" means any facility providing physical or mental health service, and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, but does not include in-patient or overnight accommodations, nor the type of services rendered in a hospital, except upon an occasional and/or emergency basis. Medical clinic includes health centers, health clinics, community clinics, specialty clinics, and free clinics. Medical clinics are medical offices which do not necessarily require appointments, are often open beyond regular business hours, and serve a greater number of patients in a day than medical offices. All medical clinics must have a state clinic license (see California Health & Safety Code, Section 1600). 
(Prior code § 9220.13 (4))  
17.08.480 - Medical office. 
"Medical office" means any facility run by a physician or group of physicians, or psychologists, veterinarians, optometrists, chiropractors, and acupuncturists providing physical or mental health service, and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, but does not include in-patient or overnight accommodations, nor the type of services rendered in a hospital, except upon an occasional and/or emergency basis. Generally, medical offices require appointments and are open only during regular business hours. Medical offices run by a physician or group of physicians are regulated by the Board of Medical Quality Assurance and are not required to be licensed by the state. 
(Prior code § 9220.13 (5))  
17.08.485 - Mobile home. 
"Mobile home" means a housing unit manufactured and certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 and attached to a permanent foundation. The term mobile home includes manufactured housing and factory-built housing. 
(Prior code § 9220.13 (6))  
17.08.490 - Mobile home park. 
"Mobile home park" means any lot or parcel of land where mobile home sites are rented or leased, or offered for rent or lease for one or more mobile homes. 
(Prior code § 9220.13 (7))  
17.08.495 - Motel. 
"Motel" means any building, group of buildings or portion of a building with guestrooms having no kitchen facilities and having separate entrances leading directly from the outside of the building or interior court. These rooms are designed for rental for temporary or overnight accommodations for tourists or guests. One unit for use by a resident manager may have a kitchen. 
(Prior code § 9220.13 (8))  
17.08.500 - Multifamily dwelling. 
See Dwelling, Multiple-family. 
(Prior code § 9220.13 (9))  
17.08.505 - Minimum dwelling unit size. 
"Minimum dwelling unit size" means: 
A.  Bachelor: four hundred square feet; 
B.  Efficiency: five hundred square feet; 
C.  One-bedroom: seven hundred square feet; 
D.  Two-bedroom: nine hundred square feet; 
E.  Three-bedroom: one thousand one hundred square feet. 
Add two hundred square feet for each bedroom over three. Required floor area shall not include porches, garages, entries, terraces, patios or basements. 
(Prior code § 9220.13 (10))  
17.08.510 - Nonconforming building or structure. 
"Nonconforming building or structure" means a building or a structure, or portion of a building or structure, which was lawfully altered or constructed in accordance with the zoning regulations of the city in effect at the time, but which, by reason of the application of the provisions of this title, does not conform to the present regulations. 
(Prior code § 9220.14 (1))  
17.08.515 - Nonconforming use. 
"Nonconforming use" means the utilization of land, building(s), structure(s), or any combination which, when established, conformed to the existing zoning regulations in effect at the time of establishment of such use, but which, by reason of the application of the provisions of this title, does not conform to the present regulations. 
(Prior code § 9220.14 (2))  
17.08.520 - Nursery school. 
See Day Care. 
(Prior code § 9220.14 (3))  
17.08.525 - Nursing and convalescent hospital. 
"Nursing and convalescent hospital" means any place or institution which makes provision for bed care, or for chronic or convalescent care for one or more persons, exclusive of relatives of the operator or owner, who by reason of illness or physical infirmity are unable to properly care for themselves. Alcoholics, drug addicts, persons with mental diseases, persons with communicable diseases, including but not limited to contagious tuberculosis, shall not be permitted in nursing and convalescent hospitals. 
(Prior code § 9220.14 (4))  
17.08.530 - Open area. 
"Open area" means all portions of a lot not covered by buildings. (See specific zones.) 
(Prior code § 9220.15 (1))  
17.08.535 - Open space, useable. 
"Usable open space" means: 
A.  Any area designed, and to be used, for outdoor living and recreation; 
B.  Or landscaping located on the ground or on an unenclosed balcony, deck or porch and shall include patios and deck areas of swimming pools; 
C.  No portion of off-street parking space, driveways, accessory buildings, required front, rear, or five-foot side yards, or covered pedestrian walkways between buildings, shall constitute useable open space. 
(Prior code § 9220.15 (2))  
17.08.540 - Park. 
"Park" means the standing of a motor vehicle, other than for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. 
(Prior code § 9220.16 (1))  
17.08.545 - Parking space, off-street. 
"Off-street parking space" means a legally accessible area, not including driveways, ramps, loading or work areas, maintained exclusively for the parking of a motor vehicle. 
(Prior code § 9220.16 (2))  
17.08.550 - Parking, subterranean. 
"Subterranean parking" means a legally accessible area for parking of motor vehicles which is more than fifty percent below grade level. 
(Prior code § 9220.16 (3))  
17.08.555 - Person. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, district, political subdivision, foreign country, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, except the city of Montebello. 
(Prior code § 9220.16 (4))  
17.08.560 - Planned development and planned unit development. 
"Planned development" and "planned unit development" means the planning, construction or implementation and operation of any use or structure, or a combination of uses and structures, based on a comprehensive and complete design or plan treating the entire complex of land, structures and uses as a single project as approved pursuant to the regulations set forth in Chapter 17.38 of this code. 
(Prior code § 9220.16 (5))  
17.08.565 - Quarry. 
"Quarry" means a sand or gravel pit, rock crushing plant or any apparatus for the manufacture, processing or production of rock, sand or gravel, or the mining, excavating, removing, stockpiling or distribution of rock, sand, gravel, clay, decomposed granite or similar material. Quarry shall not include: 
A.  The excavation and removal of materials related to the construction of a building or structure for which a building permit has been issued and remains in full force and effect; provided, that such excavation is confined to the necessary for such construction five thousand cubic yards of soil or other excavated materials be removed from the premises; nor 
B.  Excavation necessary to grading; provided, that such grading is necessary to prepare a site for a lawful use permitted thereon, and for which a grading plan has been issued by the city. 
(Prior code § 9220.17)  
17.08.570 - Recorder. 
"Recorder" means the recorder of the county of Los Angeles. 
(Prior code § 9220.18 (1))  
17.08.574 - Recyclable materials. 
"Recyclable materials" means materials that have been separated from the solid waste stream prior to disposal and returning them for use or reuse in the form of raw materials for new, used or reconstituted products which meet the quality standard necessary to be used in the market place and that are not landfilled. Recyclable materials include any materials identified by the director of planning and community development for which a market exists, including, but not limited to: plastic bottles and jars, paper, cardboard, glass, newspaper, metal containers, scrap metal, cans, construction and demolition waste, as well as compostable materials such as green waste, yard waste or food waste. 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 3, 8-14-2013)  
17.08.575 - Recycling. 
"Recycling" means the collection of used products such as newspapers, cans, corrugated cardboard, glass, metal, etc., and other materials as determined by the planning manager for the conversion thereof into new products by reprocessing or remanufacturing. 
(Prior code 9220.18 (2)) 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 3, 8-14-2013)  
17.08.576 - Recycling, construction and demolition (C&D) facility. 
"Construction and demolition facility" refers to a facility within a totally enclosed building established to operate for the express purpose of receiving C&D waste, debris, and materials as defined in Section 17.08.577. 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 3, 8-14-2013)  
17.08.577 - Recycling, construction and demolition (C&D) waste, debris, and materials. 
"Construction and demolition C&D waste, debris, or materials" means discarded materials that are not water soluble and are non-hazardous in nature, including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Various metals, glass, brick, concrete, asphalt material, pipe, gypsum, wallboard, and lumber resulting from the construction or destruction of a structure as part of a construction project, demolition project, and/or rehabilitation project. 
2.  Other waste materials associated with landscaping including rocks, soils, tree remains, trees, and other vegetative matter that normally results from land clearing, landscaping and development operations for a construction project. 
3.  Clean cardboard, paper, plastic, wood, and metal scraps from any construction and/or landscape project. Non-construction and demolition debris wood scraps. 
4.  De-minimis amounts of other non-hazardous wastes that are generated at construction or demolition projects, provided such amounts are consistent with best management practices of the industry. 
Mixing of construction and demolition debris with other types of solid waste will cause it to be classified as other than construction and demolition debris. 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 3, 8-14-2013)  
17.08.578 - Recycling, C&D—Covered project. 
"Covered project" refers to any project that meets the following threshold requirements related to the recovery of construction and demolition debris: 
1.  A private project where any construction, demolition, and renovation are projected to be one thousand square feet or greater, and all demolition-only projects shall be considered covered projects. 
2.  All City-sponsored construction, demolition and renovation projects that are projected to be one thousand square feet or greater shall be subject to this Chapter, and consequently, shall be considered covered projects. 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 3, 8-14-2013)  
17.08.579 - Recycling, C&D—Deconstruction. 
"Deconstruction" refers to the careful and systematic dismantling of buildings and structures in order to salvage materials for diversion (also refer to Section 17.08.586, Demolition). 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 3, 8-14-2013)  
17.08.580 - Recycling, C&D—Demolition. 
"C&D demolition" refers to the deconstructing, destroying, razing, tearing down, or wrecking of any facility including its foundation. Demolition work shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  The proper disposal of recyclables, solid waste, and hazardous materials pursuant to applicable regulations and approved plans, if any; 
2.  The termination of utilities serving the premises including permits and final inspections and approvals; 
3.  The removal of driveways and repair of public sidewalks, as required; and 
4.  Site cleanup and restoration including grading, landscaping, and fencing as required. 
(Prior code § 9220.18 (2) (a)) 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 3, 8-14-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2352, § 3, adopted Aug. 14, 2013, changed the title of § 18.08.580 from "Recycling collection facility" to "Recycling, C&D - Demolition."  
17.08.581 - Recycling, C&D—Divert/diversion. 
"Diversion" refers to the percentage of construction and demolition waste generated from a covered project through recycling that is diverted from landfills. The diversion requirement shall be the maximum feasible diversion rate established by the city or other designated staff in charge of C&D Ordinance oversight. 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 3, 8-14-2013)  
17.08.582 - Recycling, C&D—Diversion requirement. 
"Diversion requirement" refers to the percentage of construction and demolition waste generated from a covered project by reuse or recycling that must be diverted from landfills, unless the applicant has been granted an exemption pursuant to Section 17.64080.G of this chapter. If the applicant has been granted an exemption, the diversion requirement shall be the maximum feasible diversion rate established by the compliance official, or other designated staff in charge of C&D Ordinance oversight. 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 3, 8-14-2013)  
17.08.585 - Recycling, C&D—Recycling/recyclables. 
"Recycling" refers to the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace. 
(Prior code § 9220.18 (3)) 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 3, 8-14-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2352, § 3, adopted Aug. 14, 2013, changed the title of § 17.08.585 from "Recyclable materials" to "Recycling, C&D—Recycling/recyclables."  
17.08.587 - Recycling, C&D—Renovation/remodeling. 
"Renovation" refers to any change, addition or modification to an existing structure(s) that is a covered project. 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 3, 8-14-2013)  
17.08.589 - Recycling, C&D salvage. 
"C&D salvage" refers to the controlled removal of construction or demolition waste/material from a permitted building, construction, or demolition site for the purpose of recycling, reuse, or storage for later recycling or reuse. 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 3, 8-14-2013)  
17.08.590 - Recycling, C&D—Waste management plan. 
"Waste management plan" refers to a completed waste management plan (WMP) form, approved by the city for the purpose of compliance with Section 17.64.080, submitted by the applicant for any covered project. 
(Prior code § 9220.18 (4)) 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 3, 8-14-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2352, § 3, adopted Aug. 14, 2013, changed the title of § 17.08.590 from "Recycling center, community" to "Recycling, C&D—Waste management plan."  
17.08.593 - Recycling, C&D—Compliance official. 
"Compliance official" refers to the designated staff person(s) authorized and responsible for the implementation of pertinent sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 3, 8-14-2013)  
17.08.595 - Recycling facility, permitted. 
"Permitted recycling facility" means a solid waste facility for which there exists a solid waste facilities permit issued by the local enforcement agency and concurred in by the CalRecycle, or which is permitted under the regulatory scheme of another state. All recycling facilities in the City of Montebello must be permitted by the city and CalRecycle. 
(Prior code § 9220.18 (6)) 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 3, 8-14-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2352, § 3, adopted Aug. 14. 2013, changed the title of § 17.08.595 from "Recycling plant" to "Recycling facility, permitted."  
17.08.596 - Recycling, materials recovery facility. 
"Materials recovery facility" means a permitted solid waste facility where solid wastes or recyclable materials are sorted or separated, by hand or by use of machinery, for the purposes of recycling or composting. 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 3, 8-14-2013)  
17.08.597 - Recycling, waste transfer facility. 
"Waste transfer facility" means a facility where approved municipal solid waste is unloaded from collection vehicles and briefly held while it is reloaded onto larger long-distance transport vehicles for shipment to landfills or other treatment or disposal facilities for the purpose of combining the loads of several individual waste collection trucks into a single shipment. Such facilities typically transfer solid waste directly from one container to another, or from one vehicle to another for transport, or temporarily store solid waste prior to a final disposal at a CalRecycle-permitted landfill or transformation facility. 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 3, 8-14-2013)  
17.08.598 - Recycling, public collection facility. 
"Public recycling collection facility" means a facility established to receive presorted redeemable beverage containers; provided that such facility is composed of reverse vending machine(s), collection storage unit(s) or a mobile recycling unit. 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 3, 8-14-2013)  
17.08.600 - Recycling facility. 
"Recycling facility" means a totally enclosed building within which the receipt, separation, storage, conversion, baling and/or processing of recyclable materials can occur for the purpose of reutilization of such materials. Hazardous and biodegradable materials including, but not limited to, food, beverages, drugs, cosmetics, hazardous chemicals, poisons, electronic wastes, medical wastes, syringes, needles, pesticides, and other similar materials shall not be brought into or handled by a recycling facility. A recycling facility may consist of a waste transfer facility, a materials recovery facility, or both. 
(Prior code § 9220.18 (5)) 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 3, 8-14-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2352, § 3, adopted Aug. 14, 2013, changed the title of § 17.08.600 from "Recycling station" to "Recycling facility."  
17.08.605 - Repair. 
"Repair" means the work necessary to restore a vehicle to a usable condition. 
(Prior code § 9220.18 (7))  
17.08.610 - Restaurant. 
"Restaurant" means an establishment providing prepared food for consumption on the premises. 
(Prior code § 9200.18 (8))  
17.08.615 - Rest home. 
"Rest home" means a home offering or providing lodging, meals, nursing, dietary or other personal service to five or more ambulatory convalescents, invalids or aged persons, but shall not include the type of care or services rendered in either hospitals, or nursing and convalescent hospitals. 
(Prior code § 9220.18 (9))  
17.08.620 - Reversed corner lot. 
See Lot, reversed corner. 
(Prior code 9220.18 (10))  
17.08.625 - Room. 
"Room" means an unsubdivided portion of the interior of a dwelling excluding bathrooms, kitchens, closets, halls and service porches. 
(Prior code § 9220.18 (11))  
17.08.630 - Sanitarium and sanatorium. 
"Sanitarium" and "sanatorium" means the same as nursing and convalescent hospital. 
(Prior code § 9220.19 (1))  
17.08.632 - Self-service display. 
"Self-service display" means the open display or storage of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia in a manner that is physically accessible in any way to the general public without the assistance of the retailer or employee of the retailer and a direct person-to-person transfer between the purchaser and the retailer or employee of the retailer. A vending machine is a form of self-service display. 
(Ord. No. 2334, § 2, 9-23-2009)  
17.08.635 - Self-storage. 
"Self-storage" means a type of warehousing specifically involving real property designed and used for the purpose of renting or leasing individuals storage space to persons who are to have access to the space for the purpose of storing and removing personal property, but does not include a garage or other storage area in a private residence. 
(Prior code § 9220.19 (2))  
17.08.640 - Senior citizen's housing. 
"Senior citizen's housing" means any building, or portion thereof, other than a hospital or rest home, providing living accommodations for ambulatory persons aged sixty or older. 
(Prior code § 9220.19 (2) (a))  
17.08.645 - Service station. 
"Service station" means any premises used for the retail sale of automotive fuels and lubricants, but which may also provide for the incidental servicing of motor vehicles including grease racks, tire repairs, battery charging, hand washing of automobiles, sale of merchandise and supplies related to the servicing of motor vehicles, and minor repairs, but excluding body and fender work, painting, major automotive repair and similar activities. 
(Prior code § 9220.19 (3))  
17.08.650 - Shall. 
"Shall" is mandatory. 
(Prior code § 9220.19 (4))  
17.08.655 - Sign. 
"Sign" means any device for visual communication, including any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration or insignia, which is used to advertise or promote the interests of any person, business group or enterprise, including, but not limited to, outdoor advertising structures. 
(Prior code § 9220.19 (5))  
17.08.660 - Sign, off-premises. 
"Off-premises sign" means any sign (and/or sign structure) designed and maintained for the primary purpose of soliciting public support, or directing public attention to the sale, lease or use of any object, product, service or function, the sale, leasing or use of which is not necessarily involved in a principal or accessory use conducted upon the lot on which such sign or sign structure is located. The phrase "off-premises sign" includes signs referred to as "subdivision or tract advertising and/or directional signs" and "billboards." The definition shall not include any sign erected and maintained by any public agency, nor to any sign maintained by a public utility which is required to be maintained by statute or ordinance. 
(Prior code § 9220.19 (6))  
17.08.665 - Sign, temporary. 
"Temporary sign" means a sign erected for advertising, promotion or directing public interest to the sale, lease or use of any object, product, service or function which is temporary in nature in that the product will be available for a limited period of time. 
(Prior code § 9220.19 (7))  
17.08.667 - Significant tobacco retailer. 
"Significant tobacco retailer" means any tobacco retailer that devotes ten percent or more of floor area to, or devotes ten percent or more of display area (measured in linear feet or aggregate square footage) to, or derives seventy-five percent or more of gross sales receipts from, the sale or exchange of tobacco products and/or tobacco paraphernalia. 
(Ord. No. 2334, § 2, 9-23-2009)  
17.08.670 - Sloping terrain. 
"Sloping terrain" means any ground surface having a rate of incline or decline of greater than ten percent gradient. 
(Prior code § 9220.19 (8))  
17.08.672 - Smoking. 
"Smoking" means possessing a lighted tobacco product, lighted tobacco paraphernalia, or any other lighted weed, shisha, herb, or plant (including a lighted pipe, cigar, hookah pipe, or cigarette of any kind) and means the lighting of a tobacco product, tobacco paraphernalia, or any other weed, shisha, herb, or plant (including in a pipe, cigar, hookah pipe, or cigarette of any kind). 
(Ord. No. 2334, § 2, 9-23-2009)  
17.08.675 - Solid fill. 
"Solid fill" means any noncombustible materials, insoluble in water, such as soil, rock, sand or gravel, that can be used for grading land or filling depressions. 
(Prior code § 9220.19 (9))  
17.08.680 - Solid fill projects. 
"Solid fill projects" means any operation where more than one thousand cubic yards of solid fill materials are deposited for any purpose including the grading or reclaiming of land. 
(Prior code § 9220.19 (10))  
17.08.685 - Stable. 
"Stable" means a detached accessory building in which horses owned by the occupants of the premises are kept, and in which no horses are kept for hire or sale. 
(Prior code § 9220.19 (11))  
17.08.690 - Stable, public. 
"Public stable" means a stable other than a private stable. 
(Prior code § 9220.19 (12))  
17.08.695 - Stand. 
"Stand" means a structure for the display and sale of products with no space for customers within the structure itself. 
(Prior code § 9220.19 (13))  
17.08.700 - State. 
"State" means the state of California. 
(Prior code § 9220.19 (14))  
17.08.705 - State freeway. 
"State freeway" means any section of a state highway which has been declared to be a freeway by resolution of the California Highway Commission pursuant to the Streets and Highways code. (Prior § 9220.19 (15))  
17.08.710 - Store. 
"Store" means to keep or locate for future use. 
(Prior code § 9220.19 (16))  
17.08.715 - Story. 
"Story" means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. Story includes a basement, but not a cellar. 
(Prior code § 9220.19 (17))  
17.08.720 - Story, half. 
"Half-story" means a story with at least two of its opposite sides situated immediately under a sloping roof, with the floor of the story not in excess of two-thirds of the floor area immediately below it. 
(Prior code § 9220.19 (18))  
17.08.725 - Street. 
"Street" means a public or recorded private thoroughfare which affords a means of access to abutting property excluding alleys. 
(Prior code § 9220.19 (19))  
17.08.730 - Street, side. 
"Side street" means a street which is adjacent to a corner lot and which extends in the general direction of the line determining the depth of the lot. 
(Prior code § 9220.19 (20))  
17.08.735 - Structural alterations. 
"Structural alterations" means any change in the supporting members of a building such as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams, floor or roof joists, girders or rafters, or changes in roof or exterior lines. 
(Prior code § 9220.19 (21))  
17.08.740 - Structure. 
"Structure" means anything constructed or erected, which requires a fixed location on the ground, or is attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. 
(Prior code § 9220.19 (22))  
17.08.745 - Structure, advertising. 
"Advertising structure" means a structure existing, erected or maintained to serve exclusively as a stand, frame or background for the support or display of signs. 
(Prior code § 9220.19 (23))  
17.08.750 - Subterranean parking. 
See Parking, subterranean. 
(Prior code § 9220.19 (24))  
17.08.755 - Through lot. 
See Lot, through. 
(Prior code § 9220.20 (1))  
17.08.757 - Tobacco paraphernalia. 
"Tobacco paraphernalia" means cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other item designed for the smoking, preparation, storing, or consumption of tobacco products. 
(Ord. No. 2334, § 2, 9-23-2009)  
17.08.758 - Tobacco product. 
"Tobacco product" means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, snus, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco; and any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human body, but does not include any cessation product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependence; and any product that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human body, including but not limited to shisha, herbs, or plants of any kind, by means of inhalation through smoking. 
(Ord. No. 2334, § 2, 9-23-2009)  
17.08.759 - Tobacco retailer. 
"Tobacco retailer" means any person who sells, offers for sale, or does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia. "Tobacco retailing" shall mean the doing of any of these things. This definition is without regard to the quantity of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia sold, offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange. 
(Ord. No. 2334, § 2, 9-23-2009)  
17.08.760 - Trailer. 
"Trailer" means a vehicle designed for carrying persons or property on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle; includes semitrailers; does not include mobile homes. 
(Prior code § 9220.20 (2))  
17.08.765 - Trailer park. 
See Mobile home park. 
(Prior code § 9220.20 (3))  
17.08.770 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2352, § 3, adopted Aug. 14, 2013, deleted § 17.08.770, which pertained to transfer station and derived from prior code § 9220.20(4).  
17.08.775 - Triplex. 
"Triplex" means three-family dwelling. 
(Prior code § 9220.20 (5))  
17.08.776 - Truck washing and cleaning (heavy trucking). 
"Truck washing and cleaning" means a facility where trucks, truck trailers, recreational vehicles, and other similar vehicles can be taken to be washed. All vehicles washed leave the facility shortly afterwards, and are not stored at the facility overnight. 
(Ord. No. 2342, § 3, 6-22-2011)  
17.08.777 - Truck/RV storage yard (heavy trucking). 
"Truck[/RV] storage yard" means a facility intended for the storage of trucks, truck trailers, recreational vehicles, and other similar vehicles from different owners for storage overnight, or longer periods of time. Independent truck drivers and recreational vehicle owners are able to store their vehicle at such a facility. Accessory washing facilities are permitted for vehicles stored at the facility. 
(Ord. No. 2342, § 3, 6-22-2011)  
17.08.778 - Truck terminals, draying, or freight (heavy trucking). 
"Truck terminals, draying, or freight" means a storage and distribution facility that specializes in the transfer of freight, but excludes trucking accessory to another business. Typically, a truckload of goods will arrive at the truck terminal, empty the load of goods onto the loading dock area/cross dock, and the goods will be redistributed to other trucks where the goods will be shipped out to other destinations within a short period of time. The terminal is not the point of origin or the final destination of the freight. It includes transportation establishments furnishing services incidental to air, motor freight, and rail transportation including: 
A.  Freight forwarding services. 
B.  Freight terminal facilities. 
C.  Joint terminal and service facilities. 
D.  Packing, crating, inspection and weighing services. 
E.  Postal service bulk mailing distribution centers. 
F.  Transportation arrangement services. 
G.  Trucking facilities, including moving, transfer and storage. 
(Ord. No. 2342, § 3, 6-22-2011)  
17.08.779 - Truck transportation yard (heavy trucking). 
"Truck transportation yard" means a location where trucks that are operating a truck terminal are stored when not in use, and may include maintenance facilities. It may also be the location where a fleet of trucks are stored (overnight) and dispatched to other facilities for construction services, maintenance services, or the loading and distribution of freight. Such uses include but are not limited to solid waste hauling operations, street sweeping services, and the like. 
(Ord. No. 2342, § 3, 6-22-2011)  
17.08.780 - Vehicle. 
"Vehicle" means and includes motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, motor truck, passenger vehicle, as these phrases are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state of California, and all similar types of vehicles. 
(Prior code § 9220.21 (1))  
17.08.785 - Video game machine. 
See Amusement game machine. 
(Prior code § 9220.21 (2))  
17.08.790 - Warehouse. 
"Warehouse" means the use of a building or portion of a building for the storage of goods or merchandise which is not used for or related to a manufacturing or retailing business on the same premises. 
(Prior code § 9220.22)  
17.08.795 - Yard. 
"Yard" means the space between a lot line and building line. 
(Prior code § 9220.23 (1))  
17.08.800 - Yard, front. 
"Front yard" means a yard extending the full width of the front of a lot between the front property line and the front building setback line. (See Exhibit 17.08.800.) 
(Prior code § 9220.23 (2)) 
EXHIBIT 17.08.800 
YARDS 
   
17.08.805 - Yard, rear line of required front. 
"Rear line of required front yard" means a line parallel to the front lot line and at a distance equal to the required depth of the front yard and extending across the full width of the lot. (See Exhibit 17.08.800.) 
(Prior code § 9220.23 (3))  
17.08.810 - Yard, rear. 
"Rear yard" means a yard extending the full width of the lot in the area between the rear lot line and the rear building setback line. (See Exhibit 17.08.800.) 
(Prior code § 9220.23 (4))  
17.08.815 - Yard, side. 
"Side yard" means a yard extending the full length of the lot in the area between a side lot line and a side building line. (See Exhibit 17.08.800.) 
(Prior code § 9220.23 (5))  
17.08.820 - Supportive housing. 
"Supportive housing" shall be considered as a residential use that is subject to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses, of the same type, in the same zone. Supportive housing is housing with no limit on the length of stay that is occupied by the target population. Supportive housing may include onsite or offsite services that will assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community (per Health and Safety Code 50675.14(b)). 
(Ord. No. 2364, § 1, 12-10-2014)  
17.08.825 - Transitional housing and transitional housing development. 
"Transitional housing and transitional housing development" are considered a residential use only subject to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type, in the same zone. This type of housing refers to temporary rental housing that is intended for occupancy by a target population group that is transitioning to permanent housing. This type of housing is operated under program requirements calling for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months (per Health and Safety Code 50675.2(h)). 
(Ord. No. 2364, § 1, 12-10-2014)  
17.08.830 - Emergency shelter. 
"Emergency shelter" means a temporary residential facility, which provides overnight accommodations and incidental services for homeless persons and/or families on a short-term basis. 
(Ord. No. 2364, § 1, 12-10-2014)  
17.08.835 - Body art establishment. 
"Body art establishment" means any premises or establishment, or facility incidental thereto, which performs body piercing, tattooing, branding, or application of permanent cosmetics. "Body art establishment" does not include a facility that only pierces the ear with disposable, single use, presterilized clasp and stud, or solid needle that is applied using a mechanical device to force the needle or stud through the ear. 
(Ord. No. 2391, § 2, 1-25-2017)  
Chapter 17.10 - RESIDENTIAL ZONES GENERALLY 
 
17.10.010 - Scope. 
The following regulations shall be limitations on, and be applicable to, all properties and uses on any residential R-zoned lots. 
(Prior code § 9230.1)  
17.10.020 - Development standards—Generally. 
Refer to Exhibit 17.10.020, Residential Development Standards, for specifications not shown here. 
(Ord. 2062 § 2, 1991; Ord. 2022 § 5 (a), 1990; prior code § 9230.2 (part)) 
Exhibit 17.10.020 
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS TABLE 
Zone 	Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling 	Maximum Number of Bedrooms* 	Minimum Lot Area** 	Minimum Lot Width 	Minimum Lot Depth 	Maximum Coverage*** 	Maximum Building Height 	Maximum Building Length 	Minimum Open Space 	Minimum Parking 
									Private 	Common 	Total 	
R-A & R-1 	1 dwelling unit per lot 	(no limit) 	5,000 sq. ft.  	50 ft. 	100 ft. 	40% 	35 ft. 	None 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	2 enclosed spaces per dwelling unit 								
R-2 	3,000 sq. ft. 	1 bedroom per 1,000 sq. ft.  	6,000 sq. ft. 	50 ft. 	100 ft. 	50% 	25 ft. 	None 	100 sq. ft. per unit 	N/A 	300 sq. ft. per unit 	2 enclosed spaces per dwelling unit 
R-3 	3,000 sq. ft. 	1 bedroom per 1,000 sq. ft. 	10,000 sq. ft. 	50 ft. 	100 ft. 	60% 	25 ft. 	150 ft. 	150 sq. ft. per unit 	100 sq. ft. per unit 	300 sq. ft. per unit 	2 enclosed spaces per dwelling 
R-4 	2,000 sq. ft. 	1 bedroom per 1,000 sq. ft.	20,000 sq. ft. 	50 ft. 	100 ft. 	60% 	25 ft. 	250 ft. 	150 sq. ft. per unit 	100 sq. ft. per unit 	300 sq. ft. per unit 	2 enclosed spaces per dwelling 
 
* A bedroom is any room other than the living room, kitchen or bathroom, which is 70 square feet or larger in size and which is not a portion of an adjoining room. 
** For creation of new lots only. 
** Coverage includes accessory structures and patio covers.  
17.10.030 - Development standards—Lot area, width and depth. 
Refer to Exhibit 17.10.020, Residential Development Standards. 
Prior code § 9230.2 (A))  
17.10.040 - Development standards—Setback requirements. 
In addition to the minimum setback requirements for main and accessory buildings shown in Exhibit 17.10.040, Minimum Setback Requirements, the following provisions are applicable: 
A.  All Zones. 
1.  For every three feet of building height over fifteen feet, the setback requirement will increase by one foot. 
2.  If stories above fifteen feet in height are stepped back the length of the required setback, no additional setback on the ground floor is required (see Illustration 17.10.040(A)(2)). 
EXHIBIT 17.10.040(A)(2) 
STEPPED BACK STORIES 
  
B.  R-3 and R-4 Zones. If primary access to the units is from side yard, then a ten-foot setback is required. If secondary access to the units is from side yard, then a five-foot setback plus one foot for each unit is required (up to a combined total of ten feet). 
(Prior code § 9230.2 (B) (part)) 
EXHIBIT 17.10.040 
MINIMUM SETBACK REQUIREMENTS TABLE 
From Lot Line 	Bounded By 	Building Type 	Minimum Setback 
Front 	Street 	Main or accessory 	20 feet 
Side 	Other lots 	Main and accessory used for human habitation 	5 feet (see Section 17.10.040(A)(2)) 
Side 	Other lots 	Accessory (not used for human habitation) 	0 with no opening in facing wall; 5 feet with openings 
Side 	Alley 	Garage opening to alley 	5 feet from alley 
Side 	Alley 	Accessory (other than garage opening on alley) 	0 feet 
Side 	Street 	Main or accessory 	10 feet 
Side 	Street 	Garage opening to street 	20 feet 
Rear 	Other lots 	Main or accessory used for human habitation 	10 feet 
Rear 	Other lots 	Accessory (not used for human habitation) 	0 feet (5 feet for reverse corner lots) 
Rear 	Alley 	Main or accessory used for human habitation 	5 feet 
Rear 	Alley 	Accessory (except garages opening on alley) 	0 feet 
Rear 	Alley 	Garage opening on alley 	5 feet from alley 
  
17.10.050 - Development standards—Distance between buildings. 
A.  The distance between buildings used for human habitation shall be a minimum of ten feet. 
B.  The distance between main and accessory buildings shall be a minimum of ten feet or five feet with one-hour fire-resistant construction throughout the accessory building. The five-foot area between buildings shall be open from the ground to the sky. 
(Prior code § 9230.2 (B) (part))  
17.10.060 - Development standards—Garages. 
A.  All garages must be constructed and maintained with overhead doors. 
B.  R-A, R-1, and R-2 Zones. Standards are established in Chapter 17.52 of this code, Off-Street Parking. 
C.  R-3 and R-4 Zones. In addition to the standards set forth in Chapter 17.32 of this code, Off-Street Parking, the following provisions are applicable: 
1.  No detached garage may be erected in front of the main building of any lot. 
2.  If a garage is attached to, and is a part of, the main building, not more than forty percent of the total frontage of the building, including all stories, may be devoted to garage entry purposes. 
(Prior code § 9230.2 (C))  
17.10.070 - Development standards—Open space—Minimum requirements. 
Refer to Exhibit 17.10.020, Residential Development Standards, for specifications for all zones. 
(Prior code § 9230.2 (D))  
17.10.080 - Development standards—Landscaping. 
A.  Whenever a driveway is located within a required side yard, and when dwelling units face the yard, a landscaped area at least five feet wide shall be maintained between such a driveway and any dwelling unit building on the same lot. Required walkways may encroach not more than thirty inches into this landscaped area. 
B.  Shrubs, flowers, plants and hedges not more than thirty-six inches in height, as well as trees shall be permitted in any required yard. 
C.  Landscaping is required throughout required setbacks and other open areas which are visible from the public right-of-way and which are not used for parking, access or loading. 
D.  Landscaping shall consist of a combination of trees, groundcover and shrubbery to adequately cover all designated landscaped areas when installed. Plant materials shall cover the designated planting area from the outset. 
E.  All landscaping shall be maintained in a neat, clean and healthful manner. 
F.  Nonliving material shall not be substituted for required landscaping. 
G.  R-3 and R-4 Zones Only. A landscape plan (including plans for a permanent underground automated irrigation system) shall be submitted with the site plan for all residential development. 
(Prior code § 9230.2 (E))  
17.10.090 - Development standards—Internal walkways—R-3 and R-4 zones. 
A.  There shall be designated internal walkways between the public streets and the front door of each dwelling unit, and between off-street parking area and any door of such dwelling unit. Such walkways shall be a minimum of thirty inches wide and shall be improved with a hard durable-type surface. They shall be free of any overhead obstruction less than seven feet high. 
B.  Driveways shall not be considered in lieu of required internal walkways except where stairways and stair landings encroach upon such walkways. 
(Prior code § 9230.2 (F))  
17.10.100 - Development standards—Trash facilities—R-3 and R-4 zones. 
A.  All outside trash and garbage collection areas shall be enclosed or screened with a six-foot high view-obscuring wall or fence with gates and shall be located so as to allow for convenient pickup and disposal. 
B.  All trash containers shall be provided with tight-fitting lids. 
C.  Trash areas for multiple-family dwellings shall provide the equivalent of not less than seventy-five gallon capacity container per dwelling unit. Where commercial trash containers (three cubic yards or more) are used, there shall be not less than one such container for every seven dwelling units. 
D.  Trash enclosures shall be considered as accessory structures. 
E.  Trash areas shall be located within one hundred fifty feet of the units which they serve. 
(Prior code § 9230.2 (G))  
17.10.110 - Development standards—Utility areas—R-3 and R-4 zones. 
The equivalent of not less than five square feet of enclosed floor space per dwelling unit shall be provided for the storage of building maintenance tools and laundry facilities. No such area shall contain less than seventy-five square feet of floor area unless individual facilities are provided. 
(Prior code § 9230.2 (H))  
17.10.120 - Development standards—Courts. 
A.  Where dwelling units face each other and have doors or window access on only one side of the court, a court of not less than fifteen feet in width shall be provided. 
B.  Where opposing walls of a building or buildings each have door access to a court, the court width shall be at least twenty feet. 
C.  All courts shall be unobstructed from the ground to the sky except as provided in Section 17.50.050 
D.  Courts on which door or window access is provided on only one side of the courtyard shall increase in fifteen- foot increments for every four stories or forty-five feet. 
E.  Courts on which door or window access is provided on opposing walls, shall increase in twenty-foot increments for every four stories or forty-five feet. 
(Prior code § 9230.2 (I))  
17.10.130 - Development standards—Walls, fences and hedges. 
A.  See Exhibit 17.10.130, Fencing Standards, for allowable height and placement. 
B.  The provisions of this Section shall not apply to fences required by state law to surround and enclose public utility installations. 
C.  In any R-zone, a wall, fence or hedge thirty-six inches in height may be located and maintained on any part of a lot. A wall, fence or hedge not more than six feet in height may be located anywhere on the lot behind the rear line of the required front yard with the exception of reversed corner lots. Within the required front yard, a wrought iron or similar nonview obscuring decorative fence not more than six feet in height may be permitted. The fence shall be subject to the approval of the city planner in order to insure adequate site distance for traffic safety. Chain link fence and fences of similar materials are not considered decorative in nature. 
D.  All screening or fencing visible from the public rights-of-way shall be composed of: 
1.  Decorative masonry walls (slumpstone, stuccoed, split-face or similar); 
2.  Evergreen shrubs closed spaced and maintained in a healthy and attractive state; 
3.  Wooden fencing of adequate aesthetic and structural quality (no plywood sheeting); 
4.  Decorative wrought iron, or 
5.  Other materials if found by the planning commission to be architecturally or aesthetically in keeping with the building and the neighborhood. 
However, in no event shall corrugated or sheet metal, fiberglass or any plastic material (not covered by subdivision 5 of this subsection) remain on any residential lot for more than one hundred twenty days beyond the effective date of the provisions of this section. 
(Prior code § 9230.2 (J)) 
EXHIBIT 17.10.130 
FENCING STANDARDS 
Type of Lot 	Location of Fence/Retaining Wall 	Height 
All lots 	On front setback. 	No view-obscuring fence hedge or wall over 3 feet. Non view-obscuring decorative fence not more than 6 feet. 
All lots 	Corner line of sight area. Corner vision clearance triangle. (See Section 17.50.040.) 	No fence, hedge or wall including retaining walls more than 3 feet. 
All lots 	On line separating* lots where wall retains a cut below natural grade. 	Fence, wall or hedge of same height as otherwise permitted may top retaining wall. 
All lots 	On line separating lots* where wall retains a fill. 	Wall may not exceed height otherwise permitted except that additional nonview-obscuring fencing up to 42 inches may be erected at top of wall. 
All lots 	On front setback where* grade is above grade of abutting sidewalk. 	No retaining wall more than 3 feet with a non- view-obscuring fence up to 42 inches on top of retaining wall. 
All lots 	Behind front setback. 	No fence, wall or hedge over 6 feet. 
Reversed corner lot 	On front setback or side setback on street side. 	No view-obscuring fence hedge or wall over 3 feet. No nonview-obscuring decorative fence, more than 6 feet. 
 
* See Illustrations 17.10.130. 
ILLUSTRATIONS 17.10.130 
RETAINING WALL STANDARDS 
  
Retaining wall within front side yard setback facing street protecting cut or fill which results in a change in lot grade of sidewalk.  
17.10.140 - Development standards—Accessory storage space—R-3 and R-4 zones. 
At least one hundred cubic feet of enclosed accessory storage space shall be provided for each dwelling unit. The space may be located adjacent to each unit or in a garage serving the unit; provided, that it does not interfere with the parking of a vehicle. 
(Prior code § 9230.2(K))  
17.10.150 - Development standards—Drainage—R-3 and R-4 zones. 
All improvements in open areas shall be maintained so as to readily dispose of all storm runoff and all surface water to eliminate any puddles or standing water. In no event shall drainage be permitted to cross over a public sidewalk. 
(Prior code § 9230.2(L))  
17.10.160 - Development standards—Driveway encroachments—R-3 and R-4 zones. 
A.  All required driveways shall be open and unobstructed, for their full required width, to a minimum overhead clearance of fourteen feet. Utility meters, trash receptacles, power poles, exterior plumbing and any similar facilities are specifically prohibited within the driveway areas. 
B.  Screen walls separating the driveway from adjoining property may extend not more than eight inches into the driveway except where the driveway is also used as a turning area behind parking spaces. 
(Prior code § 9230.2(M))  
17.10.170 - Development standards—Screening of mechanical equipment, utilities and activity areas. 
A.  All mechanical equipment shall be completely enclosed or screened. 
B.  No mechanical equipment or utility meters shall be located in the front yard or street side yard of any lot, unless the equipment or meter is located behind required setbacks and screened in a manner architecturally compatible with the existing structure. 
C.  Satellite dish antenna as well as heating and air conditioning equipment, pumphouses for swimming pools, utility meters, elevator returns, and so forth, shall be considered "mechanical equipment." 
D.  R-3 and R-4 Zones. A solid wall, view-obscuring fence or dense evergreen hedge with a minimum height of six feet shall surround any recreation area, swimming pool area, patio, play area, clothes drying area, utility area, open parking area, outdoor living area or similar specialized activity area except uses located within "courts" as defined in this title. 
(Prior code § 9230.2(N))  
17.10.180 - Development standards—Joining buildings. 
Buildings may be considered to be connected, when the roof is extended from one building to the other, for not less than fifty percent of the length of the opposing wall of the smaller of such buildings, but in such cases, the required yard areas for the main building shall then apply to the entire structure. 
(Prior code § 9230.2(O))  
17.10.190 - Development standards—Stairways and elevators. 
A.  No enclosed stairways shall be placed in front of, and within ten feet of, any door or window. Open stairways (bucket-type stairs) with open rails may be placed not less than five feet away from any such door or window. 
B.  All buildings containing units above the third floor shall be served with elevators in addition to the stairways otherwise required by law. 
C.  For purposes of this section, the number of floors in a building shall be counted from the lowermost floor to the uppermost floor and shall include subterranean off-street parking areas. 
(Prior code § 9230.2(P))  
17.10.200 - Development standards—Outdoor clothes drying yards or areas. 
No outdoor clothes drying area shall be allowed or maintained except on the ground floor level and within the area to the rear of the rearmost main building. 
(Prior code § 9230.2(Q))  
17.10.210 - Parking, repair, dismantling or storage of vehicles. 
A.  Definitions. The following words, for the purpose of this section, shall be defined as follows: 
"Disabled vehicle" means a vehicle which is not operable by reason of the removal of, or damage to, integral component parts. 
"Disassemble" means the same as dismantle. 
"Dismantle" means the removal or stripping of one or more integral component parts from a vehicle. 
"Park" means the standing of a motor vehicle, other than for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. 
"Repair" means the work necessary to restore a vehicle to a useable condition. 
"Store" means to keep or locate for future use. 
"Vehicle" means and includes motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, motor truck, passenger vehicle, as these phrases are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state of California, and all similar types of vehicles. 
B.  Repair and Assembly of Vehicles. The occasional and incidental repair and assembly of vehicles is permitted but shall be limited to vehicles owned by the person(s) in possession of the premises and shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  Time Limitations. Not longer than seven days within a thirty-day period shall constitute "occasional and incidental." 
2.  Work Area. For any period in excess of the seven-day limit, repair and assembly work shall be limited to work done within an enclosed building or within an open area that is completely enclosed by exterior building walls and/or view-obscuring walls or fences not less than six feet in height. 
C.  Parking of Vehicles. 
1.  No person shall park any vehicle or any component thereof, for any purpose, in any front or side yard area of any R-zoned lot except in the driveway area. 
2.  Except as provided herein, no off-street parking spaces or parking areas, whether required or not, shall be located within the front yard area or in front of the main building. Such parking facilities, when completely below ground level, may occupy required front yards. (R-3 and R-4 zones only.) 
3.  No off-street parking spaces or parking areas, whether required or not, shall be located within required side yards. Parking facilities, when completely below ground level, may occupy required side yards. (See Section 17.52.190.) 
D.  Commercial Parking Facilities. 
1.  Off-street parking facilities which are to be utilized for a use permitted in any zone other than an R-zone, may be permitted on an R-zoned lot; provided, that a conditional use permit for such usage shall not be issued unless the following conditions are met: 
a.  That the lot to be used for parking facilities abuts a lot line of the lot upon which the use to be served is located, or the lot lines of the two lots are separated by an alley; and 
b.  That the parking facilities shall be used solely for the parking of private passenger vehicles; and 
c.  That no signs of any kind, other than those designating entrances, exits or conditions of use, shall be maintained on such lot. Such signs shall not exceed eight square feet in face area. 
E.  Parking Within Driveways. 
1.  A "no parking" sign shall be located at the entrance to, and at fifty-foot intervals, in and along each driveway which services an off-street parking facility serving five or more dwelling units. 
2.  Where a driveway serves parking facilities of five or more vehicles, no person shall park, stand or leave any vehicle in any portion of the driveway, except for the purpose, and during the process, of loading or unloading passengers or goods, and only while such vehicle is attended by the operator thereof. 
F.  Storage of Commercial Vehicles. No person shall park or store any commercial vehicle, as that phrase is defined in the Vehicle Code of the state, which has a capacity of greater than three-quarters of a ton, in any R-zone. 
G.  Outdoor Storage Areas. All outdoor storage that occupies a space of more than sixty cubic feet and is visible from any abutting public street shall: 
1.  Not exceed an overall height of six feet; 
2.  Be enclosed by a view-obscuring fence or wall six-feet high. 
(Prior code § 9230.3(A))  
17.10.220 - Civic center district. 
All plans for buildings or structures, other than single-family residential units, proposed to be located upon properties included in the district, shall be submitted to the planning commission and the city council for review and approval prior to the issuance of a building permit. (See Chapter 17.40 of this code.) 
(Prior code § 9230.3(B))  
17.10.230 - Temporary uses. 
A.  Generally, see Chapter 12.16 of this code. 
B.  Garage Sales in R-Zones. 
1.  Not more than four such sales shall be permitted on any residential zoned lot, during the calendar year January through December; and 
2.  No such sale shall have a duration in excess of three consecutive "weekend days." "Weekend" for the purpose of this section shall be defined as a consecutive Friday, Saturday and Sunday; and 
3.  Such sales be limited to the first full "weekend" during the months of March, June, September and December; and 
4.  Such sales shall be conducted only during the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. of any permitted "weekend day;" and 
5.  All items available for sale and/or personal property utilized in conjunction with such sale shall be kept on private property and shall not encroach into neighboring properties or into the public right-of-way; and 
6.  Not more than one sign shall be displayed on the premises where a garage sale is conducted for the purpose of advertising such sale; and 
7.  The placement of signs on public property is prohibited, as provided in Section 17.62.150, Prohibited signs; and 
8.  No fee or special permit shall be required to conduct such a sale; and 
9.  Any violation in conducting a garage sale, except as permitted by the provisions of this section shall constitute an infraction and is subject to a fine as provided in Section 17.06.070 of this code. 
(Ord. 2141 § 3, 1996: prior code § 9230.3(C))  
17.10.240 - Conditional uses. 
See Appendix A, Index of Permitted Uses, and Chapter 17.70 of this code, Conditional Use Permits. 
(Prior code § 9230.3(D))  
17.10.250 - Garage conversion enforcement deferment program. 
Any owner of a residential property in the R-A or R-1 zone having a garage or a detached structure which has been converted into living quarters in violation of the provisions of this code may obtain a deferment of enforcement as to such conversion until such time as the property is sold or title is otherwise transferred in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
A.  Certificate of Deferment. The city will defer enforcement action in cases where a garage or detached structure has been converted to living quarters in violation of the provisions of the Montebello Municipal Code if the property owner obtains a certificate of deferment according to the following procedures: 
1.  Application must be received by the city by October 31, 1988, in order to be eligible for deferment. Applications for deferment must be accompanied with a forty-five dollar application fee. 
2.  Following the submittal of an application for a deferment, an inspection of the premises will be made by the city or any garage and/or detached structure, and a deferment inspection report prepared. 
3.  Corrections required to ensure the health and safety of occupants noted on the deferment inspection report must be completed on or prior to the expiration date specified in the report. Follow-up inspections needed to ensure completion of corrections will be subject to a twenty-five dollar fee per inspection. 
4.  If no corrections are required subsequent to an inspection, or when corrections are completed prior to the date specified on the deferment inspection report, a certificate of deferment will be issued and recorded with the Los Angeles County recorder's office by the city. 
5.  All garages and detached structures converted to living quarters in violation of the provisions of this title and for which no certificate of deferment has been issued are subject to immediate code enforcement action according to standard procedures. 
B.  Certificate of Occupancy. Any property for which a certificate of deferment for a conversion has been recorded must receive a certificate of occupancy prior to the transfer of title. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall void the certificate of deferment. 
1.  A certificate of occupancy may only be issued to such a property subsequent to a reconversion of the garage or detached structure so that it may be used in a manner consistent with the provisions of this title, and an inspection to ensure adequate completion of such reconversion. An inspection shall be made by the city upon request of the owner and the payment of a standard inspection fee. 
2.  An owner who sells his property without obtaining a certificate of occupancy is guilty of a misdemeanor violation of law. 
3.  Exemptions from the requirement for reconversion and obtaining a certificate of occupancy may be considered and granted by the city manager or his designee for any nonmarket title transfer of property which would qualify for exemption from any title transfer fee required by law. 
(Prior code § 9230.3. (E))  
17.10.260 - Condominium conversion—R-2, R-3 and R-4 zones. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, no tentative subdivision tract map or parcel map, which would have the effect of creating a condominium or a community apartment project or stock cooperative project from the existing dwelling units, shall be approved, nor shall a final map be recorded, unless the following requirements are met and guaranteed in a manner approved by the city council: 
1.  That there are not less than two enclosed off-street parking spaces for each dwelling unit plus one visitor space per three units, developed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.52 of this code; and 
2.  That all existing buildings and structures shall comply with all applicable building regulations of the city, in effect at the time of filing the tentative map; and 
3.  That whenever the city council finds it necessary, in order to adequately serve the development proposed by such map, to require the subdivider to construct public improvements and/or dedicate land for a public use, to be accomplished or guaranteed in the manner approved by the city council; and 
4.  That concurrent with the filing of the tentative subdivision tract map or parcel map, the subdivider shall submit to the city planner each of the following; 
a.  A written declaration of service, in a form prescribed by the planning commission, indicating that on a date not less than sixty days prior to the filing of the tentative subdivision tract map or parcel map, all tenants were served with the notification of intention to convert required by Section 66427.1(a) of the Government Code. The notice shall be given at least one hundred eighty days prior to the determination of tenancy due to the conversion or proposed conversion; and 
b.  An accurate current list of all tenants; and 
5.  That all notices to tenants required by state law subsequent to the filing of the tentative subdivision tract map or parcel map shall be approved by the city attorney as to form and content prior to mailing; and 
6.  That at least ten days' written notification is provided each tenant of the application for a public report submitted to the Department of Real Estate; and 
7.  That each person applying for rental of a unit within a project proposed for condominium conversion within sixty days prior to the filing of a tentative map for such conversion shall be given written notice of such filing pursuant to and in the manner prescribed by Section 66452.8(a) and (b) of the Government Code; alternatively, fees shall be paid to the tenant as prescribed in Section 66452.8(c) of the Government Code; and 
8.  That the staff reports and notices which are required to be served on the tenants shall be prepared and served the city. The city shall be reimbursed by the subdivider for the administrative material and mailing cost of: 
a.  Notice preparation (Government Code Section 66451.3), 
b.  Staff report preparation (Government Code Section 66452.3). 
B.  If the existing building, structures or uses included on such a map, have a legal nonconforming status, the approval of such map will not eliminate such status, nor extend the period of abatement for the termination of such nonconformity. (See Chapter 17.08 of this code for definition and Chapter 17.54 of this code for regulations.) 
(Prior code § 9230.4)  
17.10.270 - Issuance of building permits for R-zoned lots abutting narrow streets. 
No building permit shall be issued for the construction, reconstruction or relocation of any buildings or structures to be located on any R-zoned lot, abutting upon a street having a lesser width than that established by resolution of the city council unless the following requirements are complied with: 
A.  Dedication of Street Right-of-Way. When the building permit valuation is fifteen thousand dollars or more, the owner of the lot shall make a formal offer of dedication to the city for public street purposes, and all uses appurtenant thereto of a depth equal to one-half of the width of the street as described in the resolution. 
B.  Setbacks. The required setbacks shall be maintained for all buildings, structures and improvements including off-street parking as measured from the right-of-way width. (See Exhibit 17.10.020, Residential Development Standards.) 
C.  Off-Site Improvements. When the building permit valuation is seven thousand five hundred dollars, any building permit shall be subject to provide improvements for curb, gutter and sidewalk in compliance with Chapter 15.04 of this code. 
(Prior code § 9230.5)  
17.10.280 - Design and development standards for accessory dwelling units. 
A.  Purpose. This section sets forth regulations for accessory dwelling units, also known as "second dwelling units," in residential zoning districts consistent with state law (California Government Code Sections 65852.1 through 65852.2). The purpose of these regulations is to help expand affordable housing opportunities for low-income and moderate-income or elderly households by increasing the number of housing units available within existing neighborhoods while ensuring and maintaining healthy and safe residential living environments, including compatibility with surrounding uses and maintenance of the character of the neighborhood. Second dwelling units are intended to provide livable housing at lower cost while providing greater security, companionship and family support for the occupants. 
B.  Permitted by Right in R-2, R-3 and R-4 Zones with Compliance to Standards. Second dwelling units shall be permitted as a matter of right, without any required discretionary review (conditional use permit) in the R-2, R-3 and R-4 zones within the city, provided that they comply with the residential development standards applicable to these zones. 
C.  Permitted by Right in R-1 and R-A Zones with Compliance to Standards. Second dwelling units shall be permitted as a matter of right, without any required discretionary review (conditional use permit), in conjunction with any existing single-family dwelling unit in the R-1 and R-A zones, provided any such second dwelling unit conform to the following standards: 
1.  A second dwelling unit must be located on a lot that has only one single-family dwelling unit prior to construction of the second dwelling unit. The previously existing single-family dwelling shall be referred to herein as the "primary" dwelling unit. The second dwelling unit must be clearly subordinated in size to the primary dwelling unit, and the second dwelling unit must be located on the same lot as the primary dwelling unit. 
2.  The second dwelling unit is either attached to the existing primary dwelling unit and located within the living area of the existing dwelling unit or detached from the existing dwelling unit and located on the same lot as the existing dwelling. 
3.  An accessory dwelling unit may only be established on lots that have and maintain the minimum lot size and dimensions consistent with the existing general plan and zoning designations for the lot. An accessory dwelling unit is not permitted on sub-standard lots. 
4.  The distance between a detached accessory dwelling unit and the primary dwelling unit shall be a minimum of ten feet. If the entrance of a detached accessory dwelling unit faces the rear of the primary dwelling, the accessory unit shall be separated by a minimum distance of twenty feet from the primary dwelling unit. 
5.  Only one accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted per parcel or lot in conjunction with an existing single-family dwelling unit. 
6.  The development of an accessory dwelling unit shall be subject to all minimum development standards, including, but not limited to, requirements set forth in the Montebello Zoning Code relating to height, setback, lot area, lot dimensions, lot coverage (see Exhibit 17.10.020 of this chapter), design guidelines, fees, charges, and other zoning requirements generally applicable to residential construction in the zone in which the accessory dwelling unit is located. 
7.  The accessory dwelling unit shall comply with the Uniform Building Code, the Uniform Fire Code, and all city building and fire requirements, as appropriate, in addition to the requirements of this section. 
8.  When adding an accessory dwelling unit that is attached to the primary dwelling unit as a second story, the entire structure must comply with all height requirements that apply to the zone in which the property is located. 
9.  The gross living area of an accessory dwelling unit shall not be less than three hundred fifty square feet and shall not exceed thirty-five percent of the existing living area of the primary dwelling unit for attached accessory dwelling units, or one thousand two hundred square feet for detached accessory dwelling unit. "Gross living areas" shall refer to all habitable space, excluding any garage or patio area. 
10.  An accessory dwelling unit that is attached to the primary dwelling may be established utilizing a portion of the living area within the primary dwelling, or as an addition and utilizing a portion of the living area of the primary dwelling, or designed strictly as an addition to the primary dwelling unit. However, the increased floor area of an attached second unit shall not exceed thirty-five percent of the existing living area of the primary dwelling unit. 
11.  No accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted unless the primary dwelling unit provides parking in compliance with Exhibit 17.52.050. Additional parking for an accessory dwelling unit shall be provided with one off-street parking space per unit. Such parking space shall be enclosed with a garage door opening. 
12.  The second dwelling unit shall utilize the same vehicular access that serves the existing primary dwelling unit, unless the second unit has access from an alley contiguous to the lot. 
13.  All utilities servicing the second dwelling unit shall be metered in conjunction with the primary dwelling unit. 
14.  The accessory dwelling unit shall incorporate the same or similar architectural features, building materials, and color as the primary dwelling unit on the property. These features shall include, but are not limited to, architectural styling, roof line, window and door treatment, materials, color, texture and building height, scale, and bulk. 
15.  Adequate utilities are available or can be made available to serve the second unit. All utility connections for the accessory dwelling unit to the primary dwelling unit shall be placed underground, unless it is determined to be unfeasible by the city planner. 
16.  The accessory dwelling unit shall have a separate entrance from the primary dwelling which shall not be visible from the public right-of-way (street). 
17.  The construction of an accessory dwelling unit shall not cause the existing primary dwelling unit to be in conflict with the minimum development standards applicable in the zone in which the accessory dwelling unit property is located. 
18.  The address numbers for both the primary and accessory dwelling unit shall be posted on the front of the primary dwelling unit and the accessory dwelling unit as provided in Section 15.08.100. 
19.  The primary dwelling unit and the accessory dwelling unit, whether attached to or detached from the primary dwelling unit, shall both be equipped with "hardwired" smoke detectors (with battery backup) and automatic fire extinguishing systems (sprinkler) systems subject to fire department specifications, unless it is determined to be infeasible by the fire department. 
20.  After the accessory unit has been established, no guest house shall exist or be established on the property. In addition, the establishment of an accessory unit shall preclude the renting of individual bedrooms to boarders in the primary and/or accessory dwelling units pursuant to Section 17.14.020 which would otherwise apply. 
21.  An owner of the property upon which an accessory dwelling unit is located who has at least a fifty percent ownership of the property must utilize either the primary dwelling or the accessory dwelling as their principal place of full-time residence. 
22.  The accessory dwelling unit shall not be owned or sold separately from the primary dwelling unit. 
D.  Nothing in this section shall prevent the construction of multiple-family dwellings otherwise permitted in any multiple-family zone and under applicable development standard of the appropriate zone. 
E.  This section shall not validate any existing illegal accessory dwelling units. An application for a permit may be made to convert an illegal accessory dwelling unit to a conforming legal accessory dwelling unit, and the standards and requirements for said conversion shall be the same as for proposed new construction of an accessory dwelling unit. 
F.  Applications or proposals for accessory dwellings units which do not comply with respective standards set forth in subsections B and C of this section, may be appealed to the city manager. The appeal shall not include a public hearing and shall be limited to compliance with the standards referenced in this section. 
(Ord. 2274 § 2, 2004: Ord. 2109 § 7, 1994)  
Chapter 17.12 - R-A RESIDENTIAL AGRICULTURAL ZONE 
 
17.12.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the R-A zone is to provide for single-family residential development and the proper use of those lands best suited for agricultural purposes. The R-A zone may also be used as a transitional classification for open or agricultural land pending classification for a more permanent use. 
(Prior code § 9231.1)  
17.12.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in any R-A zone: 
A.  Principal uses: 
1.  Single-family detached dwellings; 
B.  Accessory uses: 
1.  Accessory buildings including storage rooms, bathhouses, cabanas, laundry rooms or similar structures. All other accessory structures, including attached and detached accessory dwelling units, shall be subject to the development standards set forth in Section 17.10.280, 
2.  Horsekeeping per Chapter 17.68 of this code, 
3.  Animal keeping per Chapter 17.68 of this code, 
4.  Up to three household pets and their offspring under four months of age, 
5.  Noncommercial horticulture and agriculture crops and stock including sorting, processing and packing of crops and stock grown on the same lot, 
6.  Day care for twelve or fewer children provided such homes are licensed by the state, 
7.  Off-street parking facilities, 
8.  Signs per Chapter 17.62 of this code. 
(Ord. 2274 § 4, 2004; Ord. 2109 § 8, 1994; prior code § 9231.2)  
Chapter 17.14 - R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE 
 
17.14.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the single-family residential zone is to encourage and promote a suitable living environment by providing for the development of adequate homes, yards and other residential facilities and to protect and stabilize desirable characteristics of residential neighborhoods. 
(Prior code § 9232.1)  
17.14.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in any R-1 zone: 
A.  Principal uses: 
1.  Single-family detached dwellings, 
2.  Mobile homes, subject to site plan review to ensure architectural compatibility with the neighborhood. An application with plans, site renderings and/or elevations depicting and describing roof overhang, roofing material and exterior siding material shall be subject to approval of the planning commission following a noticed public hearing per Chapter 17.78. Application fee will be set by city council resolution. Planning commission decisions may be appealed in writing accompanied by a fee set by city council resolution. Appeal must be made within fifteen days of the planning commission's action; 
B.  Accessory uses: 
1.  Accessory buildings including storage rooms, bathhouses, cabanas, laundry rooms or similar structures. All other accessory structures, including attached and detached accessory units, shall be subject to the development standards set forth in Section 17.10.280, 
2.  Up to three household pets and their offspring under four months of age, 
3.  Day care for twelve or fewer children provided such homes are licensed by the state, 
4.  The renting of not more than two rooms to not more than four boarders per dwelling unit, 
5.  Signs per Chapter 17.62 of this code, 
6.  Off-street parking facilities, 
7.  Horsekeeping per Chapter 17.68 of this code, 
8.  Noncommercial horticulture and agriculture crops and stock including sorting, processing and packing of crops and stock grown on the same lot. 
(Ord. 2274 § 5, 2004; Ord. 2109 § 9, 1994; prior code § 9232.2 (part))  
17.14.030 - Development standards. 
A.  Every one-family dwelling unit shall have a roof constructed with woodshake, shingle, asphalt composition, crushed rock, tile, or other similar roofing material, except that reflective, glossy, polished and/or rolled-formed type metal roofing is prohibited. 
B.  Every one-family dwelling shall have an exterior siding of brick, wood, stucco, metal, concrete or other similar material except that reflective, glossy, polished and/or rolled-form metal siding is prohibited. 
C.  Every one-family dwelling unit shall not be less than twenty feet in width. 
D.  Every one-family dwelling shall have a floor area of not less than one thousand two hundred square feet. 
E.  Mobile homes (including manufactured housing and factory-built housing) are subject to the following: 
1.  As used in this section, the term "mobile home" includes manufactured housing and factory-built housing. 
2.  The mobile home shall be manufactured and certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, and shall not have been altered in violation of applicable codes. 
3.  The mobile home shall be attached to a permanent foundation system subject to the provisions of Section 18551 of the Health and Safety Code of the state. 
4.  The mobile home shall be utilized for single-family residential purposes only. 
5.  The mobile home shall be subject to the same residential zoning development standards as other one-family dwellings, including, but not limited to, building setback standards, front, side and rear yard requirements, vehicle parking, architectural, aesthetic, minimum width, and minimum square footage requirements; as well as all the requirements of the uniform building, plumbing and fire codes. 
6.  The roof overhang, roofing material and exterior siding material of any mobile home constructed pursuant to this section in the R-1 zone shall be architecturally and aesthetically compatible with other dwellings in the neighborhood. 
(Prior code § 9232.2 (part))  
Chapter 17.16 - R-2 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE 
 
17.16.010 - Purpose. 
The R-2 zone is created to provide a suitable living environment for those persons and families seeking to reside in low-density multiple-family dwelling units. The R-2 zone also provides a transition between single-family and medium and high density residential areas. 
(Prior code § 9233.1)  
17.16.020 - Minimum dwelling unit size. 
A.  The following minimum dwelling unit sizes apply to the R-2 zone: 
1.  Bachelor: four hundred square feet; 
2.  Efficiency: five hundred square feet; 
3.  One-bedroom: seven hundred square feet; 
4.  Two-bedroom: nine hundred square feet; 
5.  Three-bedroom: one thousand one hundred square feet. (Add two hundred square feet for each bedroom over three.) 
B.  Family rooms or dens shall be considered bedrooms for this calculation. 
C.  Required floor area shall not include porches, garages, entries, terraces, patios or basements. 
(Prior code § 9233.2)  
17.16.030 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in any R-2 zone: 
A.  Principal uses: 
1.  Detached dwelling units or duplexes; 
B.  Accessory uses: 
1.  Same as R-1. 
(Prior code § 9233.3)  
Chapter 17.18 - R-3 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE 
 
17.18.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the R-3 multiple family residential zone is to provide a suitable living environment for those wishing to live in multiple dwelling units. The intent is to promote desirable residential characteristics for medium density living and to stabilize and protect existing medium density areas by the establishment of those requirements and facilities conductive to the proper development. 
(Prior code § 9234.1)  
17.18.020 - Minimum dwelling unit size. 
A.  The following minimum dwelling unit sizes apply to the R-3 zone: 
1.  Bachelor: four hundred square feet; 
2.  Efficiency: five hundred square feet; 
3.  One-bedroom: seven hundred square feet; 
4.  Two-bedroom: nine hundred square feet; 
5.  Three-bedroom: one thousand one hundred square feet. (Add two hundred square feet for each bedroom over three.) 
B.  Family rooms or dens shall be considered bedrooms for this calculation. 
C.  Required floor area shall not include porches, garages, entries, terraces, patios and basements. 
(Prior code § 9234.2)  
17.18.030 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in any R-3 zone: 
A.  Principal uses: 
1.  Multiple-family attached or detached dwellings up to the maximum density specified in Exhibit 17.10.020, Residential Development Standards; 
B.  Accessory uses: 
1.  Same as R-1. 
(Prior code § 9234.3)  
Chapter 17.20 - R-4 HIGH-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE 
 
17.20.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the R-4 multiple-family residential zone is to provide a suitable living environment for those wishing to live in multiple dwelling units, particularly high-density structures. The intent is to promote desirable residential characteristics for medium-density living and to stabilize and protect existing medium-density areas by establishment of those requirements and facilities conducive to proper development. 
(Prior code § 9235.1)  
17.20.020 - Minimum dwelling unit size. 
A.  The following minimum dwelling unit sizes apply to the R-4 zone: 
1.  Bachelor: four hundred square feet; 
2.  Efficiency: five hundred square feet; 
3.  One-bedroom: seven hundred square feet; 
4.  Two-bedroom: nine hundred square feet; 
5.  Three-bedroom: one thousand one hundred square feet. (Add two hundred square feet for each bedroom over three.) 
B.  Family rooms or dens shall be considered bedrooms for this calculation. 
C.  Required floor area shall not include porches, garages, entries, terraces, patios or basements. 
(Prior code § 9235.2)  
17.20.030 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in any R-4 zone: 
A.  Principal uses: 
1.  Multiple-family attached or detached dwellings up to the maximum density specified in Exhibit 17.10.020, Residential Development Standards; 
B.  Accessory uses: 
1.  Same as R-1. 
(Prior code § 9235.3)  
Chapter 17.22 - COMMERCIAL ZONES GENERALLY 
 
17.22.010 - Scope. 
The following regulations shall be applicable to all properties and uses on any commercial (C) zoned lots. 
(Prior code § 9237.1)  
17.22.020 - Development standards—Lot area, width and depth. 
Refer to Exhibit 17.22.020 Commercial Development Standards. 
(Prior code § 9237.2 (A)) 
EXHIBIT 17.22.020 
COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
Zone 	Minimum Lot 	Maximum 
	Area 	Width 	Depth 	Building Height 	Floor Area Ratio 	Lot Coverage 
C-R 	5,000 sq. ft. 	50 ft. 	100 ft. 	35 ft. where common lot line with R-1 (25 ft. for any portion of building within 15 ft. of R-1 property) 	0.5:1 	60% 
C-1 	5,000 sq. ft. 	50 ft. 	100 ft. 	35 ft. where common lot line with R-1 (25 ft. for any portion of building within 15 ft. of R-1 property) 	1:1 	Unlimited except for required yard areas 
C-2 	2,500 sq. ft. 	25 ft. 	100 ft. 	35 ft. where common lot line with R-1 (25 ft. for any portion of building within 15 ft. of R-1 property) 	3:1 	Unlimited except for required yard areas 
C-M 	7,500 sq. ft. 	25 ft. 	100 ft. 	35 ft. where common lot line with R-1 (25 ft. for any portion of building within 15 ft. of R-1 property) 	2:1 	Unlimited except for required yard areas 
  
17.22.030 - Off-street parking and loading. 
In addition to the following regulations, each lot or parcel of land in the C zones shall have and maintain off-street parking as prescribed in Chapter 17.52 of this code, Off-Street Parking Regulations. Any use with a gross floor area over six thousand square feet which requires deliveries or shipments must provide off-street loading facilities in accordance with the following requirements: 
A.  Required Spaces. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided on the same lot with every building or separate occupancy as follows: 
Gross Floor Area (square feet) 	Required Spaces 
6001 — 10,000 	1 
10,001 — 20,000 	2 
20,001 — 50,000 	3 
50,001 — 100,000 	4 
100,001 — 200,000 	5 
Each additional 100,000, or fraction thereof 	1 
 
B.  Size. Each off-street loading space shall be not less than twelve feet in width and thirty feet in length and fifteen feet in height. Uses requiring four or more spaces shall have one quarter (twenty-five percent) of the spaces with a minimum width of fourteen feet and a minimum length of sixty feet. 
C.  Location. Off-street loading facilities shall be located so that vehicles shall not extend on to public sidewalks or streets or required driveways in the course of loading or unloading goods. 
(Prior code § 9237.2 (B))  
17.22.040 - Development standards—Trash areas. 
Each lot or parcel shall be provided with facilities for the temporary storage and collection of trash, rubbish and garbage (hereafter "facilities") in accordance with all of the following: 
A.  Such facilities may be located within a building, or, if in the open, shall be enclosed by a masonry wall architecturally compatible with the main building and including a solid gate. 
B.  Where bulk-type trash containers are used, the same shall be fitted with rubber wheels for ease of movement. 
C.  All trash, rubbish and garbage receptacles and surrounding areas shall be regularly cleaned and maintained. 
D.  All containers shall be of substantial construction and provided with tight-fitting lids. 
E.  All trash storage areas shall be located for convenient vehicular access for pickup and disposal. 
F.  Trash areas in setbacks abutting residential zones are prohibited. 
(Prior code § 9237.2 (C))  
17.22.050 - Development standards—Mechanical equipment, utilities or satellite dishes. 
Each lot or parcel which has mechanical equipment or utilities or similar machinery located outside of the exterior walls of any building (except window-mounted devices), including roof-mounted equipment, shall: 
A.  Completely screen all such devices from view from any public right-of-way or adjacent residential uses by either view-obscuring landscaping, or architectural features compatible with the main structure(s); 
B.  Maintain all such devices to prevent collection of litter and to avoid unnecessary noise. 
(Prior code § 9237.2 (D))  
17.22.060 - Development standards—Signs. 
Signs shall be in compliance with Chapter 17.62 of this code. 
(Prior code § 9237.2 (E))  
17.22.070 - Development standards—Storage. 
Storage shall be limited to accessory storage of commodities sold at retail or utilized in the conduct of a permitted use which is located on the premises. Storage must be within a completely enclosed building, except that vehicles and equipment used in the operation of a permitted use may be stored outdoors on the premises in the C-M zone. 
(Prior code § 9237.2 (F))  
17.22.080 - Development standards—Setbacks, buffering and screening. 
A.  Minimum setbacks are shown on Exhibit 17.22.080 (A), Setback Requirements for Commercial Zones. 
B.  Landscaping is required throughout all required setbacks which abut residential property and throughout all other setbacks and open areas which are visible from the public street right-of-way unless used for parking, access or loading. 
C.  A solid wall or decorative building facade must be constructed along all property lines abutting residential property. Such fences or walls must be a minimum of six feet in height. Any solid fence which is constructed within twenty feet of a street right-of-way may not exceed three feet in height. 
D.  All fences or walls shall be of materials and design architecturally compatible with the main building. 
E.  There shall be no height limit on fences or walls on commercial properties adjacent to residential properties except where the property is adjacent to a residentially-zoned front yard, the fence or wall shall be no more than three feet in height. 
F.  1.  If there is a common side or rear lot with residentially-zoned property, the commercially-zoned property must have a solid decorative (on both sides) wall. A wall shall be considered decorative if it incorporates architectural variation on its surface. That is, every six feet the materials or patterns of the wall shall vary. 
2.  In addition, the facade of such wall which faces the residential property shall be of a material as described in Section 17.10.130 (D). 
(Prior code § 9237.2 (G)) 
EXHIBIT 17.22.080 (a) 
SETBACK REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL ZONES 
From Lot Line 	Minimum Setback* 
Front 	5 feet; 0 feet with a decorative facade. 
	10 feet if abutting an R-zone. 
	20 feet in C-R if side abuts an R-zone. 
Side 	5 feet (15 feet if abutting R-zone); or 
	0 feet if no windows or doors (and decorative if abutting an R-zone). 
	5 feet minimum in first 20 feet back from the street if abutting an R-zone and has a decorative facade. 
	5 feet in C-R if abutting R-zone. 
Side Facing Street 	5 feet; or 0 feet if decorative facade; 
	10 feet if C-R or if reverse corner lot abutting R-zone. 
Rear 	5 feet (15 feet if abutting R-zone); or 
	0 feet if no windows or doors (and decorative if abutting R-zone). 
	5 feet minimum in first 20 feet back from street if a reverse corner lot abutting an R-zone and has a decorative facade. 
 
* Note: The required yard setback shall be increased to twenty feet for any yard where the driveway enters.  
17.22.090 - Development standards—Landscaping. 
A.  Landscaping shall consist of a combination of trees, groundcover and shrubbery to adequately cover all designated landscaped areas when installed. Plant materials shall cover the designated planting areas from the outset. 
1.  Shrubs shall be not less than three feet in height when planted and cover not less than thirty percent of the landscaped area. 
2.  Trees shall be planted at a rate of one tree for each twenty linear feet of landscaped area (excluding parking lots). Trees shall be at least six feet in height from the ground to the lowest limb at the time of planting and shall attain a mature overall height of at least fifteen feet. Of each five required trees, one shall be at least fifteen feet in overall height when planted. 
B.  All landscaping shall be maintained in a neat, clean and healthful manner. To that end, each landscaped area shall be provided with a permanent, underground, automated irrigation system. 
C.  Nonliving material shall not be substituted for required landscaping, except that decorative rocks or stones may be substituted for groundcover where trees and shrubbery are sufficiently dense, (that is, cover at least seventy percent of the landscape area when planted). 
D.  A landscape plan (including plans for a permanent underground automated irrigation system) shall be submitted with the site plan for all commercial development. All landscaping and trees shall be approved by the city planning division, and installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
E.  1.  Where a parking lot is visible from a public street, and lies within fifty feet of that street right-of-way, a five-foot deep landscape strip shall be developed adjacent to the street right-of-way in front of the parking lot. 
2.  In addition, if more than ten automobile parking spaces exist on a C-zoned lot or parcel of land, trees shall be provided internally in the lot in the amount of one tree for each ten parking spaces. The trees shall be at least six feet in height from the ground to the lowest limb at the time of planting and shall attain an overall height at maturity of at least fifteen feet. 
F.  All landscaping provided in conjunction with the development of parking facilities serving commercially-zoned properties shall be surrounded by a continuous six-inch concrete curb. 
(Prior code § 9237.2 (H))  
17.22.100 - Development standards—Building materials. 
A.  A building facade shall be considered decorative if it incorporates architectural variations on its surface. That is, for every six feet in height, an additional surface material or color shall be used. 
B.  Metal buildings are prohibited (except for emergency equipment and supply shelters). 
C.  Fence materials shall be wrought iron, slump stone, split-face rock, brick, stucco or a similar material as approved by the planning division. (Chain link fencing and nondecorative masonry walls are permitted except where visible from and parallel to public streets or along property lines that adjoin residential property). 
D.  Security gates or grills are prohibited on the exterior of windows, doors or other entry ways visible from the public right-of-way. 
E.  All exterior building materials are subject to review by the planning division. 
(Prior code § 9237.2 (I))  
17.22.105 - Development standards—Color. 
A.  The purposes of this section are to establish exterior color standards for structures in the commercial zone to ensure that such structures (except those structures used solely for residential purposes) remain compatible and consistent with surrounding development and the desired character of the community, to promote a positive and attractive business environment in the city and to implement the goals and policies of the city's design guidelines. Providing for exterior color standards will create a sense of aesthetic harmony and encourage higher quality development, therefore improving the quality of life and overall image of the city. For purpose of this section, the term "structures" shall refer solely to the following: buildings, accessory buildings, and fences. 
B.  Consistent with the city of Montebello's design guidelines for commercial development, the primary body color of the exterior of a structure in the commercial zone shall be painted or colored in earth tones and neutral colors. Examples of earth tone or neutral colors include off-whites, siennas, light greys, beiges, tans, browns or other similarly subdued tones, shades, or colors. When choosing exterior colors, consideration shall be given to the color of other structures nearby, with the objective being that the exterior colors of adjacent or surrounding structures complement one another. 
C.  While earth tones and neutral colors shall serve as the dominant overall primary body color of the exterior of a structure within the commercial zone, brighter colors may be used to accent other structural elements such as doors, window frames and other architectural features. Neon colored paint shall not be allowed on any structure. Such brighter colors and the placement of such brighter colors shall complement the primary body color of the structure as well as highlight decorative details, such as ornaments, trims, fascias, inlays, tile, ironworks, awnings and other architectural features of the structure. 
D.  These color standards shall apply to the color of new structures in the commercial zone as well as the re-painting and color of existing structures in the commercial zone. For purposes of this section, "existing structures" shall mean any structure (whether occupied or vacant) located in the commercial zone which is built and in existence prior to the effective date of this section of the zoning code. 
E.  Any property owner or designated representative of the owner of any existing structure in the commercial zone whose existing exterior color(s) do not comply with the color standards set forth herein at the time this section becomes effective shall have eighteen months from the effective date of this section to comply with the provisions herein. Moreover, if an existing structure in the commercial zone is re-painted after this section becomes effective and the color(s) used do not conform to these color standards, it shall be subject to code enforcement for compliance. 
F.  Exterior Colors—Existing Structures. 
1.  Permits shall be required to re-paint the exterior of any existing structure in the commercial zone, provided that no fee shall be charged by the city of Montebello for processing or obtaining the permit. In order to obtain the permit to re-paint the existing structure, the property owner or designated representative of the owner of any existing structure in the commercial zone shall submit the proposed exterior color plan to the city's planning division in order to determine if the color plan complies with the color standards set forth herein. For purpose of this section, the terms "exterior color plan," "color plan" or "color plans" shall all refer to any document or rendering describing or depicting the exterior colors to be used on the structure, including but not limited to, a color and materials board or exterior paint color samples. A good faith effort in achieving color compatibility and harmony with adjacent structures is required by all applicants. The planning division shall review and make a determination regarding the proposed color plan. If the color plan is approved by the planning division, a permit shall thereafter be issued to the property owner or designated representative of the owner of the existing structure. If the color plan is not approved by the planning division, the matter may be appealed to the design review board with no fee assessed upon the applicant for purpose of the appeal. As part of the appeal, the applicant may provide a written explanation describing why the proposed color plan is required or that no other alternative color scheme can be employed. The design review board shall review appeals and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed color plans. The decision of the design review board is final. 
2.  With respect to administrative projects other than re-painting of existing structures in the commercial zone, the exterior color plans shall be reviewed by the planning division for compliance with the color standards herein. Any property owner or designated agent of the owner of an existing structure in the commercial zone objecting to a determination or disapproval of the exterior color plans by the planning division may appeal the matter to the design review board. No fee shall be assessed upon the applicant for purpose of the appeal. As part of the appeal, the applicant may provide a written explanation describing why the proposed color plan is required or that no other alternative color scheme can be employed. The design review board shall review appeals and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed color plans of the existing structure in the commercial zone. The decision of the design review board shall be final. 
3.  With respect to discretionary projects (or projects requiring planning commission or city council review) involving existing structures in the commercial zone, the exterior color plans shall be reviewed by the design review board for compliance with the color standards herein. Any property owner or designated agent of the owner of an existing structure in the commercial zone objecting to a determination or disapproval of the exterior color plan by the design review board may appeal the matter to the city council and pay the requisite fee for the appeal. As part of the appeal, the applicant may provide a written explanation describing why the proposed color plan is required or that no other alternative color scheme can be employed. The city council shall review appeals and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed color plans of the existing structure in the commercial zone. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
G.  Exterior Colors—New Structures. 
1.  Exterior colors to be used on new structures in the commercial zone shall be reviewed either by the planning division or the design review board as part of its general review process for administrative or discretionary projects. Exterior color review shall be required upon request for any permit or other type of building or land use entitlement required by this code with respect to the construction or development of any new structure in the commercial zone. Proposed color plans shall be provided by the applicant as required by the planning division or the design review board. A good faith effort in achieving color compatibility and harmony with adjacent structures is required of all applicants. 
2.  With respect to administrative projects, the planning division shall review the proposed color plans. Any applicant objecting to a determination or disapproval of the exterior color plans by the planning division may appeal the matter to design review board with no fee assessed upon the applicant for purpose of the appeal. For purpose of appeal, the applicant may provide a written explanation describing why the proposed color plan is required or that no other alternative color scheme can be employed. With respect to discretionary projects, the planning division shall present the exterior color plans to the design review board. The design review board shall review the proposed color plans and determine compliance with the color standards herein. In reviewing the proposed color plans, the design review board can approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed color plans. If the proposed color plans are not approved by the design review board, the applicant can modify the proposed color plans and resubmit them to the design review board, or appeal the matter to the city council within fourteen days of the design review board's action, or the next city council meeting, whichever is sooner. The decision of the city council regarding the appeal of the design review board's determination shall be final. 
(Ord. 2246 § 2002)  
17.22.110 - Development standards—Noise. 
A.  1.  Every use shall be so operated that the noise inherent and recurrently generated does not exceed the following levels at the lot line of the lot on which the use is located: 
Adjacent Zone 	Maximum Noise Level: 7 a.m. to 10 p.m. 	Maximum Noise Level: 10 p.m. to 7 a.m. 
Residential 	65 dBA 	60 dBA 
Commercial 	70 dBA 	70 dBA 
Industrial 	75 dBA 	75 dBA 
 
2.  Every use in the C-R and C-1 zones shall be so operated that the noise inherently and recurrently generated does not exceed sixty dBA between seven a.m. and nine p.m. and fifty-five dBA between ten p.m. and seven a.m. when adjacent to a residential zone. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person or any property to create any noise, or to allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person, which causes the noise level when measured on any other property, to exceed: 
1.  The noise standard for a cumulative period of more than thirty minutes in any hour; or 
2.  The noise standard plus five dBA for cumulative period of more than fifteen minutes in any hour; or 
3.  The noise standard plus ten dBA for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in any hour; or 
4.  The noise standard plus fifteen dBA for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or 
5.  The noise standard plus twenty dBA for any period of time. 
C.  For the purpose hereof, the peak decibel reading for a noise with a fluctuating noise level (such as live or recorded music) shall be considered as noise level for the entire cumulative period of the noise. Likewise, the time between repetitive intermittent noises (such as banging, pounding, or hammering) shall be included in the cumulative period of the noise. 
(Prior code § 9237.2 (J))  
17.22.120 - Limitations on permitted uses—Enclosure. 
All uses, including storage, shall be in a completely enclosed building, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 9237.3 (part))  
17.22.130 - Limitations on permitted uses—Sales uses. 
All permitted sales shall be limited to retail sales only (C-1 and C-2 only). 
(Prior code § 9237.3 (A))  
17.22.140 - Limitations on permitted uses—Storage of certain materials. 
Materials which might cause fumes or dust, which constitute a fire hazard, or which are edible by or attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored only in closed containers. 
(Prior code § 9237.3 (B))  
17.22.150 - Limitations on permitted uses—Outdoor sales areas. 
Permitted outdoor sales areas shall be improved and maintained to comply with all of the regulations of Chapter 17.52 of this code for the improvement and maintenance of off-street parking areas. All permitted outdoor sales and/or display areas visible from the public right-of-way shall be separated from the public right-of-way by a minimum of a ten-foot wide landscape planter located adjacent to the street facing property lines. In addition a minimum of five percent of such lot area used for outdoor sales or display shall be landscaped in accordance with Section 17.22.090 of this code. 
(Ord. 2120 § 5, 1995: prior code § 9237.3 (C))  
17.22.160 - Limitations on permitted uses—Temporary uses. 
Those temporary uses permitted pursuant to Appendix A, Index of Permitted Uses and to Chapter 12.16 of this code, temporary uses. 
(Prior code § 9237.3 (D))  
17.22.170 - Limitations on permitted uses—Conditional uses. 
Those conditional uses permitted pursuant to Appendix A, Index of Permitted Uses. (See Chapter 17.70 of this code, Conditional Use Permits.) 
(Prior code § 9237.3 (E))  
17.22.180 - Limitations on permitted uses—Civic center district. 
All plans for buildings or structures, other than single-family residential units, proposed to be located upon properties included in the district, shall be submitted to the planning commission and city council for review and approval prior to the issuance of a building permit. (See Chapter 17.40 of this code.) 
(Prior code § 9237.3 (F))  
17.22.190 - Limitations on permitted uses—Extended hours permits. 
A.  In the general commercial zone, restaurants may stay open between twelve a.m. and seven a.m. only with an extended hours permit. In the C-1 zone, take-out food establishments may stay open between nine p.m. and seven a.m. only with an extended hours permit. 
B.  An application for an extended hours permit must be made by the person intending to operate the restaurant in question. The application must be signed by the restaurant operator and must be filed with the city license collector using a standardized form containing the following information: 
1.  The address of the restaurant for which the application is being submitted; 
2.  The name and address of the owner(s), partners, officers or directors of the business; 
3.  The name and address of the applicant; 
4.  The intended hours of operation; 
5.  The name and address of any person in charge of the business during the hours between twelve a.m. and seven a.m. 
C.  1.  Upon receipt of an application for an extended hours permit, the license collector shall forward the application to the special services officer who will initiate a request for an investigation of the applicant, the business, and the neighborhood by the police department. 
2.  Within thirty days from receipt of the application, the special services officer will issue the permit if it can be found that: 
a.  The application is complete and in proper form and all information provided is accurate and true; 
b.  The proposed extended hours of operation will not create a public nuisance infringing on the peace and safety of nearby businesses and residents; 
c.  That the extended hours of operation do not conflict with any state or local law, ordinance or existing permit. 
2.  If the special services officer cannot make one or more of the findings stated in subdivision 1 of this subsection, the permit request cannot be approved. In such case, the applicant may request a city council hearing on the application. Pending testimony at a public hearing before the city council, the council may issue the permit and may impose special conditions on the permit. 
D.  Extended hours permits are not transferable. 
E.  Extended hours permits must be renewed on an annual basis. An application form as described must be completed and submitted with the annual business license. The license collector will forward the application to the special services officer to be reviewed for changes or problems which may have occurred during the previous year. Within thirty days, the special services officer will either issue the permit renewal or inform the applicant by certified mail that the permit has been denied. 
F.  At any time that it becomes apparent to the special services officer or to the chief of police that an existing permit is in violation of one or more findings stated herein, a hearing before the city council may be scheduled. Pending public testimony, the city council may revoke, suspend, or place special conditions on the permit in question. In no case shall the city council revoke or place permanent special conditions on a permit without a public hearing. However, the city council may suspend or place temporary conditions on a permit at any time. Notice of such suspension must be given to the applicant by certified mail within five days after the city council action. 
(Prior code § 9237.3 (G))  
17.22.200 - Limitations on permitted uses—Motels and hotels. 
Motels and hotels are permitted in the C-2 and C-M zones, provided the following conditions are met: 
A.  All motel/hotel projects shall have a minimum of forty units; 
B.  The site for a motel or hotel development must be at least three hundred feet away from residentially-zoned property; 
C.  A motel or hotel may not be rented for a single period less than twenty-four hours nor more than thirty days; 
D.  Each motel or hotel unit must be at least two hundred twenty-five square feet in size including the restroom and shall provide the following amenities: telephone, television, wall-to-wall carpeting; 
E.  Motel and hotel sites shall provide a ten-foot-wide landscape strip along all street frontages; and 
F.  All facades of motel and hotel buildings shall be decorative, using three or more different surface materials, textures and colors. 
(Prior code § 9237.3 (H))  
17.22.210 - Issuance of building permits for lots abutting a narrow street. 
No building permit shall be issued for the construction, reconstruction or relocation of any building or structure to be located on any lot in this zone, abutting upon a street having a lesser width than established by resolution of the city council unless the following requirements are complied with: 
A.  Dedication of Street Right-of-Way. When the building permit valuation is fifteen thousand dollars or more, the owner of such lot shall make a formal offer of dedication to the city for public street purposes, and all appurtenant uses, of a depth equal to one-half of the width of the street as described by resolution of the city council. 
B.  Setbacks. The required setback shall be maintained in this zone for all buildings, structures and improvements including off-street parking as measured from the right-of-way width established by resolution of the city council. 
C.  Off-Site Improvements. When the building permit valuation is seven thousand five hundred dollars, any building permit shall be subject to provide improvements for curb, gutter and sidewalk in compliance with Section 15.04.070. 
(Prior code § 9237.4)  
Chapter 17.24 - C-R COMMERCIAL RESTRICTED ZONE 
 
17.24.010 - Purpose. 
The C-R zone is established to provide areas for professional offices and related uses close to residential areas. This zone permits the development of light traffic generating uses to be located on heavily traveled street or highway frontages. It is intended that the use will be housed in buildings similar to residential uses, and generate substantially the same levels of traffic, noise, light, etc., as residential uses. 
(Prior code § 9238.1)  
17.24.020 - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted in the commercial restricted (C-R) zone shall be those professional offices or limited retail services which are similar in traffic, noise, odors, etc., generation to residential uses. Hours of operation shall be limited to seven a.m. to six p.m.: 
A.  Principal uses: 
1.  See Appendix A, Index of Primary Uses, for specific uses allowed in a C-R zone; 
B.  Accessory uses: 
1.  Accessory uses, buildings or structures, including parking lots, private garages and carports. 
(Prior code § 9238.2)  
Chapter 17.26 - C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL ZONE 
 
17.26.010 - Purpose. 
The C-1 zone is established to provide for certain commercial and professional office uses adjacent to and serving the surrounding residential neighborhoods. Uses which would create unnecessary noise and traffic congestion within the neighborhood, such as service stations, drive-up or drive-through facilities, bars and outdoor sales, are not permitted. 
(Prior code § 9239.1)  
17.26.020 - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted in the neighborhood commercial (C-1) zone shall generally be low-traffic professional offices, limited retail sales (hours of operation between seven a.m. and nine p.m.), personal and professional services, medical offices, and child care centers. Take-out food establishments may operate after nine p.m. only with an after-hours permit. (Refer to Section 17.22.190.) 
A.  Principal uses: 
1.  See Appendix A, Index of Primary Uses, for specific uses permitted in the C-1 zone; 
B.  Accessory uses: 
1.  All accessory uses and structures incidental to the principal use. 
(Prior code § 9239.2)  
Chapter 17.28 - C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE 
 
17.28.010 - Purpose. 
The C-2 zone is established to provide for business centers in areas where a wide range of retail sales and service establishments are needed to accommodate the surrounding community. 
(Prior code § 9240.1)  
17.28.020 - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted in the general commercial (C-2) zone shall generally be those with higher traffic and longer hours such as retail sales, medical and professional offices, general office, as well as service stations and automobile sales yards subject to conditional use permits: 
A.  Principal uses: 
1.  See Appendix A, Index of Primary Uses, for specific uses allowed in the C-2 zone; 
B.  Accessory uses: 
1.  All accessory uses and structures incidental to the permitted primary use, 
2.  Automobile service and garages when repair is incidental to the operation of a permitted automobile service station or auto sale use and; provided, that all repair work is conducted within an enclosed building, 
3.  Outdoor vending subject to a conditional use permit and the following limitations: 
a.  Primary business must have at least thirty thousand square feet of floor area, 
b.  Primary business must be located at least eighty feet from a public street, 
c.  Vending operations must be located immediately adjacent to the primary business' building, 
d.  Vending operations may be conducted only during hours in which the primary business is in operation, 
e.  The primary business to which the vending operations are accessory must be at least one thousand feet away from any other business which has outdoor vending operation(s); 
4.  Dancing, pool and billiard tables and amusement games machines which are accessory to restaurants, cafes, bars and cocktail lounges; provided, that the accessory uses are limited to a maximum usage of twenty-five percent of the total floor area used by the primary use, 
5.  Dry cleaning plants accessory to a retail dry cleaning agency located on the same premises, excluding carpet cleaning, 
6.  Retail sale of used articles taken as trade-in on the sale of new articles when such new articles are sold from the premises, 
7.  Dwellings; provided, that only those portions of a building located above the ground floor may be used for dwelling purposes, and that the dwellings are occupied only by persons employed on the premises or by the owner of the property. Front and side yard requirements are not applicable to these dwellings. 
(Prior code § 9240.2)  
Chapter 17.30 - C-M HEAVY COMMERCIAL—LIMITED INDUSTRIAL ZONE 
 
17.30.010 - Purpose. 
The C-M zone allows for all commercial activities and some limited industrial uses. This zone is intended to provide for commercial uses which are not conductive to a central business district. These uses include wholesaling and the sale of used articles and nonconsumer products such as large medical equipment and burial caskets. This zone is also intended to provide for various types of workshop-oriented uses such as auto repair and jewelry, candy and optical manufacturing. 
(Prior code § 9241.1)  
17.30.020 - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted in the heavy commercial—limited industrial (C-M) zone shall generally include research and development, industrial services, laboratories, kennels and veterinarians, wholesale greenhouses, equipment repair and servicing including automobile repair and body shops (including those that involve repair work requiring open flame, welding or use of highly flammable liquids), and similar uses: 
A.  Principal uses: 
1.  See Appendix A, Index of Primary Uses, for specific uses allowed in a C-M zone; 
B.  Accessory uses: 
1.  All accessory uses and structures incidental to permitted primary uses, 
2.  Caretaker dwellings. For commercial uses the caretaker dwelling must be on the second floor, 
3.  Vehicles and equipment used in the operation of a permitted use which is located on the premises may be stored outdoors on the premises. 
(Prior code § 9241.2)  
Chapter 17.32 - MANUFACTURING ZONES GENERALLY 
 
17.32.010 - Scope. 
The following regulations shall be applicable to all properties and uses in the M-1 and M-2 zones. 
(Prior code § 9243.1)  
17.32.020 - Development standards—Generally. 
The property development standards set forth here shall apply to all land in the M-zones. 
(Prior code § 9243.2 (part))  
17.32.030 - Definitions. 
"Security opening" means security openings in any fencing or landscaping required hereunder, not exceeding four feet in width, at locations shown on an approved site development plan. Security openings shall be protected with an approved ornamental iron or galvanized cyclone fencing. 
"View-obscuring fence" means: 
A.  A solid masonry wall; or 
B.  An approved ornamental iron fence maintained together with view-obscuring landscaping or chain link fence with landscaping on the outside of the chain link fence; or 
C.  Any other type of fencing, constructed of noncombustible material, with view-obscuring landscaping on the street side thereof, or, if not visible from the public right-of-way, then landscaping is not required. Such fencing shall be uniformly painted and maintained in such condition on all sides of such fencing visible from any abutting street; or 
D.  Any combination of the preceding, if first approved by a site development plan. 
(Prior code § 9243.2(J))  
17.32.040 - Development standards—Lot area, width and depth. 
Determined on a case-by-case basis, a development site plan is required for the creation of any new lot. Any existing lot which is legal at the time this section is adopted can be developed in accordance with other provisions herein. 
(Prior code § 9243.2 (A))  
17.32.050 - Development standards—Off-street parking and loading. 
Each lot or parcel of land shall have and maintain off-street parking and loading as prescribed in Chapter 17.52 of this code, off-street parking and loading regulations. 
(Prior code § 9243.2 (B))  
17.32.060 - Development standards—Trash areas. 
Each lot or parcel of land shall be provided with facilities for the temporary storage and collection of trash and rubbish (hereafter "facilities"), in accordance with the following: 
A.  Such facilities may be located within a building, or, if in the open, shall be enclosed by a view-obscuring wall or fence. 
B.  All thrash, rubbish, garbage receptacles and surrounding areas shall be regularly cleaned and maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All containers shall be of substantial construction and provided with tight-fitting lids. 
C.  All trash storage areas shall be located for convenient vehicular access for pickup and disposal. 
(Prior code § 9243.2 (C))  
17.32.070 - Development standards—Mechanical equipment or utilities. 
Mechanical equipment or utilities or similar machinery located outside of the exterior walls of any building (except window-mounted devices), including roof-mounted equipment, shall be: 
A.  Completely screened (M-1 zone), and completely screened from any public right-of-way (M-2 zone) by use of either: 
1.  View-obscuring landscaping; or 
2.  Architectural features compatible with the main structure(s). 
B.  Maintained in a clean and proper condition to prevent collection of litter and to avoid unnecessary noise. 
(Prior code § 9243.2 (D))  
17.32.080 - Development standards—Signs. 
Each lot or parcel may have signs and sign structures, provided the same are constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.52 of this code, sign regulations. 
(Prior code § 9243.2 (E))  
17.32.090 - Development standards—Setbacks, buffering and screening. 
A.  Minimum setbacks are shown on Exhibit 17.32.090, Setback Requirements for Industrial Zones. 
B.  For any lot or parcel developed after the effective date of this section (11/22/89), the area between the principal building (including an imaginary line extending from the front facade of that building to the side lot lines) and the public street shall be used only for accessory buildings, recreational areas, landscaping, driveways, an improved parking lot or pedestrian access. 
C.  A solid masonry wall a minimum of six feet in height shall be constructed along all property lines abutting commercially or residentially zoned property (except that in the required front yard setback a three-foot masonry wall shall be constructed and additional nonview-obscuring wrought iron fencing at least three feet in height may be placed on top of the three-foot wall). 
(Prior code § 9243.2 (F)) 
EXHIBIT 17.32.090 
SETBACK REQUIREMENTS FOR INDUSTRIAL ZONES 
From lot line 	Minimum Setback 
Front 	20 feet if across from or abutting R zone. 
	10 feet or 5 feet if decorative facade. 
	20 feet from street for 15 feet extending from both sides of the driveway when vehicle access directly into building (see illustration below). 
Side 	5 feet (15 feet if abutting R zone); or 0 feet if no windows or doors (and decorative facade if abutting R zone). 
	10 feet if sideyard is facing street, or 5 feet if decorative facade. 
	20 feet if across street from R zone. 
	20 feet from street for at least 15 feet extending from both sides of the driveway when vehicle access directly into building. 
Rear 	5 feet (15 feet if abutting R zone); or 0 feet if no windows or doors (and decorative facade if abutting R zone). 
	20 feet from alley for at least 15 feet extending from both sides of the driveway when vehicle access directly into building. 
 
ILLUSTRATION 
FRONT OR STREET SIDEYARD SETBACK— VEHICLE ACCESS DIRECTLY INTO BUILDING 
   
17.32.100 - Development standards—Landscaping. 
A.  Landscaping is required throughout required setbacks and other open areas which are visible from the public right-of-way and which are not used for parking, access or loading. 
B.  Landscaping shall consist of a combination of trees, groundcover and shrubbery to adequately cover all designated landscaped areas when installed. 
C.  All landscaping shall be maintained in a neat, clean and healthful manner. Each landscaped area shall be provided with a permanent, underground, automated irrigation system. 
D.  Nonliving material shall not be substituted for required landscaping, except that decorative rocks or stones may be substituted for groundcover where trees and shrubbery are sufficiently dense. 
E.  If a parking lot or loading area is visible from and is located within fifty feet of the street, it shall be separated from the right-of-way by a landscaped strip that is a minimum of five feet wide and located adjacent to the right-of-way. 
F.  If a parking lot has more than ten spaces, five percent of the parking lot area must be landscaped in addition to the requirements of subsection E of this section. If the parking lot is enclosed or is not visible from the public right-of-way, this landscaping may be transferred to any visible location on the site. 
G.  A landscape plan (including plans for a permanent underground automated irrigation system) shall be submitted with site plan for all development. All landscaping and trees shall be approved by the city planning division, and installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
H.  One tree shall be provided for each twenty lineal feet of landscaping. The trees shall be at least six feet in height from the ground to the lowest limb at the time of planting and shall attain an overall height at maturity of at least fifteen feet. 
(Prior code § 9243.2 (G))  
17.32.110 - Development standards—Building height. 
The height of buildings shall be unlimited except if the lot abuts a residential zone, then the maximum height shall be thirty-five feet, or twenty-five feet if the building is within fifteen feet of the residential property line. 
(Prior code § 9243.2 (H))  
17.32.120 - Development standards—Building intensity. 
The ratio of floor area to lot size shall be a maximum of three-to-one in the M-1 zone and a maximum of two-to-one in the M-2 zone. 
(Prior code § 9243.2 (I))  
17.32.130 - Development standards—Building and fencing materials. 
A.  A building facade or wall over six feet in height shall be considered decorative if it incorporates architectural variation on its surface. That is, for every six feet in height, an additional surface material or color shall be used. 
B.  No buildings may have exterior metal walls which are not covered by decorative siding or veneer (e.g., masonry block or wood or stucco) unless such walls are not visible from the public right-of-way or commercially or residentially zoned property. Exterior metal building walls which are not visible per the above preceding must conform to Exhibit 17.32.130 (B). However, buildings used for emergency equipment and supply storage are exempted from this provision. 
C.  In no event shall chain link or any other sheet metal or sheet fiber glass/plastic fencing be used parallel to and visible from abutting streets unless completely screened by landscaping. 
(Prior code § 9243.2 (K)) 
EXHIBIT 17.32.130 (B) 
GENERAL STANDARDS FOR METAL PANELS AND COATINGS 
A.  All metal wall panels shall be 6 - 90 hot-dipped galvanized steel, and shall not be less than 24 gauge in thickness. All panels and exposed fasteners shall be coated at the factory with products meeting the following specifications: 
1.  Colors shall not change more than 5E (hunter) units (per ASTM D-224) for a period of 20 years. 
2.  Colors shall not chalk more than a 7 rating (per ASTM D-659) for a period of 20 years. 
3.  Coatings shall not peel, crack, check or chip for a period of 20 years. 
B.  The following panels illustrated are the only type panels permitted to be used as replacement for existing metal panels: 
1.  Embossed architectural panels with concealed fasteners. 
  
2.  Flat 12-inch panels with grooves and concealed fasteners. 
  
3.  Flat 12-inch panels with concealed fasteners. 
  
4.  Type "A" panels. 
  
5.  Vee-rib architectural panels with semiconcealed fasteners. 
  
6.  Shadow-line panels. 
  
7.  Box-rib panels. 
  
8.  Bold-line panels. 
  
C.  No wall may be constructed or reconstructed using any metal other than those listed and illustrated in subsection B of this exhibit. The S-type galvanized corrugated metal panels illustrated below are specifically prohibited. 
D.  Any metal building which is granted an exception under the provisions of Exhibit 6, above, must comply with the following: 
1.  Planning and community development department would survey building to determine if and to what extent repairs to existing panels are necessary; 
2.  Owner must do work in accordance with written specifications of the city and must use a licensed contractor and approved paint; 
3.  Must obtain a building permit.  
17.32.135 - Development standards—Color. 
A.  The purposes of this section are to establish exterior color standards for structures in the manufacturing zone to ensure that such structures (except those structures used solely for residential purposes) remain compatible and consistent with surrounding development and the desired character of the community, to promote a positive and attractive industrial or manufacturing environment in the city and to implement the goals and policies of the city's design guidelines. Providing for exterior color standards will create a sense of aesthetic harmony and encourage higher quality development, therefore improving the quality of life and overall image of the city. For purpose of this section, the term "structures" shall refer solely to the following: buildings, accessory buildings, and fences. 
B.  Consistent with the city of Montebello's design guidelines for industrial development, the primary body color of the exterior of a structure in the manufacturing zone shall be painted or colored in earth tones and neutral colors. Examples of earth tone or neutral colors include off-whites, siennas, light greys, beiges, tans, browns or other similarly subdued tones, shades, or colors. When choosing exterior colors, consideration shall be given to the color of other structures nearby, with the objective being that the exterior colors of adjacent structures complement one another. 
C.  While earth tones and neutral colors shall serve as the dominant overall primary body color of the exterior of a structure in the manufacturing zone, brighter colors may be used to accent other structural elements, such as doors, window frames and other architectural features. Neon colored paint shall not be allowed on any structure. Such brighter colors shall complement the primary body color of the structure as well as highlight decorative details, such as ornaments, trims, fascias, inlays, tile, ironworks, awnings and other architectural features of the structure. 
D.  These color standards shall apply to the color of new structures in the manufacturing zone as well as the re-painting and color of existing structures in the manufacturing zone. For purposes of this section, "existing structures" shall mean any structure located in the manufacturing zone which is built and in existence prior to the effective date of this section of the zoning code. 
E.  Any property owner or designated representative of the owner of any, existing structure in the manufacturing zone whose existing exterior color(s) do not comply with the color standards set forth herein at the time this section becomes effective shall have eighteen months from the effective date of this section to comply with the provisions herein. Moreover, if an existing structure in the manufacturing zone is re-painted after this section becomes effective and the color(s) used do not conform to these color standards, it shall be subject to code enforcement for compliance. 
F.  Exterior Colors—New Structures. 
1.  Permits shall be required to re-paint the exterior of any existing structure in the manufacturing zone, provided that no fee shall be charged by the city of Montebello for processing or obtaining the permit. In order to obtain the permit to re-paint the existing structure, the property owner or designated representative of the owner of any existing structure in the manufacturing zone shall submit the proposed exterior color plan to the city's planning division in order to determine if the color plan complies with the color standards set forth herein. For purpose of this section, the terms "exterior color plan," "color plan" or "color plans" shall all refer to any document or rendering describing or depicting the exterior colors to be used on the structure, including but not limited to, a color and materials board or exterior paint color samples. A good faith effort in achieving color compatibility and harmony with adjacent structures is required by all applicants. The planning division shall review and make a determination regarding the proposed color plan. If the color plan is approved by the planning division, a permit shall thereafter be issued to the property owner or designated representative of the owner of the existing structure. If the color plan is not approved by the planning division, the matter may be appealed to the design review board with no fee assessed upon the applicant for purpose of the appeal. As part of the appeal, the applicant may provide a written explanation describing why the proposed color plan is required or that no other alternative color scheme can be employed. The design review board shall review appeals and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed color plans. The decision of the planning commission is final. 
2.  With respect to administrative projects other than re-painting of existing structures in the manufacturing zone, the exterior color plans shall be reviewed by the planning division for compliance with the color standards herein. Any property owner or designated agent of the owner of an existing structure in the manufacturing zone objecting to a determination or disapproval of the exterior color plans by the planning division may appeal the matter to the design review board. No fee shall be assessed upon the applicant for purpose of the appeal. As part of the appeal, the applicant may provide a written explanation describing why the proposed color plan is required or that no other alternative color scheme can be employed. The planning commission shall review appeals and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed color plans of the existing structure in the manufacturing zone. The decision of the design review board shall be final. 
3.  With respect to discretionary projects (or projects requiring planning commission or city council review) involving existing structures in the manufacturing zone, the exterior color plans shall be reviewed by the design review board for compliance with the color standards herein. Any property owner or designated agent of the owner of an existing structure in the manufacturing zone objecting to a determination or disapproval of the exterior color plan by the design review board may appeal the matter to the city council and pay the requisite fee for the appeal. As part of the appeal, the applicant may provide a written explanation describing why the proposed color plan is required or that no other alternative color scheme can be employed. The city council shall review appeals and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed color plans of the existing structure in the manufacturing zone. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
G.  Exterior Colors—Existing Structures. 
1.  Exterior colors to be used on new structures in the manufacturing zone shall be reviewed either by the planning division or the design review board as part of its general review process for administrative or discretionary projects. Exterior color review shall be required upon request for any permit or other type of building or land use entitlement required by this code with respect to the construction or development of any new structure in the manufacturing zone. Proposed color plans shall be provided by the applicant as required by the planning division or the design review board. A good faith effort in achieving color compatibility and harmony with adjacent structures is required of all applicants. 
2.  With respect to administrative projects, the planning division shall review the proposed color plans. Any applicant objecting to a determination or disapproval of the exterior color plans by the planning division may appeal the matter to design review board with no fee assessed upon the applicant for purpose of the appeal. For purpose of appeal, the applicant may provide a written explanation describing why the proposed color plan is required or that no other alternative color scheme can be employed. With respect to discretionary projects, the planning division shall present the exterior color plans to the design review board. The design review board shall review the proposed color plans and determine compliance with the color standards herein. In reviewing the proposed color plans, the design review board can approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed color plans. If the proposed color plans are not approved by the design review board, the applicant can modify the proposed color plans and resubmit them to the design review board, or appeal the matter to the city council within fourteen days of the design review board's action, or the next city council meeting, whichever is sooner. The decision of the city council regarding the appeal of the design review board's determination shall be final. 
(Ord. 2246 § 2, 2002)  
17.32.140 - Limitations on permitted uses—Enclosure. 
All uses shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, or within an enclosed outdoor area which is entirely screened by view-obscuring fence. 
(Prior code § 9243.3 (part))  
17.32.150 - Limitations on permitted uses—Outdoor uses. 
A.  For new development, outdoor storage shall be prohibited between the front of the principal building(s) and the public street which abuts the principal building(s). 
B.  Outdoor storage areas shall be completely screened by walls, fences, or landscaping so that they are not visible from the public right-of-way (M-1 and M-2 zones) or from abutting and adjacent properties (M-1 zone). 
C.  All outdoor uses areas shall be surfaced with not less than three inches of asphalt or concrete in compliance with the requirements of Chapter 17.52 of this code. 
D.  No materials or wastes shall be stored in such a manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes. 
E.  Materials which might cause fumes or dust, which constitute a fire hazard, or which are edible by or attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored only in tightly-closed containers in required enclosures or buildings. 
F.  All permitted outdoor sales and/or display areas visible from the public right-of-way shall be separated from the public right-of-way by a minimum of a ten-foot wide landscape planter located adjacent to the street facing property lines. In addition a minimum of five percent of such lot area used for outdoor sales or display shall be landscaped in accordance with Section 17.32.100 of this code. 
G.  The following outdoor uses are exempted from subsections A and B of this section: 
1.  Drive-in uses; 
2.  Restaurants; 
3.  Service stations; 
4.  Electrical distribution substations; 
5.  Horticultural nurseries; 
6.  Vehicular parking and sales; 
7.  Loading docks; and 
8.  Other similar uses where outdoor activity is provided for. 
(Ord. 2120 §§ 6, 7, 1995; prior code § 9243.3 (A))  
17.32.160 - Limitations on permitted uses—Noise. 
A.  Every use shall be so operated that the noise inherently and recurrently generated does not exceed the following levels at the lot line of the lot on which the use is located: 
Adjacent Zone 	Maximum Noise Level: 7 a.m. to 10 p.m. 	Maximum Noise Level: 10 p.m. to 7 a.m. 
Residential 	65 dBA 	60 dBA 
Commercial 	70 dBA 	70 dBA 
Industrial 	75 dBA 	75 dBA 
 
B.  It is unlawful for any person on any property within the city to create any noise, or to allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person, which causes the noise level when measured on any other property to exceed: 
1.  The noise standard for cumulative period of more than thirty minutes in any hour; or 
2.  The noise standard plus five dBA for a cumulative period of more than fifteen minutes in any hour; or 
3.  The noise standard plus ten dBA for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in any hour; or 
4.  The noise standard plus fifteen dBA for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or 
5.  The noise standard plus twenty dBA for any period of time. 
C.  For the purpose hereof, the peak decibel reading for a noise with a fluctuating noise level (such as live or recorded music) shall be considered as the noise level for the entire cumulative period of the noise. Likewise, the time between repetitive intermittent noises (such as banging, pounding or hammering) shall be included in the cumulative period of the noise. 
(Prior code § 9243.3 (B))  
17.32.170 - Limitations on permitted uses—Vibration. 
Every use shall be so operated that the ground vibration generated at any time and measured at any point along the lot line on which the use is located shall not be perceptible and shall not exceed the following: 
Adjacent Zone 	Vibration In Inches Per Second: Impact 	Vibration In Inches Per Second: Steady-State 
Residential 	.006 	.003 
Commercial 	.010 	.005 
Industrial 	.100 	.040 
 
(Prior code § 9243.3 (C))  
17.32.180 - Limitations on permitted uses—Radioactivity and electrical disturbance. 
A.  The use of radioactive materials shall be limited to measuring, gauging and calibration devices, as tracer elements in X-ray and like apparatus, and in connection with the processing and preservation of foods. In no event shall radioactivity, when measured at each lot line, be in excess of 2.7 by ten to the eleventh power microcuries per milliliter of air at any moment of time. Transportation of radioactive materials shall be only along routes approved by the city council. 
B.  Radio and television transmitters shall be operated at the regularly assigned wave lengths (or within the authorized tolerances therefor) as assigned thereto by the appropriate governmental agency. All electrical and electronic devices and equipment shall be suitably wired, shielded, and controlled so that in operation they shall not, beyond the lot lines, emit any electrical impulse or wave which will adversely affect the operation and control of any other electrical or electronic devices and equipment. 
(Prior code § 9243.3 (D))  
17.32.190 - Limitations on permitted uses—Toxic materials, fire and explosion hazards. 
A.  All storage, use and disposal of potentially toxic, flammable, or explosive materials shall utilize safety and fire suppression devices as specified by the fire department. 
B.  Prior to obtaining an occupancy permit or business license for any industrial use, a fire department clearance must be obtained. A "risk management plan" must be submitted to and approved by the fire department for any use including the use, storage or creation of any actually hazardous material as defined by Section 6.95 of the California Health and Safety Code (in any amount.) 
(Prior code § 9243.3 (E))  
17.32.200 - Limitations on permitted uses—Heat and humidity. 
Heat, humidity, or other climatic influence from any source, shall not be produced beyond the lot lines of the use. 
(Prior code § 9243.3 (F))  
17.32.210 - Limitations on permitted uses—Glare. 
No operation, activity or lighting fixture shall create illumination which exceeds .5 footcandles at any point on the lot lines of the use, except as necessary to meet the requirements of Section 15.08.110, security provisions. 
(Prior code § 9243.3 (G))  
17.32.220 - Issuance of building permits for lots abutting narrow streets. 
No building permit shall be issued for the construction, reconstruction or relocation of any building or structure to be located on any lot in this zone, abutting upon a street having a lesser width than that established by resolution of the city council unless the following requirements are complied with: 
A.  Dedication of Street Right-of-way. When the building permit valuation is fifteen thousand dollars or more, the owner of such lot shall make a formal offer of dedication to the city for public street purposes, and all appurtenant uses, of a depth equal to one-half of the width of the street as described in the city council resolution. 
B.  Setbacks. The required setback shall be maintained in this zone for all buildings, structures and appurtenant improvements including off-street parking as measured from the right-of-way width established by resolution of the city council. 
C.  Off-Site Improvements. When the building permit valuation is seven thousand five hundred dollars, any building permit shall be subject to provide improvements for curb, gutter and sidewalk in compliance with Chapter 15.04 of this code. 
(Prior code § 9243.4)  
Chapter 17.34 - M-1 LIGHT MANUFACTURING ZONE 
 
17.34.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the M-1 zone is to provide areas for the establishment of light industrial plants and related activities, and to promote the concentration of such uses in a manner which will foster mutually beneficial relationships within the area, as well as with the areas of the city zoned for heavy industrial development. The regulation of uses necessary to provide the proper environment for the efficient and desirable use of light industrial land, to ensure the availability of adequate infrastructure to serve the permitted uses, to provide the proper safeguards to protect nearby residential, commercial and public uses, to provide an aesthetically pleasant district conducive to good industrial relations, and to attract and encourage the location of desirable light industrial uses. 
(Prior code § 9244.1)  
17.34.020 - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted in the light manufacturing (M-1) zone generally include all uses in the C-M zone as well as light manufacturing and automotive-related uses. Industrial and equipment services are also permitted. 
(Prior code § 9244.2) 
(Ord. No. 2342, § 4, 6-22-2011)  
17.34.030 - Emergency shelters. 
1.  Emergency shelters are permitted by right in the Emergency Shelter Overlay Zone. The Emergency Shelter Overlay Zone permits emergency shelters by right within the following designated geographic area. The geographic area where the overlay zone would be applicable is within the M-1 zone located to the North of Date Street, South of Washington Blvd, West of South Greenwood Ave and to the West City Boundary. The following requirements are applicable to the operation of emergency shelters: 
a.  The facility must comply with applicable state and local standards and requirements. 
b.  The facility must adhere to Federal, state, and local licensing as required for any program incidental to the operation of an emergency shelter. 
c.  The facility must comply with applicable state and local housing, building, and fire code requirements. 
d.  The facility shall have on-site security during all hours when the shelter is open. 
e.  The facility shall provide exterior lighting on pedestrian pathways and parking lot areas on the property. Lighting shall reflect away from residential areas and public streets. 
f.  The facility shall provide secure areas for personal property. 
g.  If the emergency shelter is proposed in conjunction with a religious facility, the area utilized for emergency shelter facilities may not exceed fifty percent of the total floor area used for the religious facility. 
h.  Each facility shall provide common kitchen and dining room area adequate for the number of residents serviced. 
i.  Each facility shall provide bathroom with lavatory, toilet, and showers adequate for the number of residents serviced. 
2.  The facility's capacity shall not exceed forty beds. 
3.  The maximum term of staying at an emergency shelter is six months in a consecutive twelve-month period. 
4.  Parking. The emergency shelter shall provide on-site parking at a rate of one space per facility staff plus one space per six occupants allowed at the maximum capacity. 
5.  A management plan is required for all emergency shelters to address management experience, good neighbor issues, transportation, client supervision, client services, and food services. Such plan shall be submitted to and approved by the planning, inspections, and permitting department prior to operation of the emergency shelter. 
The plan shall include a floor plan that demonstrates compliance with the physical standards of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2364, § 3, 12-10-2014)  
Chapter 17.36 - M-2 HEAVY MANUFACTURING ZONE 
 
17.36.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the M-2 zone is to preserve the lands of the city appropriate for heavy industrial uses, to promote uniform and orderly industrial development, to create and protect property values, to foster an efficient, and aesthetically pleasant industrial district with infrastructure adequate to the types of uses permitted, to attract and encourage the location of desirable industrial plants, to provide an industrial environment which will be conductive to good employee relations, and to provide proper safeguards and appropriate transition for surrounding land uses. 
(Prior code § 9245.1)  
17.36.020 - Permitted uses. 
The uses permitted in the heavy manufacturing (M-2) zone generally include all uses permitted in the M-1 zone as well as the heavier manufacturing uses. 
(Prior code § 9245.2) 
(Ord. No. 2342, § 5, 6-22-2011)  
Chapter 17.37 - HEAVY TRUCKING USES 
 
17.37.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of these regulations is to permit the establishment and operation of new heavy trucking uses subject to applicable operational standards and to provide the existing heavy trucking uses subject to abatement as of November 22, 2009, with an abatement exemption contingent upon compliance with mandatory improvements and operating standards to adequately regulate these uses and ensure that their operations are consistent and compatible with the areas in which they are established. 
(Ord. No. 2342, § 6, 6-22-2011)  
17.37.020 - Definitions. 
Refer to Chapter 17.08 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2342, § 6, 6-22-2011)  
17.37.030 - New heavy trucking uses. 
A.  Site Improvements and Operating Standards. All new heavy trucking uses, as defined in Chapter 17.08 of this code, that are established after the effective date of this chapter shall comply with all applicable requirements of this code and the zoning district in which the use is located in addition to the distance requirement of Section 17.37.030.B. 
B.  Distance Requirements. 
1.  Five Hundred Feet Separation Required. A new heavy trucking use, as defined in Chapter 17.08 of this code, shall not be established on any parcel or lot located within five hundred feet of any residential zone or other sensitive land use. A sensitive land use shall include (i) a public or private kindergarten, elementary, middle, junior high or high school; (ii) a licensed child-care facility or preschool other than a small or large family day care facility; (iii) playground; (iv) youth center; (v) recreational facility; (vi) park; or (vii) library. 
2.  How to Measure Operation. The distance between any parcel or lot used for heavy trucking uses and the residential zone or sensitive land uses detailed above shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest property line of the parcel or lot used for heavy trucking uses to the closest property line of the residentially zoned property, or sensitive land use. 
(Ord. No. 2342, § 6, 6-22-2011)  
17.37.040 - Existing heavy trucking uses. 
All existing heavy trucking uses at the time this chapter becomes effective, and without an effective conditional use permit, shall be considered exempt from the abatement action of Code Amendment No. 3-89 provided that these uses make an application for exemption and complete the conditions and requirements listed in the notice to comply described in Section 17.37.040.B.2 of this section within twenty-four months of the effective date of this chapter ("compliance term"). There shall be no extensions granted to the compliance term. Failure to comply with the requirements of this section by any of the affected parties will result in the enforcement of an abatement order by the city. 
A.  Site Improvements and Operating Standards. All existing heavy trucking uses, as identified in the paragraph above, shall demonstrate compliance with applicable standards of this code and the zoning district in which the use is located, including but not limited to those regulating lighting and glare, landscaping, screening, noise, vibration, and hazardous substances. Additionally, the following standards shall apply to all applicable uses: 
1.  A solid decorative wall of at least eight feet in height must be constructed along all property lines abutting, or across an alley from, a residentially zoned property (except that in the required front yard setback of a residential use a three-foot decorative wall shall be constructed and additional non view-obscuring wrought iron may be placed on top of the three-foot wall). A wall shall be considered decorative if it incorporates architectural variation on its surface (i.e. slumpstone, stuccoed, split-face or similar). 
2.  A landscaped planter of a minimum of ten feet wide shall be required along all property lines abutting a residentially zoned property. The planter shall be fully irrigated and subject to the review and approval of a landscape and irrigation plan by the city's planning division. The landscape plan shall complement the solid eight-foot wall in providing a visual screen and physical separation from the abutting residentially zoned property and shall discourage plant materials susceptible to vermin such as ivy and vines. 
3.  A photometric plan shall be submitted for review and approval by the city's planning division prior to the issuance of a business license and a certificate of occupancy. The photometric plan shall show lighting levels that do not exceed 0.5 footcandles along any property lines abutting a residentially zoned property. 
4.  All trash areas and storage of trash/utility bins shall be located a minimum of one hundred feet from any property line shared with a residentially zoned property. 
5.  Any areas used for the parking of trucks, trailers, or fleet vehicles shall be located a minimum of one hundred feet from any property line shared with a residential zone. Customer or employee parking shall be permitted within the one hundred-foot buffer. 
The director, at his/her discretion, may grant specific deviations from these standards (or the standards of this code and the zoning district in which the use is located) for existing heavy trucking uses satisfying the requirements of this chapter if strict compliance with these conditions and requirements is impeded by existing physical constraints or limitations of the affected sites. 
B.  Exemption Process. 
1.  Application. All existing heavy trucking uses at the time of this chapter, without an effective conditional use permit, as described above, which desire to be exempt from the enforcement of the abatement action, may file a "request for exemption" (the "request") with the planning division. The request shall consist of all of the following items: 
a.  An "abatement exemption" application, which must include the names and signatures of both the business operator(s) and the property owner(s); and 
b.  A plot plan of the entire subject property site showing all existing and proposed buildings and uses, landscaped areas, parking areas, storage areas, lighting, adjacent uses, and any other data as may be required by the planning division to adequately review the exemption request. 
c.  A filing fee in the amount equal to a preliminary plan review, as established in the user fees by resolution of the Montebello City Council. 
2.  Review. Within fifteen working days of the date of filing a complete abatement exemption application by the applicant, planning staff shall review the plot plan, perform the required site inspection, evaluate the findings and issue a "notice to comply" listing all pertinent site improvements and operating requirements to be implemented by the applicant. If site improvements are required, planning staff shall stipulate a specific timeframe to complete the improvements and shall issue a "site improvement completion" form upon satisfactory completion of all the required operations and improvements. 
3.  Nonconforming Status. Any existing heavy trucking use issued a site improvement completion form as a result of this code amendment shall no longer be considered a nonconforming use, as regulated by Chapter 17.54 of this code, and as such shall not be subject to the abatement period applicable to nonconforming uses. 
C.  Intensification, Expansion. The intensification, expansion, or substantial alteration of an existing heavy trucking use will not be permitted unless all applicable requirements of this code and the zone in which the use is located are met in addition to the operation standards of Section 17.37.030.A for the affected areas of the proposal. The distance requirement in Section 17.37.030 shall not apply to the intensification, expansion, or substantial alteration of a heavy trucking use in existence at the time of the effective date of this chapter and qualified for an exemption from the abatement order resulting from Code Amendment 3-89. 
(Ord. No. 2342, § 6, 6-22-2011)  
Chapter 17.38 - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Note— Prior code history: Prior code §§ 9250—9250.13. 
 
17.38.010 - Planned development districts defined. 
A plan development district ("PD") is master planning mechanism for the development of larger parcels of land in residential, commercial and manufacturing zones where the existing underlying development standards do not functionally allow for reasonable development. This master planning mechanism allows for a comprehensive approach to development on a single parcel or contiguous parcels of land under single or joint ownership, and allow for flexibility in land use controls typically required by another zoning designation. The planned development mechanism encourages the use of modern planning and development techniques thereby ensuring more efficient utilization of land in the community. An approved planned development will be designated on the official zoning map with a "PD" designation. A precise plan of development ("the Plan") shall be adopted along with the "PD" designation as the implementation tool for the planned development. 
(Ord. 2290 § 4 (part), 2006)  
17.38.020 - Purpose. 
A plan development district designation is a reasonably flexible development tool that: 
A.  Provides for sound and efficient development of a parcel or parcels of land with unique topographic land features and/or having irregular shape, and/or parcels affected by incompatible land uses on adjacent properties; 
B.  Insures the preservation of natural land features, open space, and other valuable and desirable environmental features of a particular area; 
C.  Allows the development of large residential, commercial and industrial projects in such a manner to insure that such proposed development is consistent with the elements of the general plan, any applicable specific plan, and to assure that such development will be compatible with surrounding existing and proposed land uses; 
D.  Reduces or eliminates the rigidity, delays, and inequities that otherwise may result from the application of land use regulations and administrative procedures designed for small parcels of land; 
E.  Allows for mixed-use (commercial/residential) development in such a manner as to insure that such proposed development is consistent with the elements of the general plan, any applicable specific plan, and to assure that such development will be compatible with surrounding existing and proposed land uses; 
F.  Encourages architectural design diversity and avoids monotony in large developments by allowing greater freedom in the design of architectural elements to provide access, light, open space, and amenities in an aesthetically pleasing manner; 
G.  Provides for maintenance of the open space for those who will directly benefit from it; 
H.  Encourages the assembly of properties that might otherwise be developed in unrelated increments to the detriment of surrounding neighborhoods; and/or 
I.  Encourages a more efficient use of public and/or private services and facilities. 
(Ord. 2290 § 4 (part), 2006)  
17.38.030 - Definitions. 
In addition to the definitions contained in Chapter 17.08 of this code, the following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter, be designated as follows, unless it is clearly apparent from the context that another meaning is intended: 
"Building coverage" means all land within the planned development covered by buildings, garage building area, carport building area and other enclosed areas. All area coverage shall be computed at ground level. 
"Common open space" means a parcel or parcels of land, or of water, or a combination, within the site designated for a planned development and designated and intended for the use or enjoyment of all or certain of the owners and/or occupants of the planned development. Common open space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary or desirable and appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of all or certain of the owners and/or occupants of the planned development. 
"Covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs)" means a term used to describe restrictive limitations, usually recorded as covenants, that may be placed on property and its use, and which are usually made a condition of holding title or lease. The CC&Rs are intended to preserve the physical nature and character of the development. 
"Open space" refers to unimproved land, landscaped areas, improved recreation areas, recreational buildings and structures totally accessory to recreational uses, and water surfaces, all within the planned development. Open space does not include streets, public or private parking areas, storage areas or areas covered by any building, garage, carport or other structures except recreational structures. 
"Precise plan of development" or "PPD" means the written and graphic materials describing the characteristics of a planned development, including, but not limited to, a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use; design, location and bulk of buildings and other structures; intensity of use or density of development; streets, vehicular circulation lanes, walkways and parking facilities. 
(Ord. 2290 § 4 (part), 2006)  
17.38.040 - Minimum site area. 
The parcel(s) proposed to be developed utilizing the planned development procedures and designation must have an area of at least: 
A.  Two acres for multiple occupancy by commercial and/or industrial uses; 
B.  One acre for mixed-uses (commercial/residential); and/or 
C.  One-half acre for a residential uses when the housing units share a common open space and/or a common pedestrian and/or vehicular access to and from a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 2290 § 4 (part), 2006)  
17.38.050 - Planned development district—Creation and map designation. 
Planned development districts shall be created in the same manner as property is reclassified from one zoning classification to another within the city (see Chapter 17.76 of this code, Zone Changes). When a planned development district has been created, it shall be designated upon the zoning map of the city, as an overlay zone, by adding the parenthetically enclosed letters "PD," after the zoning symbol indicating the zone in which the subject property is included. 
(Ord. 2290 § 4 (part), 2006)  
17.38.060 - Permitted uses and densities. 
The uses and densities within a planned development district must be in accordance with the underlying zoning classification for the lots in the PD. These zoning classifications are established by the zoning map of the city (prior code § 9250.2). Strict adherence to the underlying range of uses and/or density requirements may not be necessary if a reasonable mix of uses and densities can be designed to be compatible with one another within the PD and with those existing and/or proposed uses in the immediately surrounding properties provided that the mix of uses and densities is consistent with the overlying designations of the general plan for the lots in the PD. The establishment and operation of any use in the approved PD shall be in compliance with the requirements of the underlying zoning classifications and/or pursuant to Section 17.70.030, unless specifically exempted by the approved plan. 
(Ord. 2290 § 4 (part), 2006)  
17.38.070 - Development standards. 
Any development classified in a PD designation, including, but not limited to, the construction and maintenance of buildings and structures shall be accomplished in accordance with the zoning regulations applicable to the underlying zone, unless the zoning regulations and/or the development standards are made inapplicable by an express condition of the PD designation, in which case, the conditions of the PD designation take precedence. The required precise plan of development shall conform to the following design criteria: 
A.  The plan shall be comprehensive, with respect to land, buildings, landscaping and their interrelationships; 
B.  The plan shall provide for adequate open space, circulation, off-street parking and pertinent amenities. Buildings, structures and facilities in the project site shall be well integrated, oriented and related to the topographic and natural landscape features of the site, as well as the surrounding development patterns. In situations where multi-story structures are proposed to be developed abutting residentially developed properties, due consideration should be given to the privacy of the existing residential uses; 
C.  The internal street system shall not be a dominant feature in the overall design; rather it should be designed for the efficient and safe flow of vehicles without creating a disruptive influence on the activity and function of any common areas and facilities in the project site; 
D.  Common areas and recreational facilities (if provided) shall be readily accessible to the occupants of the dwelling units and shall be related to any common open space provided in the project site; 
E.  Architectural harmony within the development and design compatibility with the surrounding existing and expected future development shall be obtained so far as feasible; 
F.  The development characteristics such as lot area, frontage and width, coverage, density, yards/setbacks, building heights, landscaping and parking depicted in the plan shall be the standards of the underlying zoning designations. Exceptions to these standards may be allowed by the planning commission and city council when it can be demonstrated that such modified standards would result in more desirable development and are warranted in terms of the relationship of the total proposed development or units thereof to the general plan. 
(Ord. 2290 § 4 (part), 2006)  
17.38.080 - Planned development district designation and precise plan of development approval—Application requirements. 
An application for adoption of a planned development district designation and approval of the attendant precise plan of development shall be filed with the planning department. A processing fee shall be paid when the application is filed, the amount of the fee to be set by a city council resolution. The application shall consist of the required forms provided by the director of planning and the precise plan of development. 
(Ord. 2290 § 4 (part), 2006)  
17.38.090 - Precise plan of development—Content. 
This plan shall include a narrative and schematics sufficient to describe the nature of the proposed development as determined by the director of planning. The plan shall include as minimum the following information: 
A.  Proof of ownership of property, or the written authorization from the owner(s) permitting such filing; 
B.  Maps and drawings showing: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant, and of the person who prepared the plan, 
2.  The street address and the legal description of the property involved, and the names of the nearest streets which intersect the street or streets on which the subject property is located, 
3.  The number of the lots involved, if more than one, the lot dimensions and total area, 
4.  The location, proposed use, size, height, floor plans, elevations of all proposed and existing buildings on the subject lot(s), 
5.  Approximate size and location of proposed terraces, topographic detail including approximate grades of driveways, 
6.  Cut and fill slopes, banks and terraces, topographic detail including approximate finished elevation of building pad, driveways, property lines and slopes, 
7.  The location of existing natural features such as mature trees and/or other significant vegetation, water courses, rock outcrops, topographic features, viewsheds and ridgelines including the methods proposed to preserve and incorporate such elements into the proposed plan, 
8.  The location of existing significant historical, cultural and archeological features in the area, including the methods proposed to preserve and incorporate such elements into the proposed plan, 
9.  The location, height and type of all existing and proposed walls and fences, 
10.  The location of existing and proposed pedestrian and vehicular streets and accessways, 
11.  Sight distance (horizontal and vertical) at all intersections, 
12.  The location, number of spaces, dimensions and circulation pattern of all existing and proposed off-street parking and loading areas and how compliance with the city's off-street parking requirements is achieved, 
13.  The location of any existing and proposed outdoor lighting fixtures, 
14.  The proposed landscaping for the development, including a detailed depiction of the location and height of screen planting, and a statement setting forth the method by which such landscaping shall be maintained after installation, 
15.  A preliminary grading plan for the entire development, and 
16.  The location, or proposed location, of all physical features, including, but not limited to, such items as firefighting facilities, utility facilities, drainage and sewage structures; 
C.  A comprehensive description of the proposed project including, but not limited to, the following data: 
1.  The proposed type of development (e.g., residential, commercial, industrial, mixed-use), 
2.  The proposed design and use themes of the development (e.g., California Ranch, California Mission Style, family living, live-work, etc.), 
3.  For residential developments or for the residential component of a mixed-use project describe: 
a.  Number of residential units and proposed density, 
b.  Proposed type of structures (e.g., single-family detached, town homes, condominiums, etc.), 
c.  Proposed unit size(s) and amenities provided, and 
d.  Proposed market (e.g., seniors, large families, empty nesters, etc.), 
4.  For commercial developments or for the commercial component of a mixed-use project describe: 
a.  Proposed range of commercial uses with the proposed allocation of gross floor area per type of use (e.g., sit down restaurants — eight thousand sq. ft., general retail — twelve thousand sq. ft., etc.), and 
b.  The type of buildings, including gross square feet of floor space, for which pads are designed (e.g., one- or multi-story structures, freestanding pad, etc.), 
5.  For industrial or manufacturing developments or for a commercial/manufacturing development describe: 
a.  Proposed range of manufacturing and/or commercial uses with the proposed allocation of gross floor area per type of use (e.g., cosmetic manufacture, dry cleaning plant, restaurant, etc.), 
b.  The type of buildings, including gross square feet of floor space being proposed, and 
c.  Proposed market (e.g., owner-occupant, lease holder, etc.), 
6.  Describe available utilities, 
7.  Describe proposed treatment of "view" sites, and 
8.  Describe soil conditions, including any known groundwater conditions (dump site, oil well site, natural ground, etc.); 
D.  Proposed covenants; 
E.  If the proposed PD is totally or partially located within a hillside area as identified in Exhibit 17.42.020 of this code, the applicant shall ensure that the precise plan of development includes all the required data and information listed in Section 17.42.030 of this code; and 
F.  Other materials as the applicant or director of planning may deem appropriate. 
(Ord. 2290 § 4 (part), 2006)  
17.38.100 - Application for planned development district designation and precise plan of development approval—Process and conditions of approval. 
Applications are to be submitted by the director of planning to the engineering, fire, street and building departments for comments and recommendations. These comments and recommendations, as well as other staff reports, will be submitted to the planning commission and to the city council for their consideration. 
An application for planned development district designation and precise plan of development approval shall not be approved unless the planning commission and/or city council determines that the approval is consistent with the public safety and general welfare, that the development proposed is consistent with the city's general plan and any applicable specific plan. Where such a plan has been approved, the conditions of approval and the provisions of this chapter shall be observed in the development of the planned area. 
Each approved precise plan of development shall comply with the following conditions, and any other conditions imposed upon the plan by the planning commission and the city council: 
A.  Compliance with Precise Plan of Development. All improvements within a planned development district shall substantially conform to the precise plan of development as adopted, amended or modified; 
B.  Construction in Stages. A plan may provide for construction in phases provided that each phase includes a description of location, structures, infrastructure and the timing for completion of all phases does not exceed the time limit established in the plan; and 
C.  Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions. Forms for covenants, conditions and restrictions, approved by the city attorney, may be established as a part of each precise plan of development, as the city council may direct, so as to insure compliance with the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 2290 § 4 (part), 2006)  
17.38.110 - Application for planned development district designation and precise plan of development approval—Planning commission determination and appeal. 
A.  Notices of hearing before the planning commission shall be given in accord with the procedures set forth in Section 17.78.040 of this code. The planning commission shall conduct the public hearing in compliance with the provisions of Section 17.78.050 of this code. The commission and the city council must find that the application as submitted: 
1.  Is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter; 
2.  Is consistent with the subdivision regulations, with the general intent of the zoning regulations, with the general plan, and with any applicable specific plan; 
3.  Is compatible with present and future development of the property within the immediate vicinity; 
4.  Is consistent with the general peace, health, safety and general welfare; 
5.  That the permitted uses and development standards adopted as part of the PD will not be detrimental to present and potential surrounding uses, but will have a beneficial effect which could not have been adequately achieved under the pre-existing zoning district; 
6.  That the proposed on-site streets and thoroughfares are adequate in size to accommodate the traffic volume generated by the proposed PD, and increased densities will not generate traffic in such amounts as to overload the street network outside the PD boundary; 
7.  That the exceptions, if any, from the development standards of the zoning code are warranted by the design and amenities, as incorporated, are in accord with adopted policies of the planning commission and the city council; 
8.  That the existing or proposed utility services and facilities are adequate for the proposed population densities and nonresidential uses; and 
9.  That the proposed buildings and structures are situated in such a manner to minimize impacting the privacy of existing abutting residential uses. 
B.  After making these findings, the commission shall determine by resolution whether to recommend to the city council the adoption of the planned development district designation and approval of the precise plan of development subject to pertinent conditions of approval. In cases of denial, the commission's action shall be final unless the applicant appeals to the city council pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.78 of this code. 
(Ord. 2290 § 4 (part), 2006)  
17.38.120 - Application for planned development district designation and precise plan of development approval—City council determination. 
Upon receipt by the city clerk of an appeal in the case of a denial, or a copy of the commission's recommendation for approval of a plan, the clerk shall set the same for a notice hearing by the city council at its next convenient meeting pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.78.040 of this code. The hearing shall be conducted in accord with the procedures set forth in Section 17.80.050 of this code. At the meeting, the council shall consider the commission's files and all applicable staff reports, and any relevant evidence offered by any person, and determines whether the commission's action should be approved, modified or disapproved. The action of the council shall be by resolution, and shall be based upon the same factors as are applicable to the action of the commission. The action of the council shall be final. 
(Ord. 2290 § 4 (part), 2006)  
17.38.130 - Approved precise plan of development deemed in compliance with Hillside plan review provisions. 
A plan approved pursuant hereto shall be deemed to be in compliance with Chapter 17.42 of this code, Hillside Plan Review. 
(Ord. 2290 § 4 (part), 2006)  
17.38.140 - Approved precise plan of development—Expiration and extension. 
A plan approved shall be valid and in effect for a period of two years after approval by the city council. Within this period of time, the proposed development must become vested in accordance with the plan, or the plan shall be deemed to have expired at the end of two years. An application for time extension may be filed with the director of planning no less than thirty days before the date of expiration. The director of planning, for good cause, may extend the period of time up to an additional one-year period. 
(Ord. 2290 § 4 (part), 2006)  
17.38.150 - Approved precise plan of development—Changes after approval. 
A.  Minor Changes. Minor changes to the adopted plan may be approved by the director of planning at his or her discretion, provided that the proposed changes: 
1.  Do not change the boundaries of the subject development; 
2.  Do not change any use as shown on the adopted plan; 
3.  Do not exceed ten percent of the approved development standards; and/or 
4.  Do not change the intent of the adopted plan. 
The decision of the director of planning may be appealed to the planning commission pursuant to Section 17.78.060 of this code. 
B.  Major Changes. Major changes to the adopted plan as determined by the director of planning, including time extensions beyond the one-year administrative extension, may be approved by the planning commission and the city council pursuant to the same procedures required for its adoption (Sections 17.38.120 and 17.38.130 of this code). Certain major changes to the precise plan of development affecting the boundaries, uses, densities, etc., may require the concurrent modification of the adopted planned development district designation. 
(Ord. 2290 § 4 (part), 2006)  
17.38.160 - Effect of the approved precise plan of development upon subdivisions and other land use permits. 
A.  Subdivision Permits. Any application for a subdivision permit or parcel map, which includes property located in a planned development district, shall not be approved unless the proposed development of the subject property was included in a previously approved precise plan of development, or a subsequent modification to the planned development allowing for such action. 
B.  Conditional Use Permits. If the establishment and operation of any proposed use within a planned development district necessitates a conditional use permit (CUP) as per the requirements of the underlying zoning classifications and/or pursuant to Section 17.70.030, such CUP shall be processed unless specifically exempted by the approved plan. 
C.  Design Review Permits. All development projects proposed for property within a planned development district shall be required, as applicable, to process design review permits pursuant to Section 17.22.105 of this code. 
(Ord. 2290 § 4 (part), 2006)  
Chapter 17.40 - CIVIC CENTER DISTRICT 
 
17.40.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the civic center district shall be to promote the orderly, harmonious development of areas of the community adjacent to the civic center and to insure that the appearance of the areas surrounding the civic center shall be maintained at a high standard. 
(Prior code § 9251)  
17.40.020 - Civic center designated. 
The following described area within the city shall be designated as the "civic center": 
Lot 177, 178, 179 Montebello Tract, City of Montebello, as per map book 78, Pages 79 et seq. of Miscellaneous Records, on file in the office of the County Recorder, County of Los Angeles, State of California. General location: on the Northerly side of Beverly Boulevard between Maple Avenue and 18th Street. 
(Prior code § 9251.1)  
17.40.030 - Created. 
Pursuant to Section 65850 et seq. of the Government Code of the state, there is created a "civic center district" surrounding the designated civic center, for a distance of five hundred feet beyond the boundary lines of the properties included in the civic center. 
(Prior code § 9251.2)  
17.40.040 - Civic center review—Required. 
All plans for buildings or structures, other than single-family residential units, proposed to be located upon properties included in the district, shall be submitted to the planning commission and city council for review and approval prior to the issuance of such permit. 
(Prior code § 9251.3)  
17.40.050 - Civic center review—Requirements. 
Where a civic center review is required, the applicant shall submit the following: 
A.  A detailed plot plan; and 
B.  Architectural details of all: 
1.  Signs and advertising displays. See Chapter 17.62 of this code, 
2.  Exterior colors, 
3.  Landscaping design and materials, 
4.  Exterior wall elevations and roof details, 
5.  Any unique building design features intended to be used as advertising displays, 
6.  Exterior lighting; 
C.  Other material the city planner may deem necessary to communicate the intent of the proposal to the planning commission and city council. 
(Prior code § 9251.4)  
17.40.060 - Civic center review—Application. 
Application for civic center review shall be filed with the city planner and shall consist of the following: 
A.  The material required pursuant to Section 17.38.060 in a quantity determined by the city planner; 
B.  Proof of ownership of property, or written authorization from the owner permitting such filing. 
(Prior code § 9251.5)  
17.40.070 - Civic center review—Approval. 
A.  Civic center review shall be subject to the recommended approval of the planning commission and to the approval of the city council. 
B.  City council approval shall be based upon the findings that the proposed development: 
1.  Is consistent with the zoning regulations and the general plan; and 
2.  Is compatible with the architectural design of the public buildings located within the civic center district. 
(Prior code § 9251.6)  
17.40.080 - Council's authority. 
A.  The city council shall have authority to disapprove any proposed building or structure or any change in an existing building or structure, which, in its opinion, would substantially affect the appearance and have a detrimental effect on the civic center district. 
B.  The city council may require changes in the architectural treatment of buildings or structures and may require additional landscaping and development improvements. 
C.  The city council may impose such conditions of development as are necessary in its judgment to carry out the intent and purpose of the civic center district. 
(Prior code § 9251.7)  
Chapter 17.42 - HILLSIDE PLAN REVIEW 
 
17.42.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose hereof is to provide for a preliminary review of proposals for subdivisions, parcel maps and the grading of property within hillside areas, to insure compliance with the provisions of this code, the general plan, and compatibility with existing and future developments within such hillside areas, and to protect the health and safety of residents of hillside areas. (See Chapter 17.38 of this code, Planned Development Districts.) 
(Prior code § 9252)  
17.42.020 - Plan—Required. 
Hillside plans shall be required for any property located in any hillside area as designated on Exhibit 17.42.020, Hillside Areas Map, of the city where it is proposed to develop the same by means of a subdivision or parcel map, or where the development proposed requires a grading permit. 
(Prior code § 9252.1) 
EXHIBIT 17.42.020 
HILLSIDE AREAS MAP 
   
17.42.030 - Plan—Contents. 
Where a hillside plan is required, it shall consist of the following: 
A.  A map or maps showing the following information: 
1.  All of the data required for submittal of a tentative tract map, 
2.  Size and location of proposed and existing building pads and driveways, including grades of driveways, 
3.  Cut and fill slopes, banks and terraces, topographic detail, including finish elevations at building pad, driveways, slopes, property lines and adjoining properties, 
4.  All proposed retaining walls and protective fences, 
5.  All lot drainage systems, 
6.  Landmarks, terrain features, etc., to be preserved, 
7.  Landscaping scheme, including street trees, slopes, terraces, parking areas and public areas, 
8.  All existing and proposed roadways and other easements (public and private), 
9.  Sight distance (horizontal and vertical) at all street intersections, 
10.  All operating or planned oil production facilities, 
11.  Plot plans for individual lots if required by city planner, 
B.  A statement containing the following data: 
1.  The type of house for which pads are designed (split level, slab, etc.), 
2.  Grading scheme, 
3.  Dwelling unit density proposed, 
4.  Proposed covenants, 
5.  Water supply, including storage tank locations within development, 
6.  Treatment of view sites, 
7.  Landscaping theme, 
8.  Starting and completion dates of earthwork, 
9.  Soil conditions, including any known groundwater conditions (dump site, oil well site, natural ground, etc.), 
10.  A list of names and addresses of all surrounding property owners within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property involved in the proposed plan, 
11.  Other materials as the applicant or city planner may deem appropriate. 
(Prior code § 9252.2 (part))  
17.42.040 - Plan—Review—Application—Form—Fee. 
Application for a hillside plan review shall be made by the property owner or an authorized agent, to the planning commission, on a form provided for that purpose by the city, and shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 9252.4)  
17.42.050 - Plan—Review—Application—Filing—Fees—Submission for comments and recommendations. 
A.  Applications and fees are to be filed at least three calendar weeks in advance of the planning commission meeting at which they are to be considered. Applications are to be submitted by the city planner to the engineering, fire, street and building divisions for comments and recommendations. These comments and recommendations, as well as other staff reports, will be submitted to the planning commission. 
B.  Applications will include: 
1.  Sixteen prints and one reproducible copy of the map; 
2.  One copy of the statement; and 
3.  Proof of ownership of the property, including the plan or written authorization of the owner. 
(Prior code § 9252.2 (part))  
17.42.060 - Plan—Review—Hearing. 
The city planner shall set the request for a hillside plan review for a public hearing before the planning commission in the manner specified in Chapter 17.78 of this code, Public Hearings, Notices and Appeals. 
(Prior code § 9252.5)  
17.42.070 - Plan—Approval—Prerequisites. 
Before any hillside plan review shall be granted, the planning commission and city council shall determine that the applicant has shown that the plan as submitted: 
A.  Is in compliance with the provisions of this code; 
B.  Is consistent with the general plan; and 
C.  Is compatible with present and future development of the property within the immediate vicinity. 
(Prior code § 9252.6)  
17.42.080 - Plan—Commission's action. 
A.  If the commission finds that the plan has satisfied the showings required by Section 17.42.030, it shall recommend approval to the city council. The commission may also recommend conditional approval to insure compliance with the provisions hereof. 
B.  If the commission finds that the plan does not comply with any provision of this code, or is inconsistent with the general plan, or is not compatible with the future development of property in the immediate vicinity, it shall deny the plan. In cases of denial, the commission's action shall be final, unless any person appeals to the city council by filing a written letter of appeal with the city clerk, together with a filing and processing fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council, appealing such decision to the city council not later than the day following the next regularly scheduled city council meeting following the action of the commission. 
(Prior code § 9252.7)  
17.42.090 - Plan—City council action. 
Upon the receipt of the city clerk of a letter of appeal in the case of denial, or a copy of the commission's resolution recommending approval of a plan, the clerk shall set the plan for consideration by the council at its next convenient meeting. The city clerk shall give notice, (See Chapter 17.78 of this code). At such time and place, the city council shall consider the planning commission's files and all applicable staff reports, and determine whether the planning commission's action should be approved, modified or denied. The action of the council shall be based upon the same factors as the action of the planning commission. The action of the council shall be final. 
(Prior code § 9258.8 (part))  
17.42.100 - Plan—Approval—Time limit—Extension. 
If the city council approves the plan, the approval will be valid and in effect for eighteen months after approval. If all or a portion of the development is not started in this period of time, the plan will be deemed expired at the end of eighteen months. The city planner may extend the period of time for not more than an additional eighteen months if there is good cause. 
(Prior code § 9258.8 (part))  
17.40.110 - Effect upon subdivisions or parcel maps. 
Any subdivision or parcel map which includes property located in a hillside area shall be denied unless such development has been approved by a hillside plan. 
(Prior code § 9252.3)  
Chapter 17.44 - OIL AND GAS PRODUCTION DISTRICT 
 
17.44.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the oil and gas production (O) district shall be to allow the economic recovery of oil and gas in certain areas of the city which are or will be a part of a recognized oil and gas field but which are zoned for more restricted uses. The exploration for and production of oil and gas shall be permitted subject only to such limitations, safeguards and controls which are deemed necessary to protect the land values and surface uses of surrounding areas. 
(Prior code § 9253)  
17.44.020 - Superimposed nature—Designation—Precedence. 
The O district shall be in the nature of a superimposed district. Land so classified shall also be classified in one or more other zones. Property so classified shall be delineated on the zoning map by a combination of the zone symbols (for example: M-1-O for light manufacturing and oil and gas production district). The regulations hereof shall be in addition to those regulations in the underlying zone. In the event of a conflict between the provisions hereof and the provisions of an underlying zone, the oil and gas production district provisions take precedence. 
(Prior code § 9253.1)  
17.44.030 - Principal permitted uses. 
The following are the principal permitted uses in the oil and gas production district: 
A.  Any use permitted in the underlying zone; 
B.  The drilling, redrilling and servicing of oil and gas wells and related equipment. 
(Prior code § 9253.2)  
17.44.040 - Property development standards. 
Property development standards set forth in the underlying zones shall apply, except that the standards shall not apply to the exploration or the drilling, production, extraction, storing or removal of oil and gas; provided that the uses are in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 5.52 of this code. 
(Ord. 2070 § 34, 1992: prior code § 9253.3)  
17.44.050 - Applicability. 
The provisions hereof shall not be applicable to any property unless the commission and council have conducted public hearings, and made the findings required in a zone reclassification matter. (See Chapter 17.76 of this code, zone change process.) 
(Prior code § 9253.4)  
Chapter 17.46 - HEIGHT OVERLAY ZONE 
 
17.46.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the height modifying zone shall be to promote orderly, harmonious development of areas and to insure that the height of buildings and structures will be compatible with adjacent development. 
(Prior code § 9254)  
17.46.020 - Modifying nature—Designation—Precedence. 
The height overlay zone shall be in the nature of a modifying zone. Land so classified shall also be classified in one or more other zones. Property so classified shall be delineated on the zoning map by a combination of zone symbols. For example, R-3-H-50 means residential, multiple-family, building height up to fifty feet. The height regulations in this section shall supersede the height regulations in the underlying zone. 
(Prior code § 9254.1)  
17.46.030 - Height regulations. 
Whenever any property on the zoning map of the city has in addition to its zone designation the symbol "H" followed by a numerical figure, the provisions hereof shall apply concerning height limitations for any buildings or structures located, or to be located upon such property. The height of buildings or structures in an H-zone cannot exceed the numerical figure following the H on the zoning map. 
(Prior code § 9254.2)  
17.46.040 - Applicability. 
The provisions hereof shall not be applicable to any property unless the commission and council have conducted public hearings, and made the findings required in a zone reclassification matter. (See Chapter 17.76 of this code, zone reclassification.) 
(Prior code § 9254.3)  
Chapter 17.48 - DENSITY OVERLAY ZONE 
 
17.48.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the density modifying zone shall be to promote the orderly, harmonious development of residential areas and to insure that densities are consistent with the city's general plan. 
(Prior code § 9255)  
17.48.020 - Modifying nature—Designation—Precedence. 
The density overly zone shall be in the nature of a modifying zone. Land so classified shall also be classified in one or more zones. Property so classified shall be delineated on the zoning map by a combination of the zone symbols. For example, R-3-D-14 means multi-family, fourteen dwelling units per acre. The regulations hereof on the density modifying zone shall supersede the density regulations in the underlying zone. 
(Prior code § 9255.1)  
17.48.030 - Density regulations. 
Whenever any property on the zoning map which is zoned residential has in addition to its zone designation a symbol "D" followed by a numerical figure, the provisions hereof shall apply regarding the total number of dwelling units located, or to be located on the property. The numerical figure following the "D" indicates the maximum number of dwelling units allowed per acre. 
(Prior code § 9255.2)  
17.48.040 - Applicability. 
The provisions hereof shall not be made applicable to any property unless the commission and council have conducted public hearings and made the findings required in a zone reclassification matter. (See Chapter 17.76 of this code, zone reclassification.) 
(Prior code § 9255.3)  
Chapter 17.49 - BROWNFIELD OVERLAY DISTRICT 
 
17.49.010 - Brownfield overlay district established and defined. 
A.  The city of Montebello establishes a Brownfield overlay district in the approximately fifty-five acre Brownfield area that was previously used as a landfill in an effort to allow and cluster certain heavy trucking uses that were deleted from the zoning code on November 22, 1989. Subsequent to the adoption of Ordinance No. 2001 amending the industrial development standards, no new heavy trucking uses were permitted in any zones of the city, and a twenty-year abatement period was established for the previously existing nonconforming uses. 
B.  The Brownfield overlay district shall be located south of the Atchison Topeka and Santa Fe railroad tracks near Maynard Road, west of the Rio Hondo Percolation Basin (Bluff Road), north of Slauson Avenue, and east from the railroad spur just to the west of Chapin Road. The specific boundaries of the Brownfield overlay district are identified on Exhibit "A," which is attached to and is made part of this chapter. An approved Brownfield overlay district will be designated on the official zoning map with a "BF" designation. 
(Ord. 2307 § 3 (part), 2007)  
17.49.020 - Purpose. 
The establishment of the Brownfield overlay district is a short-term solution that will: 
A.  Allow certain heavy trucking uses such as truck terminals, truck transportation yards and truck storage yards that were previously deleted from the zoning code, to temporarily exist in the Brownfield area at this time; 
B.  Promote the better utilization of land with minimal improvements while more in-depth environmental studies are conducted to determine the extent of the mitigation necessary for the Brownfield area; 
C.  Cluster certain heavy trucking uses that would not require substantial development, but only minor physical improvements that would visually improve the Brownfield area; and 
D.  Provide time for the city to complete its Phase II Environmental study and address all facets of the potential surface and subsurface problems in the Brownfield area, and to formulate a specific plan for the ultimate establishment of appropriate uses therein. 
(Ord. 2307 § 3 (part), 2007)  
17.49.030 - Definitions. 
In addition to the definitions contained in Chapter 17.08 of this code, the following words and phrases shall, for the purposes hereof, be designated as follows, unless it is clearly apparent from the context that another meaning is intended: 
"Brownfield area" means the real property consisting of approximately fifty-five acres identified on the Exhibit A at the end of this chapter, the expansion, redevelopment, or reuse of which may be complicated by the presence or potential presence of a hazardous substance, pollutant, or contaminant. 
"Truck terminal, draying or freight" means a facility that specializes in the transfer of freight. The terminal is not the point or the final destination of the freight. 
"Truck transfer, moving and storage" means a facility that may be similar to a recreational vehicle storage lot, but is intended for the storage of trucks and truck trailers overnight or for longer periods of time. 
"Truck transportation yard" means a location where the trucks that are operating at a truck terminal are stored when not in use. May also be the location where trucks are stored (overnight) and then dispatched to their destination(s). 
(Ord. 2307 § 3 (part), 2007)  
17.49.040 - Permitted uses. 
A.  All uses and accessory uses of the underlying zone listed in Chapter 17.36 of the zoning code and Appendix A, index of primary uses shall be permitted in the Brownfield overlay district, including the uses below, except as otherwise specified in this chapter: 
1.  Truck terminals, draying or freight; 
2.  Truck transportation yards; 
3.  Truck transfer, moving and storage. 
B.  The director of planning and economic development may deem additional uses to be permitted based on a finding that the use is similar in nature and operation to the permitted uses listed in this subsection. 
(Ord. 2307 § 3 (part), 2007)  
17.49.050 - Prohibited uses. 
A.  All uses and accessory uses of the underlying zone listed in Chapter 17.36 of the zoning code and Appendix A, index of primary uses, specifically prohibited for the M-2 heavy manufacturing zoning district, shall be prohibited in the Brownfield overlay district except as otherwise specified in this chapter. 
B.  The director of planning and economic development may deem additional uses to be prohibited based on a finding that the use is similar in nature, and operation to the prohibited uses listed in subsection A of this section. 
(Ord. 2307 § 3 (part), 2007)  
17.49.060 - Property development standards. 
In addition to the requirements of the underlying zone, the following requirements shall apply to all new uses allowed in the Brownfield overlay district: 
A.  General Requirements. 
1.  Except as otherwise set forth in this chapter, the development characteristics such as lot area, coverage, yards/setbacks, building heights, landscaping and parking shall be the standards of the underlying zoning designation (M-2, heavy manufacturing). 
2.  All signage, including banners, shall be in conformance with Chapter 17.62 of the Montebello Municipal Code. 
3.  All uses shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.32 of this code, except as specifically stated otherwise in this chapter. 
4.  All modifications to structures and uses proposed within shall comply with all applicable building, stormwater and fire codes and city ordinances. 
5.  All properties shall be maintained in a neat and orderly condition and operated in a manner so as not to be detrimental to adjacent properties and occupants. 
B.  Special Requirements. 
1.  All properties shall be screened from view from the public right-of-way to the satisfaction of the director of planning and economic development. 
2.  Truck loading doors and facilities shall not front directly on a public street unless said truck loading doors and facilities are completely screened from public view by decorative masonry walls or appropriate landscape screening. 
3.  Truck loading doors and facilities shall be designed and located in a manner that prohibits trucks from backing in from or onto the public right-of-way. 
4.  No damaged or wrecked trucks or other vehicles shall be stored for purposes other than repair. Any truck or other vehicles awaiting repair for more than thirty days shall be removed from the location or stored in an enclosed area. 
5.  Building facades, including accessory structures such as block walls, shall be painted and repaired where needed by the business and/or property owner. 
6.  A view-obscuring wall may be substituted with a maximum of eight-foot high chain link fence with metal or vinyl slats. 
7.  There shall be no outdoor display or storage of truck parts and supply goods for sale. 
8.  No inoperable vehicles shall be stored within the public right-of-way. 
9.  All outdoor utilities or machinery located outside the exterior walls, including roof-mounted equipment, shall be completely screened from public view, subject to the review and approval of the planning division. 
(Ord. 2307 § 3 (part), 2007)  
17.49.070 - Sunset date. 
A.  The Brownfield overlay district is established on an interim basis only. The provisions of this chapter establishing the Brownfield overlay district and permitting the uses specified in Section 17.49.040 to exist in the Brownfield area shall only be in effect through November 22, 2019, (the "Sunset Date") and shall automatically be repealed as of that date unless one of the following occurs before the sunset date: 
1.  An ordinance enacted after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter extends or repeals sunset date; or 
2.  The city council of the city of Montebello adopts a specific plan or other zoning ordinance, which allows the heavy trucking uses permitted by this chapter to continue or remain beyond the sunset date. 
B.  If neither subsection (A)(1) nor (A)(2) of this section occurs prior to the sunset date, all truck transfer, moving and storage, truck terminal, draying or freight and truck transportation yard uses in the Brownfield overlay district (and any such similar uses as may have been established pursuant to the provisions of this chapter) shall become nonconforming uses, subject to the abatement/amortization period set forth in the following Section 17.49.080. 
(Ord. 2307 § 3 (part), 2007)  
17.49.080 - Abatement/amortization period. 
Except as specifically set forth otherwise in this section, the provisions of Chapter 17.54 of this code governing nonconforming uses shall apply to all truck transfer, moving and storage; truck terminal, draying or freight and truck transportation yard uses in the Brownfield overlay district (and any such similar uses as may have been established pursuant to the provisions of this chapter) as of the sunset date. 
A.  All truck transfer, moving and storage; truck terminal, draying or freight and truck transportation yard uses in the Brownfield overlay district (and such similar uses as may have been established pursuant to the provisions of this chapter) which have become nonconforming as of the sunset date (November 22, 2019), shall be permitted to continue such uses for a period not to exceed three years following the sunset date. 
B.  Following the sunset date, the director of planning and economic development shall cause official notification to be sent via certified mail to the legal property owner of record as it appears in the county tax roll, stating the nonconforming status of such truck transfer, moving and storage; truck terminal, draying or freight; truck transportation yard or such similar business use on the property, as well as the start date of the abatement/amortization period. If the operator of such truck transfer, moving and storage; truck terminal, draying or freight; truck transportation yard or such similar business use is different from that of the legal property owner, additional notification shall be sent to the business operator by certified mail. Failure to issue such a notice shall not prejudice the city's rights to subsequently issue a written order of abatement pursuant to Chapter 17.54 of this code or to subsequently require compliance with the then-applicable laws of the city. 
C.  On November 22, 2022, the conclusion of the three year abatement/amortization period set forth in this section, all nonconforming truck transfer, moving and storage; truck terminal, draying or freight and truck transportation yard uses in the Brownfield overlay district (and any such similar uses as may have been established therein pursuant to the provisions of this chapter) shall cease operation. 
(Ord. 2307 § 3 (part), 2007) 
CA-1-07 
Brownfield Area Map 
  
EXHIBIT "A"  
Chapter 17.50 - MISCELLANEOUS ZONING REGULATIONS 
 
17.50.010 - Height of buildings on through lots. 
On through lots one hundred fifty feet or less in depth, the height of a building on the lot shall be based on the permitted building height on the street on which the building fronts (measured from the exiting grade of the sidewalk). On through lots more than one hundred fifty feet in depth, the height regulations and basis of height measurements for the street permitting the greater height shall apply to a depth of more than one hundred fifty feet from that street. (See Chapter 17.08 of this code for definition.) 
(Prior code § 9245.1)  
17.50.020 - Structures permitted to exceed building height limits. 
The following structures may exceed building height limits prescribed for any zone: 
A.  Penthouse or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building; 
B.  Fire or parapet walls, skylights, flagpoles (not including used for signage in accordance with Section 17.62.070(B)(3), chimneys, smokestacks, antennas, and similar structures; 
Provided, that no structure referred to shall be used for the purpose of providing additional usable floor space. 
(Prior code § 9245.2)  
17.50.030 - Yard requirements for property abutting streets with less than required right-of-way. 
A.  A building or structure shall not be erected or maintained on a lot which abuts a street having only a portion of its required width dedicated unless sufficient yards are provided to complete the road width, plus the width or depth of the yards required on the lot. This section applies to all zones, whether or not the yards are required. 
B.  This section does not require a yard that would reduce the buildable width of a corner lot to less than forty feet. 
(Prior code § 9245.3)  
17.50.040 - Corner and reversed corner lots—Vision clearance. 
All corner and reversed lots shall maintain for vision purposes a triangular area which is fifteen feet from the corner, measured along the front and side lot lines. Within the area comprising the triangle no tree, fence, shrub, building or other physical obstruction higher than thirty-six inches above the established grade shall be permitted (see Exhibit 17.50.040.) 
EXHIBIT 17.50.040 
FRONT LOT LINE 
  
(Prior code § 9245.4)  
17.50.050 - Permitted intrusions into required yards. 
The following intrusions may project thirty inches into any required yard unless otherwise noted: 
A.  Cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, buttresses, or other similar architectural features; 
B.  Fireplaces not wider than eight feet measured along the wall to which it is attached; 
C.  Stairways, balconies and fire escapes; 
D.  First floor uncovered porches and platforms may extend six feet into the front yard; 
E.  Planting boxes or masonry planters not exceeding thirty-six inches in height; 
F.  Guard railings needed for safety purposes. 
(Prior code § 9245.5)  
17.50.060 - Substandard lots. 
When a lot legally of record as of July 2, 1956, has less than the minimum required area, width or depth, such lot shall be deemed to have complied with the minimum lot size requirements in any zone. When an R-3 or R-4 lot legally of record prior to April 28, 1986, has at least five thousand square feet such lot shall be deemed to have complied with the minimum lot size in the respective zone. 
(Prior code § 9245.6)  
17.50.070 - Effect of provisions on public utilities. 
The provisions of this code shall not limit or interfere with the installation, maintenance and operation of pipelines for transmission or distribution of water, gas, or other public utilities, or electric or telephone transmission lines, or railroads, when located in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Public Utilities Commission of the state to the extent that the same are applicable, upon property or within rights-of-way, easement or franchises authorized and available for such purpose. 
(Prior code § 9245.7)  
17.50.080 - Required yards to be open and unobstructed. 
Except as provided herein, every required yard shall be open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky. No yard or open space provided around any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this code shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building, and no yard or open space on any adjoining property shall be considered as providing a yard or open space on a building site whereon a building is to be erected. 
(Prior code § 9245.8)  
17.50.090 - Modification of side yard requirement on combined lots. 
When the common boundary line separating two contiguous lots is covered by a building or permitted group of buildings, such lots shall constitute a single building site and the yard spaces as required by this code shall then not apply to such common boundary line. 
(Prior code § 9245.9)  
17.50.100 - Yard requirements when more than one main building exists. 
Where two or more buildings are, by definition of this code, considered main buildings, then the front yard requirement shall apply only to the building closest to the front lot line. 
(Prior code § 9245.10)  
17.50.110 - Commission may establish formula for modifying yard requirements. 
The planning commission may, by resolution, adopt a formula or establish standard practices by which to determine an appropriate and practical modification of required yards in all residential zones where geometric shape and dimensions of topography are such as to make the literal application of such required yards impractical. After the adoption of such formula or standard practices, they shall be applied as an administrative act. 
(Prior code § 9245.11)  
17.50.120 - Required increase of side yard where multiple or row dwellings front upon a side yard. 
The minimum width of the side yard upon which dwellings front shall be not less than ten feet. 
(Prior code § 9245.12)  
17.50.130 - Required increase of side yard where multiple or row dwellings rear upon a side yard. 
Where two-family dwellings or multiple-family dwellings, group houses, court apartments or row dwellings are arranged so that the rear of such dwellings abut upon the side yards, and such dwellings have openings onto such side yards used as a secondary means of access to the dwellings, the required side yards to the rear of such dwellings shall be increased by one foot for each dwelling unit having such an entrance or exit opening into or served by such yard, provided such increase need not exceed five feet. 
(Prior code § 9245.13)  
17.50.140 - Sole building on lot or building site constitutes main building. 
Any building which is the only building on a lot or building site is a main building unless authorized by variance. 
(Prior code § 9245.14)  
17.50.150 - Division of through lots. 
Through lots one hundred eighty feet or more in depth may be improved as two separate lots, with the dividing line midway between the street frontages; and each resulting one-half shall be subject to the controls applying to the street upon which such one-half faces. If such resulting one-half is below the minimum lot area as determined by this code, then no division may be made and only one single-family dwelling may be erected upon such lot. If the whole of any through lot is improved as one building site, the main building shall conform to the zone classification of the frontage occupied by such main building, and no accessory building shall be located closer to either street than the distance constituting the required front yard on such street. 
(Prior code § 9245.15)  
17.50.160 - Reduction of lot area. 
No lot area shall be so reduced or diminished that the lot area, yards or other open spaces shall be smaller than prescribed hereby, nor shall the density of population be increased in any manner except in conformity with regulations established by this code. 
(Prior code § 9245.16)  
17.50.170 - Greater lot area may be required. 
Greater lot areas than those prescribed in the various zones may be required when such greater areas are established by the adoption of a precise plan in the manner prescribed by law, designating the location and size of such greater required areas. 
(Prior code § 9245.17)  
17.50.180 - Division of lots or parcels containing more than the minimum required area. 
When any lot in any zone contains a greater area than the required minimum area of the zone in which it is contained, then each unit of the required minimum area contained in such lot may be utilized as a separate lot; provided, that all requirements of the zone in which it is contained are met; and further provided, that any such division does not result in more than four lots and that each lot thus created complies with the provisions of Title 16 of this code; and further provided, that each such lot has a minimum twenty-five foot frontage upon a dedicated public thoroughfare. 
(Prior code § 9245.18)  
17.50.190 - Modified front yard on cul-de-sac. 
The depth of the required front yard on lots facing directly upon the arc of a cul-de-sac shall be measured on an arc parallel to the front property lines comprising the arc of the cul-de-sac and being a distance therefrom one-half the required front yard depth as prescribed for each zone. This modified front yard shall extend around the circumference of the cul-de-sac only to the points at which the rear lines of the required front yard, on the portions of the street not located on the cul-de-sac, extended, intersects the arc representing the rear line of the modified required front yard. 
(Prior code § 9245.19)  
17.50.200 - Lot width on a cul-de-sac. 
Notwithstanding the modified required front yard around a cul-de-sac, the depth of the standard required front yard shall continue to be used in determining the required width of a lot on a cul-de-sac. 
(Prior code § 9245.20)  
17.50.210 - Temporary construction building. 
Temporary structures for the housing of tools and equipment or containing supervisory offices in connection with major construction of major construction projects may be established and maintained during the progress of such construction on such project, and shall be abated within sixty days after completion or sixty days after cessation of work. 
(Prior code § 9245.21)  
17.50.220 - Creation of new lots—Minimum frontage. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, no lot shall be created after the effective date hereof, unless the same has not less than twenty-five feet of frontage on a public street, or upon an area devoted to off-street parking facilities. 
(Prior code § 9245.22)  
17.50.230 - Emergency equipment and supply shelters. 
Metal prefabricated structures may be used to house emergency (disaster) equipment and supplies in any zone and shall not be considered a habitable structure for zoning purposes; provided, that: 
A.  Such shelter shall not be used for any other purpose than emergency equipment and supply shelter; and 
B.  Such shelter shall be painted the same color as, or an aesthetically complementary color to, the primary structure on site; and 
C.  If visible from a public street, the structure shall be screened by a six foot view-obscuring fence, wall or view-obscuring landscape hedge (as permitted by the zone) lying parallel to the right-of-way; and 
D.  The location and size of the shelter and access point into the shelter shall be approved by the fire department and the planning division per an approved site plan which includes, among standard site plan information, additional information with respect to any nearby utility lanes; and 
E.  The shelter may not be placed on top of, or obstruct required parking; and 
F.  If any of the items set out in subsections A through E of this section are not met, a conditional use permit, or conditional use permit modification (if a CUP already exists on the site) must be approved for the shelter. 
(Prior code § 9245.23)  
Chapter 17.52 - OFF-STREET PARKING 
 
17.52.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the off-street parking regulations is to alleviate and prevent congestion of the public streets and so promote the safety and welfare of the public by establishing minimum off-street parking requirements for every use permitted by this code. 
(Prior code § 9246)  
17.52.020 - New uses. 
Any building or structure erected or located, and any use of land established after the effective date of this code or any subsequent amendments, shall be required to provide off-street parking facilities in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(Prior code § 9246.1)  
17.52.030 - Existing uses—Requirements when intensity of use increases. 
When the intensity of use of any building, structure or premises is increased through the addition of dwelling units, floor area, seating capacity or other units of measurement specified herein, the additional required parking and loading facilities for such increase shall be provided. In addition, the required parking and loading facilities existing cannot be reduced unless substitute spaces are provided in accordance herewith. 
(Prior code § 9246.2)  
17.52.040 - Establishment of facilities in excess of those required. 
Nothing in this code shall prevent the voluntary establishment of off-street parking facilities in excess of those required; provided, that all regulations governing the location, design and operation of such facilities are adhered to. 
(Prior code § 9246.3)  
17.52.050 - Parking space requirements. 
For parking requirements, refer to Exhibit 17.52.050, off-street parking requirements. 
EXHIBIT 17.52.050 
OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS* 
Type of Use 	Required Number of Parking Spaces 
RESIDENTIAL: 	
R-A and R-1 Zones 	2 enclosed per unit 
R-2, R-3 and R-4 Zones 	2 enclosed per unit; plus 1 visitor space per 3 units 
Clubs and Similar Structures with Guestrooms 	2 covered for each 3 guestrooms; 1½ covered for each guestroom with kitchen 
Motels/ Hotels 	1 per room; 2 covered for manager's room if it has kitchen 
Mobile Home/ Trailer parks 	1 on each site; plus 1 for every 2 sites for guest parking 
COMMERCIAL: 	
Outdoor Uses Including Retail Nurseries, Auto, Boat, Trailer Sales 	1 per 1,000 sq. ft. used for open display or sales—if area exceeds 10,000 sq. ft., then 1 space per 5,000 sq. ft. in excess of first 10,000; or 
	1 for each 2 employees on the largest working shift, whichever is greater 
Banks, Businesses, Professional Offices 	1 per 400 sq. ft. gross floor area 
Retail, Personal Service Shops 	1 per 400 sq. ft. gross floor area 
Medical and/or Dental Clinics or Offices 	1 per 200 sq. ft. gross floor area 
Medical or Dental Labs 	1 per 400 sq. ft. gross floor area 
Restaurants With Seating Provided 	1 per each 3 seats; plus 1 per each 400 sq. ft. gross floor area 
"Take-out" Food Businesses With no Seating Provided 	1 for every 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area in building 
INDUSTRIAL: 	
Any Industrial Use Including Warehousing 	a) 1 per 500 sq. ft.; or 
	1 per ½ the employees on the largest shift, whichever is greater: (existing building option: 1 per each employee upon written certification of employ roster submitted annually); plus 
	b) 1 for each vehicle kept in connection with the use 
Public Utilities Excepting Their Business Offices 	No less than 2—1 for each vehicle kept in connection with use: plus 1 for each 2 employees on largest shift 
INSTITUTIONAL: 	
Child Care Centers/Day Care Nurseries 	No less than 3—1 per each full-time employee or adult participant: plus 1 for every 2 part-time employees or adult participants: plus 1 for every 25 children the facility is designed to accommodate 
Children's Homes 	No less than 3—1 for each 2 employees 
Educational Institutions 	Elementary & Intermediate schools: 1 for each classroom & lecture hall 
	High School: 1 for each classroom & lecture hall plus 1 for every 10 students the facility is designed to accommodate 
	Business, Professional Trade Colleges and Universities: 1 for each classroom and lecture hall; plus 1 for each 5 students the facility is designed to accommodate 
Elementary and Intermediate School Auditorium 	1 for each 5 fixed seats; plus 1 for each 35 sq. ft. of general assembly area 
Hospitals 	2 for each patient bed 
Nursing/Convalescent Hospitals, Sanitariums, Rest Homes, Homes for the Aged 	No less than 3, 1 for each 2 resident-employees; plus 1 for each 2 residents and/or patients 
ASSEMBLY: 	
Auditoriums, Theaters, Rodeo, Etc. 	No less than 10 
	1 for each 5 fixed seats; plus 1 for every 35 sq. ft. of area available for seating where there are no fixed seats in main auditorium; plus 1 for every 2 employees 
Mortuaries and Chapels 	1 for each 5 fixed seats and for every 35 sq. ft. of seating area available for assembly in main chapel; plus 1 for each 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area, excluding main chapel 
Churches 	1 for each 5 fixed seats; plus 1 for each 35 sq. ft. of assembly area 
RECREATIONAL USES: 	
Bowling Alleys 	3 per alley 
Dancehalls, Skating rinks 	1 for each 35 sq. ft. of dance floor or rink area; plus 1 for each 5 fixed seats; plus 1 for every 35 sq. ft. of seating area where there are no fixed seats 
Golf Courses (excluding miniature courses or driving ranges) 	10 per hole; plus 1 for each 21 sq. ft. of building floor area used for public assembly 
Swimming Pools, Commercial 	No less than 10, plus 1 for each 1,000 sq. ft. of gross land area; plus 1 for each 2 employees 
Amusement Arcades 	1 for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Billiard/Pool Parlors 	2 for each table 
Racquetball/Tennis/Health Clubs 	1 for each 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Youth Center 	1 for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
 
* See Sections 17.52.070 through 17.52.170 for general regulations and development standards. 
(Prior code § 9246.4)  
17.52.060 - Parking space requirements for uses not specified. 
The requirement for a use not specifically mentioned will be the same as for a use specified which has similar traffic generating characteristics. The planning commission will determine what constitutes a similar use. 
(Prior code § 9246.5)  
17.52.070 - Development standards—Size of parking spaces. 
A.  Residential Zones. All parking spaces required for residential use shall be at least ten feet in width, nor less than twenty feet in depth. The width of each required enclosed parking space may be reduced in order to accommodate columns and end walls where necessary; provided, that no such parking space shall have a width of less than nine feet six inches. 
B.  All Other Zones. The minimum size of a parking space (whether or not required) shall be a width of eight feet and six inches and a length of eighteen feet, with no obstructions allowed. Such spaces shall be striped with double lines spaced six inches apart. 
C.  Each parallel off-street parking space shall have a length of twenty-two feet. 
(Prior code § 9246.6 (A))  
17.52.080 - Development standards—Parking area circulation. 
A.  Minimum aisle widths shall be provided depending upon the angle of the parking spaces they serve. (See Exhibit B at the end of this chapter, parking standards chart.) 
B.  Parking areas and driveways serving five or more dwelling units, and serving any commercial or industrial use shall be arranged to permit traffic to move in and out of parking areas, driveways and ramps without the backing of any vehicle onto a street or highway. 
C.  One-way driveways, ramps and aisles shall have directional markings to indicate one-way circulation. 
D.  Parking areas, driveways, maneuvering aisles, ramps and turnaround areas shall be kept free of obstructions at all times. 
E.  Required parking spaces shall be located a sufficient distance from any access opening onto a warehouse building so as to provide for unobstructed vehicle loading in these areas. 
(Prior code § 9246.6 (B))  
17.52.090 - Development standards—Access driveways. 
A.  Driveways serving parking areas shall have the following widths: 
1.  Parking areas for four or less vehicles, one driveway at least ten feet in width; 
2.  Parking areas for five to eleven vehicles, one driveway at least twelve feet in width; 
3.  Parking areas for twelve or more vehicles, one driveway for entrance, and one driveway for exit, each at least ten feet in width; or a single driveway at least sixteen feet in width; 
4.  Garage door openings serving a single parking space shall be at least eight feet in width. 
B.  Common driveways shall be allowed when proper easement or agreements have been executed and filed with the city. The driveway shall not be more than five hundred feet from the street or alley to the parking area served. 
(Prior code § 9246.6 (C))  
17.52.100 - Development standards—Entrances and exits. 
The location and design of all street or alley entrances and exits to off-street parking facilities shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
(Prior code § 9246.6 (D))  
17.52.110 - Development standards—Vertical clearance. 
A.  Off-street Parking Facilities. Spaces, driveway, maneuvering aisles, turnaround areas and ramps shall have a vertical clearance of at least seven feet for their entire required area. 
B.  The R-3 and R-4 zones shall provide a minimum vertical clearance of fourteen feet for the full required width of all required driveways. 
(Prior code § 9246.6 (E))  
17.52.120 - Development standards—Surfacing. 
A.  All parking spaces, maneuvering areas, turnaround areas and driveways used for access shall be paved with: 
1.  Concrete surfacing to a minimum thickness of three and five-eights inches; expansion joints shall be included as necessary; or 
2.  Asphalt-type surfacing compacted to a minimum thickness of one and one-half inches, laid over a base of crushed rock, gravel or similar material compacted to a minimum thickness of three inches. 
B.  Such surfacing shall be designed, constructed and maintained so as to dispose of all surface water. In no case shall such drainage be allowed to flow over or across public sidewalks. 
(Prior code § 9246.6 (F))  
17.52.130 - Development standards—Striping and marking. 
All parking spaces shall be striped with double lines spaced six inches apart. (C and M zones). 
(Prior code § 9246.6 (G))  
17.52.140 - Development standards—Wheel stops. 
Every parking space that is not separated by a fence or wall from any street or alley property line upon which it abuts, and every parking space which fronts a building wall or fence with no separation between the front end of the parking space and the wall or fence, shall be provided with a suitable concrete wheel stop or curb barrier not less than two feet from such street or alley, wall or fence property line. Such wheel stop or curb barrier shall be securely installed and maintained. 
(Prior code § 9246.6 (H))  
17.52.150 - Development standards—Landscaping. 
A.  The design, development and maintenance of all landscaping required by the development standards shall be subject to approval of the city planner. 
B.  All landscaping provided in conjunction with the development of parking facilities serving commercial and manufacturing zoned properties shall be surrounded by a continuous six inch concrete curb. 
(Prior code § 9246.6 (I))  
17.52.160 - Development standards—Screening. 
A.  In any zone, except zones R-1 and R-2, where parking spaces, driveways, maneuvering aisles or turnaround areas are located adjacent to and within fifty feet of any property line separating the site from any public street, the following screening techniques shall be used (See Exhibit 17.52.160). 
1.  A solid masonry wall, between two and three feet in height, shall be constructed and maintained parallel to and not nearer than five feet to such property line; or 
2.  A solar screen type decorative masonry wall or combination solid masonry wall and decorative masonry wall between two and three feet in height shall be constructed and maintained at such property line with a minimum continuous six-inch solid concrete curb located parallel to and not nearer than five feet to such property line; or minimum continuous six-inch solid concrete curb located parallel to and not nearer than five feet to such property line; or minimum continuous six-inch solid concrete curb located parallel to and not nearer than five feet to such property line; or 
3.  An earthen mound between one and two feet in height and four feet in width, upon which landscaping shall be installed and permitted to grow to a maximum height of three feet. The mounded area shall be surrounded by a minimum continuous six-inch high solid concrete curb. 
B.  In all cases the minimum five-foot setback distance shall be developed and maintained with suitable landscaping and irrigation. Development plans indicating the quantity, type and location of landscaping shall be submitted and be subject to the approval of the city planner. 
C.  The maximum height of the screen walls mentioned herein may be increased on properties in the M zone where higher walls or fences are required for enclosure of outdoor storage areas. 
D.  Every parking area for five or more cars which abuts an R zone shall be screened by a decorative masonry wall (or nondecorative wall with landscaping). No wall is required if the elevation of the parking area is six feet below the elevation of the residential property along the common property line. 
(Prior code § 9246.6 (J)) 
EXHIBIT 17.52.160 
SCREENING 
   
17.52.170 - Development standards—Signs. 
Where required for public safety, appropriate exit, entrance and directional signs shall be erected in the manner prescribed by the city engineer. (See Chapter 17.62 of this code for sign regulations.) 
(Prior code § 9246.6 (K))  
17.52.180 - Plot plans. 
A.  A plot plan for any proposed parking area shall be submitted subject to the approval of the city planner at the time of an application for a building permit for any building or structure for which the parking area is to be used. Where no building permit is required, such plot plan shall be submitted prior to use and occupancy of such parking facilities. The plan shall clearly indicate the proposed development, including location, size, shape, design, curb cuts, lighting, landscaping and other features of the proposed parking facilities. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, where the city planner finds, from an examination of an application for a building permit, that a proposed off-street parking facility or use, would or could cause a traffic hazard or unreasonable congestion in the flow of such traffic upon the subject property, or on any public street or alley adjacent to the property upon which such parking facility or use is proposed to be located, she/he shall refuse to approve such plan. The city planner shall, within one working day after such determination, notify the building official of such action. The building official shall refuse to approve any building permit for any building or structure proposed to be used in conjunction with such parking facilities. The building official shall, within five days of receipt of such notice from the city planner, advise the applicant of the action taken, and the reason therefor. The notice shall be by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the last known address. 
C.  The city planner's decision shall be final, unless within thirty days after the mailing of such notice, the applicant appeals the city planner's decision to the planning commission, by filing a written letter of appeal with the secretary of the commission, who shall set the same for hearing upon the next most convenient agenda of the planning commission. The secretary of the planning commission shall give the applicant at least five working days' written notice of the time and place of hearing. 
D.  At the time of such hearing, the planning commission shall permit the applicant a reasonable opportunity to be heard. The planning commission shall also consider any applicable staff report, in order to determine whether the proposed parking facilities or use, will or might create or cause a traffic hazard, or unreasonable congestion of the traffic flow upon adjacent public street or alleys. The burden of proof to show that such conditions do not exist shall be upon the applicant. 
E.  The planning commission's decision shall be final in the absence of an appeal to the city council in the time and manner described in Chapter 17.78 of this code. 
F.  In case of such appeal, the city council shall conduct a hearing, and determine the case in the same manner as that prescribed herein with reference to the planning commission. 
(Prior code § 9246.7)  
17.52.190 - Setbacks and useable areas. 
Parking areas shall be located on a lot only where main or accessory buildings are permitted, excluding land within the rights-of-way of a proposed street or highway or within the planned ultimate right-of-way width of a street or highway. All ramps, structures, parking or loading facilities shall be designed and constructed to meet ultimate highway, street and alley construction. 
(Prior code § 9246.8)  
17.52.200 - Location of parking facilities. 
Off-street parking facilities shall be located as follows. Where a distance is specified, such distance shall be the walking distance measured from the nearest point of the parking facility to the nearest point of the building that the facility is to serve: 
A.  For dwelling units, parking facilities shall be on the same lot or building site as the dwelling unit; 
B.  For hospitals, sanitariums, homes for the aged, asylums, orphanages, roominghouses, lodginghouses, club rooms, fraternity and sorority houses, not more than one hundred fifty feet from the buildings they are required to serve; 
C.  For retail, commercial, office and assembly uses, not more than three hundred feet from the building they serve; 
D.  For use other than those specified in subsections A, B and C of this section, not over one thousand feet from the building they serve, except as provided herein. 
(Prior code § 9246.9)  
17.52.210 - Computing parking for mixed occupancies in a building. 
In the case of mixed uses in a building or on a lot, the total required number of off-street parking spaces shall be the sum of the requirements for the various uses. 
(Prior code § 9246.10)  
17.52.220 - Common facilities. 
Common parking facilities serving more than one use may be provided in lieu of individual requirements, but such facilities shall be approved by the city planner, as to size, shape and relationship to business sites to be served. 
The total of such off-street parking spaces shall not be less than the number required for various uses. 
(Prior code § 9246.11)  
17.52.230 - Computation of required parking spaces. 
A.  Consideration of Fractional Remainders. Where calculation of the number of spaces required results in a fractional number, any fraction equaling one-half or more shall be rounded to the next higher whole number. 
B.  Parking in Buildings: 
1.  Where required parking computations are based on floor area, floor space devoted to parking within the building shall not be included in this computation. 
2.  Covered sheds with open side walls shall be deemed to be enclosed buildings for purposes of this subsection, when the same are used only for lumber storage, loading docks, hay barns, pipe or metal storage, or any similar use. 
C.  Loading Spaces: 
1.  Required spaces. 
Gross Floor Area (square feet) 	Required Spaces 
6001 — 10,000 	1 
10,001 — 20,000 	2 
20,001 — 50,000 	3 
50,001 — 100,000 	4 
100,001 — 200,000 	5 
Each additional 100,000, or fraction thereof 	1 
 
2.  Size. Each off-street loading space shall be not less than twelve feet in width and thirty feet in length and fifteen feet in height. Where four or more spaces are required, one-quarter (twenty-five percent) of the spaces shall have a minimum width of fourteen feet and a minimum length of sixty feet. Loading facilities shall be designed such that the largest anticipated trucks shall not (when loading or unloading) extend into parking or back-up and maneuvering area for required parking. 
3.  Location. Off-street loading facilities shall be located and designed so that the largest anticipated vehicles shall not encroach into public sidewalks, streets or required driveways in the course of loading or unloading goods. 
D.  Handicap Accessible Parking Spaces. The size and location of handicap accessible parking spaces shall be provided in a manner consistent with applicable state statutes. 
(Ord. 2193 § 5(d), 1999; prior code § 9246.12)  
17.52.240 - Joint use parking. 
The planning commission may authorize the joint use of parking facilities by the following type of uses under the following conditions: 
A.  Up to fifty percent of the parking facilities used primarily for a daytime use may be provided by the parking facilities used primarily for a nighttime and/or Sunday use. The reverse is also true: up to fifty percent of the parking facilities used primarily for a nighttime and/or Sunday use may be provided by the parking facilities used primarily for a daytime use. 
B.  Up to one hundred percent of the parking facilities required herein for a church or for an auditorium incidental to an educational institution may be supplied by parking facilities used primarily for daytime use. 
C.  Conditions Required for Joint Use. 
1.  The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principle operating hours of the buildings or uses for which the joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed. 
2.  Parties concerned in the joint use of off-street parking facilities shall show legal agreement for such joint use. The agreement, when approved as conforming to the provisions hereof shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder and copies filed with the city. 
(Prior code § 9246.13)  
17.52.250 - Ownership of parking facilities. 
Property on which required parking facilities are established shall be: 
A.  Under the same ownership as the lots or parcels or land containing the use or uses to be served: or 
B.  When required parking facilities are located on a lot which is not in the same or joint ownership as the lot containing the use or uses to be served, the affected property owner(s) shall show agreement for the use of such property by a legal document approved by the city attorney. Such agreement shall provide that if the same is terminated, the use served by the parking facilities shall also be terminated if other adequate parking facilities are not provided. 
(Prior code § 9246.14)  
17.52.260 - Maintenance of parking facilities. 
A.  All parking areas shall be kept clean and free of dust, mud or trash. Parking areas shall be used only for the purposes of parking vehicles. Where landscaping is provided within or along parking areas, adequate irrigation and maintenance shall be provided. 
B.  Striping, marking, directional signs, lighting, screening and all other improvements required by this title shall be adequately maintained. 
(Prior code § 9246.15)  
17.52.270 - Parking districts. 
Properties which are included in a planned comprehensive parking district, formed under a special assessment district proceeding, shall be exempted from the provisions hereof under the following circumstances: 
A.  That the planning commission shall conduct a public hearing with notice in the same manner as variances or conditional use permits (See Chapter 17.78 of this code, public hearings); and 
B.  That at the public hearing the commission shall determine and recommend to the council whether or not the district should be formed, based upon the following: 
1.  Whether the public interest, convenience and necessity so requires, and 
2.  Whether the district, as established, will substantially comply with the purpose and intent hereof, and 
3.  Whether the exemption, if granted, should be conditional to insure that the purpose and intent of the provisions hereof are met. 
C.  Upon receipt of a recommendation by the planning commission, the city council shall conduct a hearing in the same manner as that held by the planning commission, and shall determine whether the exemption from the provisions hereof should be granted, it shall have the authority and power to grant the exemption, with conditions, if necessary, to insure that there is compliance with the provisions hereof, and to insure compatibility of the physical facilities with surrounding and adjacent properties and uses. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, a limitation upon the extent to which the construction of new buildings and structures, or the reconstruction or expansion of existing buildings or structures located on the lots included in the district shall be permitted. 
(Prior code § 9246.16)  
17.52.280 - Tandem, stacked, valet and/or attended parking. 
A.  Tandem, stacked, valet and attended off-street parking are subject to approval of a parking management plan by the planning commission. 
B.  The planning commission may allow the off-street parking supply requirements of this chapter to be met through approval of the following types of tandem or stacked off-street parking for a commercial and/or industrial use of an existing building through a parking management plan (Section 17.52.310), provided that no fee is charged to the users of such alternative methods for meeting the off-street parking requirements of this chapter: 
1.  Employee-only parking (when tandem spaces are assigned to employees of the same business); 
2.  Attended parking for medical-oriented businesses or other uses approved by the planning commission; 
3.  Valet parking for uses such as restaurants or other uses approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 2193 § 5(a), 1999: prior code § 9246.17 (A))  
17.52.290 - Parking charges. 
The parking of motor vehicles shall be without monetary charge when such parking is required in conjunction with uses permitted hereby. 
(Prior code § 9246.17 (B))  
17.52.300 - Storage of vehicles prohibited. 
The parking facilities required hereby shall be only for the temporary parking of vehicles used in conjunction with the uses they serve. 
(Prior code § 9246.17 (C))  
17.52.310 - Parking management plan. 
Application for a parking management plan shall be submitted by the property owner, the owner of an existing or proposed business on the site, or an authorized agent thereof, to the planning commission on a form provided for that purpose by the city. Such an application shall be submitted to the planning department accompanied by the required filing fees in an amount established by resolution of the city council. Such applications shall be considered and may be approved or approved with conditions by the planning commission subsequent to conducting a public hearing consistent with the procedures contained in Chapter 17.78 of this code. 
A.  Application. The following shall be submitted as a part of the application: 
1.  A completed application on a form provided for this purpose by the planning department; and 
2.  A narrative which explains in detail the intent and operation of the parking management plan, and including information on the hours of operation for the applicant business and the building, the terms of any parking attendant agreement, any provisions for monitoring implementation of the plan, and any other relevant information. 
3.  Seventeen copies of the following: 
a.  A fully dimensioned and detailed plot plan of the subject site indicating the location and dimensions of all existing and proposed off-street parking areas; and 
b.  Any other material the director of planning may deem necessary to accurately describe the proposal to the planning commission. 
B.  Findings. A parking management plan may be approved or conditionally approved by the planning commission only if the following findings can be made: 
1.  The proposed use is consistent with the general plan, any applicable specific plans, and the general intent of the zoning code; 
2.  The surrounding properties will not be adversely affected by approval of the proposed parking management plan; and 
3.  The proposed parking management plan is appropriate for the proposed land use; and 
4.  That adequate off-street parking for customers, clients, visitors, and employees will be available for the proposed land use; and 
5.  The parking management plan includes provisions for periodic monitoring by the city to identify any problems associated with implementation of the plan and to adjust the plan as necessary. Any costs to the city incurred as a result of such monitoring shall be paid by the property owner upon request of the city. 
(Ord. 2193 § 5(b), 1999)  
17.52.320 - Parking reduction for alternate modes of transportation. 
In conjunction with approval of a parking management plan, the planning commission may authorize a reduction in the number of required off-street parking spaces when trip reduction and travel demand measures are provided for any business seeking to occupy an existing building. The applicant shall document the mode(s) of transportation to be used by each employee (to be updated on an annual basis), and that the available supply of off-street parking for the applicant business will be adequate to meet the demand for such parking without imposing any fee for the use of such parking. 
A.  Application Form, Filing Fee. Application for such a reduction in the required supply of off-street parking shall be made by the property owner, or the business owner of an existing or proposed business on the site, or by an authorized agent thereof, to the planning commission on a form provided for that purpose by the city. Such application shall be submitted to the planning department accompanied by filing fees in an amount established by resolution by the city council. 
B.  Additional Submittal Requirements. In addition to the parking management plan submittal requirements, the following shall be submitted as a part of the application for a parking reduction based on documenting modes of employee transportation: 
1.  A fully dimensioned and detailed plot plan of the subject site indicating the location of all existing and proposed parking; 
2.  A narrative describing alternative modes of transportation to be used by each employee, the permanency of such modes, the extent of the program, and other pertinent information; 
3.  Other material the director of planning may deem necessary to accurately describe the proposal to the planning commission. 
(Ord. 2193 § 5(c), 1999) 
EXHIBIT A 
MINIMUM TURNING RADII 
  
PART A - MINIMUM TURNING RADII 
R 1 Minimum turning radius 24 feet outside front bumper. 
r 2 Minimum turning radius 14 feet inside rear wheel. 
EXHIBIT B 
STANDARDS CHART - 8'6? × 18' SPACES 
N 
Parking angle in Degrees 	P 
Width of parking section in Lin. Ft. 	S 
Depth of stall in Lin. Ft. 	a 
Width of aisle in Lin. Ft. 	C 
Curb length per car in Lin. Ft. 	P' 
Width of parking section in Lin. Ft. 	S' 
Depth of stall in Lin. Ft. 
0 	29' 	20' 	12'0? 	20' 	29' 	8'6? 
30 	44'8? 	16'4? 	12'0? 	17'0? 	37'4? 	12'8? 
35 	47'6? 	17'3? 	12'0? 	14'10? 	39'7? 	13'10? 
40 	49'2? 	18'1? 	13'0? 	13'4? 	42'8? 	14'10? 
45 	51'6? 	18'9? 	14'0? 	12'0? 	45'6? 	15'9? 
50 	53'6? 	19'3? 	15'0? 	11'1? 	48'0? 	16'6? 
55 	55'3? 	19'7? 	16'0? 	10'5? 	50'4? 	17'2? 
60 	57'8? 	19'10? 	18'0? 	9'10? 	53'5? 	17'9? 
65 	59'10? 	19'11? 	20'0? (1) 	9'5? 	56'2? 	18'1? 
70 	60'8? 	19'10? 	21'0? (1) 	9'1? 	57'9? 	18'4? 
75 	61'2? 	19'7? 	22'0? (1) 	8'10? 	59'0? 	18'6? 
80 	61'5? 	19'2? 	23'0? (1) 	8'8? 	59'2? 	18'4? 
85 	61'4? 	18'8? 	24'0? (2) 	8'6? 	60'7? 	18'4? 
90 	60'0? 	18'0? 	24'0? (2) 	8'6? 	60'0? 	18'0? 
 
PARALLEL, ANGLE AND RIGHT ANGLE PARKING— OVERLAPPED AND HERRINGBONE 
  
(1) Width of aisle permits two-way circulation only when a turnaround is provided. 
(2) Width of aisle permits two-way circulation. 
EXHIBIT C 
DIAGRAMS 
8½' × 18' SPACES—8½' × 20' SPACES 
  
  
  
  
  
  
EXHIBIT D 
RAMPS AND RAMP GRADES 
  
  
NOTE: 
1. Ramp profiles shall be submitted as part of parking plan. 
2. Public sidewalk will not be modified to accommodate blend. 
3. Ample pedestrian and vehicular sight distance shall be maintained. 
4. Short ramps, under 65' in length shall not exceed a maximum slope of 16% with a 10' blend.  
Chapter 17.53 - TRIP REDUCTION AND TRAVEL DEMAND MEASURES 
 
17.53.010 - Definitions. 
The following words or phrases shall have the following meanings when used with respect to this chapter. 
"Alternative transportation" means the use of modes of transportation other than the single passenger motor vehicle, including but not limited to carpools, vanpools, buspools, public transit, walking and bicycling. 
"Applicable development" means any development project that is determined to meet or exceed the project size threshold criteria contained in Section 17.53.020. 
"Buspool" means a vehicle carrying sixteen or more passengers commuting on a regular basis to and from work with a fixed route, according to a fixed schedule. 
"Carpool" means a vehicle carrying two to six persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis. 
"The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)" means the Public Resource Code 21000 et seq. which requires all government agencies in the state of California to evaluate the extent of any environmental adverse impact posed by proposed development. 
"Developer" means the builder who is responsible for the planning, design and construction of an applicable development project. A developer may be responsible for implementing the provisions of this chapter as determined by the property owner. 
"Development" means the construction or addition of new building square footage. Additions to buildings which existed prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter and which exceed the thresholds defined in Section 17.53.020 shall comply with the applicable requirements but shall not be added cumulatively with existing square footage; existing square footage shall be exempt from these requirements. All calculations shall be based on gross square footage. 
"Director" means the director of planning. 
"Preferential parking" means parking spaces designated or assigned, through use of a sign or painted space markings for carpool and vanpool vehicles carrying commute passengers on a regular basis that are provided in a location more convenient to a place of employment than parking spaces provided for single-occupant vehicles. 
"Property owner" means the legal owner of a development who serves as the lessor to a tenant. The property owner shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of the ordinance either directly or by delegating such responsibility as appropriate to a tenant and/or his agent. 
"South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD)" is the regional authority appointed by the California State Legislature to meet federal standards and otherwise improve the air quality in the South Coast Air Basin (the non-desert portions of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside and San Bernardino Counties). 
"Tenant" means the lessee of facility space at an applicable development project. 
"Transportation demand management (TDM)" means the alteration of travel behavior, usually on the part of commuters, through programs of incentives, services, and policies. TDM addresses alternatives to single-occupant vehicles such as carpooling and vanpooling, and changes in work schedules that move trips out of the peak period or eliminate them altogether (as is the case in telecommuting or compressed work weeks). 
"Trip reduction" means reduction in the number of work-related trips made by single-occupant vehicles. 
"Vanpool" means a vehicle carrying seven or more persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis, usually in a vehicle with a seating arrangement designed to carry seven to fifteen adult passengers, and on a prepaid subscription basis. 
"Vehicle" means any motorized form of transportation, including but not limited to automobiles, vans, buses and motorcycles. 
(Ord. 2079 § 3 (part), 1993: prior code § 9246.18)  
17.53.020 - Transportation demand and trip reduction measures. 
Prior to approval of any development project, the applicant shall make provisions for, at a minimum, all of the following applicable transportation demand management and trip reduction measures. This section shall not apply to projects for which development application has been deemed "complete" by the city of pursuant to Government Code Section 65943, or for which a notice of preparation for a draft EIR has been circulated or for which an application for a building permit has been received, prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. All facilities and improvements constructed or otherwise required shall be maintained in a state of good repair. 
A.  Development Standards—Twenty-Five Thousand Square Feet or More. Nonresidential development of twenty-five thousand square feet or more of building floor area shall provide the following to the satisfaction of the city: A bulletin board, display case or kiosk displaying transportation information located where the greatest number of employees are likely to see it. Information in the area shall include, but is not limited to, the following: 
a.  Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit routes serving the site; 
b.  Telephone numbers for referrals on transportation information including numbers for the regional ridesharing agency and local transit operators; 
c.  Ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuter-oriented organizations; 
d.  Bicycle route and facility information, including regional/local bicycle maps and bicycle safety information; 
e.  A listing of facilities available for carpoolers, vanpoolers, bicyclists, transit riders and pedestrians at the site. 
B.  Development Standards—Fifty Thousand Square Feet or More. Nonresidential development of fifty thousand square feet or more of building floor area shall comply with subsection A of this section and shall provide all of the following measures to the satisfaction of the city: 
1.  Not less than three percent of the total number of required parking in commercial projects; eight and one-half percent of the total number of required parking in office/professional projects; and nine percent of the total number of required parking in wholesale, warehouse, industrial and manufacturing projects shall be located as close as is practical to the employee entrance(s), and shall be reserved for use by potential carpool/vanpool vehicles, without displacing handicapped and customer parking needs. This preferential carpool/vanpool parking area shall be identified on the site plan upon application for building permit, to the satisfaction of the city. A statement that preferential carpool/vanpool spaces for employees are available and a description of the method for obtaining such spaces must be included on the required transportation information board. Spaces will be signed/ striped as demand warrants; provided that at all times at least one space for projects of fifty thousand square feet to one hundred thousand square feet and two spaces for projects over one hundred thousand square feet will be signed/striped for carpool/vanpool vehicles. 
2.  Preferential parking spaces reserved for vanpools must be accessible to vanpool vehicles. When located within a parking structure, a minimum vertical interior clearance of seven feet two inches shall be provided for those spaces and accessways to be used by such vehicles. Adequate turning radii and parking space dimensions shall also be included in vanpool parking areas. 
3.  Bicycle racks or other secure bicycle parking shall be provided to accommodate four bicycles per the first fifty thousand square feet of nonresidential development and one bicycle per each additional fifty thousand square feet of nonresidential development. Calculations which result in a fraction of .5 or higher shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. A bicycle parking facility may also be a fully enclosed space or locker accessible only to the owner or operator of the bicycle, which protects the bike from inclement weather. Specific facilities and location (e.g., provision of racks, lockers, or locked room) shall be to the satisfaction of the city. 
C.  Development Standards—One Hundred Thousand Square Feet or More. Residential development of one hundred thousand square feet or more of building floor shall comply with subsections A and B of this section, and shall provide all of the following measures to the satisfaction of the city. 
1.  A safe and convenient zone in which vanpool and carpool vehicles may deliver or board their passengers; 
2.  Sidewalks or other designated pathways following direct and safe routes from the external pedestrian circulation system to each building in the development; 
3.  If determined necessary by the city to mitigate the project impact, bus stop improvements must be provided. The city will consult with the local bus service providers in determining appropriate improvements. When locating bus stops and/or planning building entrances, entrances must be designed to provide safe and efficient access to nearby transit stations/stops; 
4.  Safe and convenient access from the external circulation system to bicycle parking facilities onsite. 
(Ord. 2079 § 3 (part), 1993: prior code § 9246.19)  
17.53.030 - Enforcement and monitoring. 
The city shall use the following methods to enforce compliance with Section 17.53.020. 
A.  Certificate of Occupancy. Where a TDM measure is required, that information shall be included on the building or site plan and a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued by the building official until compliance with the TDM ordinance is verified by the director. 
B.  Stop-Work Order. Where a TDM measure is to be implemented during site preparation or building construction, nonimplementation or other violation of the ordinance shall result in either notification of the violation by the director or a stop-work order issued by the building official until compliance is achieved. 
C.  Subsequent Violations. Violation of an approved TDM measure subsequent to building completion and occupancy shall result in one or more of the following actions: 
1.  Written notification and demand for correction of the violation by the director; 
2.  Prosecution by the city attorney; 
3.  A lien against the real property subject to the violation in the amount necessary to correct the violation. 
(Ord. 2079 § 3 (part), 1993: prior code § 9246.20)  
Chapter 17.54 - NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES 
 
17.54.010 - Purpose. 
Within the districts established by this title or amendments that may be adopted in the future, there are uses, buildings and structures that were lawful before this title was amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the ordinance as now in force. The following regulations permit the reasonable continuation of these uses, buildings and structures, but also eliminate them under certain circumstances over a period of time. 
(Prior code § 9247)  
17.54.020 - Alteration, addition or enlargement prohibited. 
Each nonconforming use, building and structure may be used and maintained, provided there is no alteration, addition or enlargement to any such use, building or structure, except as otherwise provided herein, or as specified as a condition of approval granted in accordance to Section 17.54.090, 17.54.110 or 17.54.120 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2167 § 5, 1997: prior code § 9247.1)  
17.54.030 - Limitation on other uses. 
So long as a nonconforming use, building or structure exists upon any lot, no new use, building or structure may be established or constructed, except as provided herein, or as specified as a condition of approval granted in accordance to Section 17.54.090, 17.54.110 or 17.54.120 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2167 § 6, 1997: prior code § 9247.2)  
17.54.040 - Nonconforming buildings and structures. 
The following section applies to all nonconforming buildings and structures. (See Chapter 17.08 of this code, Definitions.) 
A.  Conforming Buildings. This section shall not place any limitation upon reconstruction, repair or remodeling by the property owner where the building or structure is conforming but the use is not. 
B.  Nonconformity—Termination and Abatement. 
1.  Termination. Nonconforming buildings and structures may continue in all zones unless any of the following occurs: 
a.  The nonconforming building or structure has been removed or demolished (that is, more than fifty percent of the exterior walls are removed) for any reason except as provided in subsection C of this section; 
b.  There is a change from a nonconforming use to a conforming use; or 
c.  There is an increase or enlargement of the area, space or volume of the building, structure or land devoted to the nonconforming use, except as provided here. 
2.  Abatement By Operation of Law. Nonconforming buildings and structures shall be abated, and usage shall be terminated upon the expiration of the periods of time indicated hereafter in this subdivision. The period of time shall begin on the date that such use, building or structure first became nonconforming by reason of the provisions of the zoning regulations of the city: 
a.  The nonconforming building or structure has been abandoned for six months or more; or 
b.  A nonconforming building or structure housing a nonconforming use: five years; or 
c.  Nonconforming buildings or structures shall be abated, and the usage terminated, within the periods of time as herein set forth, based on the type of construction as defined in the building regulations of the city, as follows: 
i.  Type IV and type V buildings per 1985 Uniform Building Code (light incombustible frame and wood frame buildings and structures): thirty-five years; and 
ii.  Type III buildings per 1985 Uniform Building Code (heavy timber construction and ordinary masonry buildings and structures): forty years; and 
iii.  Type I and type II buildings per 1985 Uniform Building Code (fire resistive, including, but not limited to, concrete buildings and structures): fifty years; and 
iv.  Metal buildings: five years. 
C.  Repair, Maintenance, Addition, Alteration and Replacement. The provisions apply to all nonconforming buildings and structures. 
1.  Ordinary Repaired Maintenance. The ordinary repair and maintenance of a nonconforming commercial or industrial building in any zone, or a residential building in a commercial or industrial zone, is permitted and encouraged; provided, that the cost does not exceed fifteen percent in any twelve-month period, of the fair market value of the building or structure at the commencement of rehabilitation. 
2.  Eminent Domain. Where a portion of a nonconforming building or structure is taken for any public use by any agency having the power of eminent domain, the building or structure may be repaired, reconstructed or remodeled. The repair, reconstruction or remodeling must be limited to rendering the building safe for continued use. 
3.  Partial Destruction. If a nonconforming building or structure is damaged or partially destroyed, it may be restored to the condition in which it existed immediately prior to the occurrence of such casualty; provided, that the total reconstruction cost does not exceed thirty-seven percent of the fair market value of the building or structure. In addition, all such construction and/or repair work shall be completed within a period of one year from the date of the occurrence of the casualty. For the purposes of this section, units under condominium ownership that are located in one building will be considered as separate units. 
4.  Elimination of Nonconformity. Alterations and/or additions shall be permitted in order to render the building or structure in conformity with the provisions of this title. 
5.  Compliance with Laws. In order to comply with any law, other than zoning regulations, enacted after the adoption of the provisions hereof, alterations and/or additions shall be permitted. 
6.  No Extension of Termination Date. Accomplishment of any work permitted pursuant to this section shall not extend the termination date of the nonconforming use, building or structure. 
D.  Nonconforming Buildings or Structures—Provisions for Each Zone. In addition to the preceding, the following provisions provide regulations by zone for nonconforming buildings and structures, regardless of whether or not such building or structure is the primary structure on the site: 
1.  Residential Zones. 
a.  Repair, Maintenance, Addition, Alteration and Replacement. The aforementioned work on nonconforming buildings and structures is permitted under the following conditions: 
i.  Any nonconforming dwelling unit, which is nonconforming solely by reason of deficient off-street parking facilities (see Chapter 17.52 of this code for the off-street parking requirements chart); provided, that the number of dwelling units on the lot does not increase. In addition, such construction or reconstruction can not result in any portion of a building or structure being located on the only portion of the lot physically available for required off-street parking facilities or access thereto or any required yard or open space area; or 
ii.  Where a second unit is a legal nonconforming structure, and the primary unit is conforming, additions and alterations to the primary unit may be allowed, subject to a scheduled review and approval by the planning commission. The primary unit shall be the largest unit, or in case both units are the same size, the front unit shall be considered primary. 
iii.  Any building which is rendered legal nonconforming by the adoption of the residential development standards on April 28, 1986, and which is totally destroyed by fire, earthquake or other calamity beyond the control of the owner, may be reconstructed with the same number of dwelling units it had prior to such fire, earthquake or other calamity; provided, that as reconstructed it shall comply with all other building and zoning ordinance requirements. 
iv.  The ordinary repair and maintenance of a nonconforming residential building in a residential zone shall be permitted under the following limitations; provided, that in no case shall the structure be altered to expand the use or increase the nonconformity: 
(A)  No limit shall be placed on work which would improve the health and life safety features of the building. The health and life safety related work shall be defined as that necessary to meet the city's adopted building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, fire and health codes. 
(B)  The cost of the nonhealth and safety related repairs and maintenance in any twelve-month period shall be limited to thirty-seven percent of the fair market value of the building or structure prior to the commencement of rehabilitation. 
b.  Nonconformity—Yard Areas. If a nonconforming building or structure is nonconforming because of a failure to observe required yard areas, the same may be altered or added to so long as the addition or enlargement will not encroach into required setback area more than the existing encroachment of the building, except that: 
i.  In no event shall the addition or enlargement be closer than three feet to the internal side or rear lot line; and 
ii.  In no event shall any addition or enlargement be made into the front setback or side setback, except to enclose an existing porch, or to add an enclosed entryway; provided, that the enclosure does not encroach into the front setback or side street setback more than the existing encroachment of the facade closest to the right-of-way; and 
iii.  In all other respects such additions or alterations shall conform to all other required yard and open space requirements (for required yard areas, see residential development standards and minimum setback requirements Exhibits, Chapters 17.10 through 17.20 of this code); and 
iv.  Nonconforming Fencing. If a fence in a residential zone is nonconforming and is damaged or partially destroyed to the point where the total reconstruction cost exceeds twenty-five percent of the existing fence, the fence must be completely removed or replaced with a conforming fence at the proper setbacks. 
2.  Commercial and Industrial Zones. Alteration, enlargement and replacement of nonconforming buildings and structures are permitted under the following conditions: 
a.  Nonconformity—Parking Facilities. Such work shall be permitted for any building or structure which is nonconforming solely with respect to its existing parking facilities in accordance with the following: 
i.  If the total cost of such work to be performed exceeds thirty-seven percent of the fair market value of the building, then parking for the entire building as altered should be provided per Section 17.52.050. 
ii.  If the total cost of the work to be performed is less than or equal to thirty-seven percent of the fair market value of the building, and no additional parking spaces would otherwise be required for such work, then no additional parking spaces are required. 
iii.  If the total cost of the work performed is less than or equal to thirty-seven percent of the fair market value of the building, and such work would in itself require an additional number of parking spaces, then the minimum number of spaces shall be the greater of the following up to the number of spaces which would make the building as altered conform to Section 17.52.050: 
(A)  Seventy-five percent of the already existing number of spaces in the parking facility; or 
(B)  The number of spaces required for the alteration or enlargement. 
b.  Fee In Lieu of Parking. In lieu of providing the number of spaces required by subsection D(2)(a) of this section and upon application by the property owner, the city may, at its discretion, accept payment of fees or alternative methods to provide for the required parking off-site; provided, that such alternative is determined to be feasible and substantially equivalent to the provision of parking on-site. 
c.  Decorative Facade. If a building or structure is nonconforming solely due to lack of a decorative facade, any addition, alteration or replacement in excess of fifteen percent of the fair market value in any twelve-month period will require that the building be made to conform with all provisions of this code. 
(Ord. 2047 §§ 5 and 6, 1991: prior code § 9247.3)  
17.54.050 - Nonconforming uses. 
The following section applies to all nonconforming uses (see Chapter 17.08 of this code, Definitions) regardless of whether or not such use occupies whole or part of a lot or space. 
A.  Abandonment and Termination. Nonconforming uses may continue in all zones unless any of the following conditions occur: 
1.  There is a change from one use to a different use, or 
2.  There is an increase or enlargement of the area, space or volume of the building, structure or land devoted to the nonconforming use, except as provided here; or 
B.  Abatement by Operation of Law. Nonconforming buildings, uses and structures shall be abated, and usage shall be terminated, upon the expiration of the periods of time indicated hereafter in this subsection. The period of time shall begin on the date that such use, building or structure first became nonconforming by reason of the provisions of the zoning regulations of the city. 
1.  The nonconforming use has been abandoned for six months or more, or 
2.  Where the property is unimproved or paved; one year, or 
3.  Where the property is unimproved or paved, except for structures of a type for which the building code does not require a building permit, or which contain less than four hundred square feet of gross floor area: three years, or 
4.  A nonconforming use housed in a nonconforming building or structure shall be terminated within five years, or 
5.  A nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure: twenty years, except for such uses which are nonconforming solely by reason of a lack of off-street parking facilities. 
(Prior code § 9247.4)  
17.54.060 - Exemptions and exceptions. 
A.  Change of Use. A permitted use which is nonconforming only because it does not meet the requirements of the standards of development for that zone or the off-street parking requirements may be changed to a similar or less intense use permitted in the zone. No change of use shall extend the termination date for the original nonconforming use. 
B.  Buildings or Structures Under Construction. Any building or structure for which a building permit has been issued, and is in force prior to the operative date of any amendment to the provisions of this title which has the effect of rendering the building or structure nonconforming, may be completed and used; provided, that it is completed in accordance with the plans and specifications upon which the building permit was issued. The building permit must be validly issued and remain unrevoked and unexpired. 
C.  Existing Variances and Conditional Use Permits. No use, building or structure shall be defined as nonconforming for the purpose hereof, where it was previously authorized by a zone variance or conditional use permit, so long as the use, building or structure conforms with the terms and conditions of the variance or permit. The variance or permit must be validly issued and remain unrevoked and unexpired. 
D.  Public Utilities Exempted. The previous provisions hereof concerning the required removal of nonconforming buildings and uses, and the reconstruction of nonconforming buildings partially destroyed, shall not apply to public utility buildings and structures when such buildings and structures pertain directly to the rendering of the service or distribution of a utility, nor shall any provision hereof be applied so as to prevent the expansion, modernization or replacement of such public utility buildings, structures, equipment and features used directly for the delivery or distribution of the service. 
E.  Public Acquisition. Whenever any lot, building or any structure is rendered nonconforming within the meaning of this code by reason of a reduction in a required yard area, lot area or reduction in off-street parking facilities occurring by reason of 
(1)  Dedication to, or purchase by the city for any public purpose, or 
(2)  Eminent domain proceedings, the same shall be considered as conforming to the same extent as prior to the dedication or eminent domain proceedings; provided, that if the buildings and/or structures located on the lot are partially destroyed after such acquisition so that the reconstruction cost would exceed more than fifty percent of the fair market value of such building or structure, such reconstruction shall not take place unless compliance is had with Chapter 17.52 of this code, Off-Street Parking. 
F.  Nonconforming Uses in Conforming Buildings. A nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure which is nonconforming exclusively by reason of an inadequate number of off-street parking spaces shall conform to all of the provisions of this code, including, but not limited to, the off-street parking requirements hereof: 
1.  Where such building or structure is partially destroyed within the meaning of Section 17.54.040(C)(3); or 
2.  Where such nonconforming use is terminated as described in Section 17.54.050 (A) and (B). 
(Prior code § 9247.5)  
17.54.070 - Abatement procedure. 
A.  Where any of the facts set forth in this chapter are found to exist by the director of planning, or where he finds that the abatement period, as to a building, use or structure, as set forth in this chapter has expired, he shall issue a written order of abatement (hereafter "order"), and give notice. The order shall contain a description of the property affected; the basis for the issuance of such order; and the time within which the use shall terminate. The order shall be final and conclusive thirty days after the date of the giving of notice in the absence of an appeal. The decision of the director of planning may be appealed as described in Sections 17.54.090 and 17.54.100 as hereafter provided. The utilization of the nonconforming building, structure and/or use which is the subject of such an order, shall be terminated within the time specified in such order. The time for termination shall not exceed one year. Failure to issue a notice shall not prejudice the city's rights to subsequently issue such an order or subsequently to require compliance with the then applicable laws of the city. 
B.  Upon issuance of a written order of abatement by the director of planning, notice shall be given by mailing a copy of such order addressed to the owners and/or persons in possession of the property to which the order relates. Postage will be prepaid and addressed to their last known address as determined from records available to the director of planning, alternately, the director of planning may personally serve such person with copies of the order. 
(Ord. 2167 § 7, 1997: prior code § 9247.6)  
17.54.080 - Fair market value determination. 
A.  If the property owner disagrees with the planning department's determination of the fair market value of a legal nonconforming building for the purpose of administering any part of this chapter, the property owner may appeal this decision to the planning commission, with a further right of appeal to the city council. 
B.  The planning commission shall conduct an informal hearing within thirty days after receiving the appeal, and shall mail notice of the hearing to the property owner at least ten days before the hearing. The decision of the planning commission shall be final unless appealed by the property owner to the city council within fifteen days after such decision. Upon an appeal to the city council, the city council shall conduct an informal hearing within thirty days of such appeal and shall mail notice of the hearing to the property owner at least ten days before the hearing. 
(Ord. 2047 § 7, 1991: prior code § 9247.7)  
17.54.090 - Appeal of abatement order. 
A.  Appeal. A recipient of an abatement order may appeal the director of planning's determination to the planning commission as provided in Chapter 17.78 of this code. Alternatively, the recipient using the same procedures, may request an extension of the amortization period applicable to the recipient's nonconforming use, building or structure. 
B.  Standard of Review. On appeal, the commission shall conduct a public hearing at which it shall uphold the director's determination and deny any requested extension unless the commission makes one or more of the following findings: 
1.  That the director wrongly determined that the use, building or structure subject to abatement is nonconforming; 
2.  That the director wrongly determined that the amortization period of the use, building or structure subject to abatement had expired; 
3.  That the director wrongly determined that the use, building or structure had been abandoned for a period of at least six months; 
4.  That to require cessation of such use, building or structure would impair the property rights of any person to such an extent as to be an unconstitutional taking of property; or 
5.  That such use, building or structure does not now and will not during the extension period requested: 
a.  Adversely affect the health, peace or welfare of persons residing or working in the surrounding area; and 
b.  Be materially detrimental to the use, enjoyment or valuation of the property of other persons located in the vicinity of the site; and 
c.  Jeopardize, endanger or otherwise constitute a menace to the public health, safety or general welfare. 
If circumstances exist as described in subsections (B)(3), (4) or (5) of this section, the commission may, but is not obligated to, extend the amortization period of a nonconforming use, building or structure. 
C.  Conditional Approvals. The commission, in approving an application to extend an amortization period may impose conditions which it deems necessary to insure that the extension will satisfy the required findings set forth in subsection (B)(5) of this section or to mitigate against any harm associated with a nonconforming use, building or structure if the commission makes a finding under subsection (B)(4) of this section. 
D.  Limitations on extensions of an amortization period. Extensions of an amortization period granted by the commission shall not be greater than ten years. 
E.  Evidentiary Burden. A person appealing a determination of the director or requesting an extension of an amortization period has the burden of proving that the findings required by subsection B of this section are satisfied. No evidence shall be considered in connection with such an application except for evidence contained in the application presented to the commission, reports prepared by the city, testimony presented at a hearing or other evidentiary submissions made at or prior to the hearing. 
(Ord. 2167 § 8, 1997)  
17.54.100 - Special amortization of nonconforming uses prior to expiration of amortization period. 
A.  Notwithstanding any contrary provision within this code, the director of planning may issue or recommend that the planning commission issue a special amortization order requiring the termination of a nonconforming use, building or structure prior to the date on which that use, building or structure would lose its legal nonconforming entitlement under this code. The order shall not require termination of the use, building or structure for at least one year from the date of the order, and shall not reduce the amortization period originally accorded to the use, structure or building by more than one-half. The abatement order shall be issued only if the director or commission concludes that: 
1.  Continuation of the nonconforming use, building or structure will adversely affect the health, peace or welfare of persons residing or working in the surrounding area; 
2.  Any alterations to the improvements on the property necessary to fully or partially satisfy the then current zoning will not result in a taking of property or a violation of law; and 
3.  Any cessation of a use on the property necessary to fully or partially satisfy the then current zoning will not result in a taking of property or a violation of law. 
B.  Appeal. A property or business owner affected by an order issued under this section may appeal that determination as provided in Chapter 17.78 of this code. An order may be sustained by the commission in its original, a modified or a conditional form if the commission makes the findings required by subdivision A. An order may be set aside if the commission cannot make the findings required by subdivision A or the commission finds that setting aside the order will serve the general welfare, equity or fairness. 
C.  Evidentiary Burden. The city shall have the burden to present evidence to sustain the findings required by subsection (A)(1). The property or business owner shall have the burden to make all other evidentiary showings. No evidence shall be considered in connection with such an application except for evidence contained in the application presented to the commission, reports prepared by the city, testimony presented at a hearing or other evidentiary submissions made at or prior to the hearing. 
D.  Other City Powers. Nothing in this section shall restrict the powers of the city to control or terminate a nonconforming use, building or structure using any power or remedies available to the city under this code or state law, including the power to abate nuisances. 
(Ord. 2167 § 9, 1997)  
17.54.110 - Request for extension of time periods for abatement by operation of law. 
Notwithstanding any contrary provision within this code, a property owner may request that the planning commission, subsequent to conducting a public hearing using the procedures established in Chapter 17.78 of this code, extend the period of time upon expiration of which a nonconforming use, building or structure shall be abated by operation of law. A property owner may also make such a request after the expiration of such time periods has passed. 
A.  Standard of Review. Upon receiving such a request, the commission shall conduct a public hearing at which it shall deny any requested extension unless the commission makes the findings as specified in Section 17.54.090(B)(4) or (5) of this chapter. If circumstances exist as described in Section 17.54.090(B)(4) or (5) of this chapter, the commission may, but is not obligated to, extend the amortization period of a nonconforming use, building or structure. 
B.  Conditional Approvals. The commission in approving such an extension may impose conditions which it deems necessary to insure that the extension will satisfy the required findings set forth in Section 17.54.090(B)(5) or to mitigate the impacts of an extension pursuant to Section 17.54.090(B)(4). 
C.  Limitations on Extensions of an Amortization Period. Extensions of an amortization period granted by the commission shall not be greater than ten years. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the approval of additional extensions of an amortization period. 
D.  Evidentiary Burden. A person requesting an extension of an amortization period has the burden of proving that the findings required by Section 17.54.090(B)(4) or (5) are satisfied. No evidence shall be considered in connection with such an application except for evidence contained in the application presented to the commission, reports prepared by the city, testimony presented at a hearing or other evidentiary submissions made at or prior to the hearing. 
(Ord. 2167 § 10, 1997)  
17.54.120 - Request for transfer of nonconforming use entitlement to a different location. 
Notwithstanding any contrary provision within this code, a property owner may request that the planning commission, subsequent to conducting a public hearing using the procedures established in Chapter 17.78 of this code, transfer an existing entitlement for a nonconforming use from one location to another location which does not have a similar entitlement for such nonconforming use. 
A.  Standard of Review. Upon receiving such a request, the commission shall conduct a public hearing at which time it shall deny any requested transfer of entitlement unless it makes the following findings: 
1.  That such use at the proposed location will promote the overall health and welfare of the city; and 
2.  Negative impacts on the city will be reduced if the use is relocated from its current location to the proposed location. 
B.  Amortization Period for New Location. Upon the commission approving such a request, the remaining amount of the amortization period for the nonconforming entitlement shall transfer to the new location. Extensions of the amortization period or special amortization periods may be granted as specified in Sections 17.54.100 and 17.54.110. The commission shall also have the authority to approve a shorter amortization period than is otherwise specified in Sections 17.54.100 and 17.54.110. 
C.  Conditional Approvals. The commission in approving such a transfer of nonconforming entitlements may impose conditions which it deems necessary to insure that the transfer will satisfy the required findings as specified in subsection A of this section. 
(Ord. 2167 § 11, 1997)  
Chapter 17.56 - OIL AND GAS DRILLING AND PRODUCTION FOR PROPERTIES NOT INCLUDED IN OIL PRODUCTION DISTRICTS 
 
17.56.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose hereof is to establish site development standards for properties not included in the oil and gas production district. 
(Prior code § 9248)  
17.56.020 - Applicable provisions. 
Oil and gas production, as defined in Chapter 5.52, shall be a permitted use in any zone within the city; provided, that if such usage is to be located upon property which is not included in an O-zone, as described in Chapter 17.44 of this code, then such use shall conform to all of the provisions of Chapter 5.52 of this code. The definitions set forth in Chapter 5.52 of this code shall apply to the provisions of this title. 
(Prior code § 9248.1)  
17.56.030 - Site development standards—Drill site location. 
No drill site shall be located closer than one thousand three hundred twenty feet to any other drill site, except a drill site located in an O-zone. A drill site having thereon an operating or suspended well, existing on the effective date of the provisions hereof, shall be deemed to include all of the area within one hundred feet from the center of such well. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (1) (a))  
17.56.040 - Site development standards—Drill site area. 
No drill site shall contain more than two and one-half acres or be of such size or shape that it cannot be contained within a square three hundred thirty feet by three hundred thirty feet. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (1) (b))  
17.56.050 - Site development standards—Number of wells. 
The number of wells which may be drilled shall not exceed one well to each five acres in the operating unit. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (1) (c))  
17.56.060 - Site development standards—Distance from dwelling. 
No oil well shall be drilled within one hundred seventy-five feet of any dwelling unit. This distance may be reduced to one hundred feet if the well and the dwelling are separated by a minimum eight foot high masonry wall, subject to the approval of the building inspector as to control of hazard. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (1) (d))  
17.56.070 - Site development standards—Hours of operation. 
Except for emergency work, all work in preparation of the site for drilling or for maintenance after the well is operational, shall be conducted only between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m., if at the time of such work there exists: 
A.  Twenty-five or more dwelling units within one thousand three hundred twenty feet of the proposed location of the well; or 
B.  Six or more dwelling units within six hundred sixty feet of the proposed location of the well. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (1) (e))  
17.56.080 - Site development standards—Roads and excavating. 
Roads and excavations servicing sites shall be planned, constructed and maintained so as to provide stability of fill, minimized disfigurement of the natural landscape, maintain natural drainage and minimize erosion. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (1) (f))  
17.56.090 - Site development standards—Cut and fill slopes. 
No slope or cut or fill shall have a gradient steeper than one foot rise in one foot horizontal measurement. Where by reason of the soil condition, the condition of the terrain or size or length of the cut and fill required, it is impractical to provide such gradient, the city engineer of the city may grant an exception to such requirement provided he first finds that compliance with the requirement is impractical and that the integrity of the neighborhood will be maintained if such exception is granted. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (1) (g))  
17.56.100 - Site development standards—Slope planting. 
All excavation slopes, both cut and fill, shall be planted and maintained with grasses, plants or shrubs during drilling and production operations, but only to the extent reasonably necessary to render the same comparable to the condition of other properties in the vicinity. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (1) (h))  
17.56.110 - Site development standards—Fencing. 
Prior to the commencement of drilling operations, the drill site shall be enclosed by a solid redwood fence or a solid masonry wall eight feet high on all sides, except those sides on which exists a natural or artificial barrier of equal or greater solidity and height. Solid redwood board gates shall be installed and be equipped with keyed locks and shall be kept locked at all times when unattended. Any and all supporting members of the fence shall be on the interior of the fence. Such fence or wall shall be in lieu of other fencing requirements. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (1) (i))  
17.56.120 - Site development standards—Pipelines. 
All off-site pipelines serving the drill site shall be buried not less than three feet below the surface of the ground. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (1) (j))  
17.56.130 - Site development standards—Off-street parking. 
An off-street parking area containing not less than five parking spaces shall be provided for each drill site and shall be surfaced and maintained in accordance with Chapter 17.52 of this code. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (1) (k))  
17.56.140 - Site development standards—Sanitary facilities. 
Sanitary facilities shall be provided at each drill site in accordance with the provisions of this code. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (1) (l))  
17.56.150 - Drilling operations—Generally. 
The following provisions relating to site drilling machinery which produces noise shall apply to all drill sites. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (2) (part))  
17.56.160 - Drilling operations—Soundproofing. 
The derrick and all drilling machinery which produces noise shall be enclosed with soundproofing material in the manner specified in Chapter 5.52 of this code. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (2) (a))  
17.56.170 - Drilling operations—Lights. 
All lights shall be directed or shielded so as to confine direct rays to the drill site. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (2) (b))  
17.56.180 - Drilling operations—Delivery of equipment. 
The delivery or removal of equipment or material from the drill site shall be limited to the hours between seven a.m. and seven p.m. except in case of emergency. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (2) (c))  
17.56.190 - Drilling operations—Drill pipe storage. 
Drill pipe shall be racked and made up only between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m., except within the derrick. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (2) (d))  
17.56.200 - Drilling operations—Power sources. 
All power sources shall be electric motors or muffled internal combustion engines. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (2) (e))  
17.56.210 - Production operations—Underground installation. 
All well head equipment shall be installed in cellars and no portion of such equipment shall be located or project above the surface of the surrounding ground. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (3) (a))  
17.56.220 - Production operations—Motive power soundproofing. 
Motive power for production operations shall be completely enclosed in a building or buildings insulated with sound deadening materials. Such building(s) shall be of residential appearance and no portion thereof shall exceed sixteen feet in height. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (3) (b))  
17.56.230 - Production operations—Motive power location. 
Buildings housing motive power for production operations shall be located on the drill site. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (3) (c))  
17.56.240 - Production operations—Height of installation. 
Except as otherwise herein specifically permitted, no permanent building, structure or other installation on the drill site shall be, or project, more than eight feet above the surface of the surrounding ground. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (3) (d))  
17.56.250 - Production operations—Storage for equipment. 
There shall be no storage of material, equipment, machinery or vehicle which is not intended for immediate use or servicing of an installation on the drill site. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (3) (e))  
17.56.260 - Production operations—Maintenance. 
The drill site and all permanent installations shall be maintained in a neat, clean and orderly condition. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (3) (f))  
17.56.270 - Production operations—Storage tank location. 
Storage tanks shall be located on a drill site. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (3) (g))  
17.56.280 - Production operations—Storage tank capacity. 
Storage tank capacity at the drill site shall not exceed a total aggregate of eighty-four thousand gallons exclusive of processing equipment; nor shall such tanks exceed a height of eight feet. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (3) (h))  
17.56.290 - Production operations—Painting. 
All surfaces of permanent buildings, structures or other installation within the drill site shall be painted and maintained in a neat and orderly manner. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (3) (i))  
17.56.300 - Production operations—Removal of oil. 
Oil produced at each drill site shall be removed therefrom by an underground pipeline or pipelines. Such pipeline or pipelines shall be constructed within one hundred eighty days after the date the first well in the drill site is completed and shall comply with Section 17.56.120. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (3) (j))  
17.56.310 - Production operations—Refineries. 
No refinery, dehydrating or absorption plant of any kind shall be constructed, established or maintained on any drill site or within the outer boundary line. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (3) (k))  
17.56.320 - Production operations—Gas burning. 
Natural gas shall not be vented to the atmosphere nor burned by open flame. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (3) (l))  
17.56.330 - Production operations—Well servicing. 
Well servicing shall be done between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m. of any day except in case of emergency. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (3) (m))  
17.56.340 - Production operations—Signs. 
No sign which is visible from outside the drill site shall be caused, permitted or allowed to be or remain any place on the drill site except: 
A.  Such signs as are required by law; or 
B.  Warning signs; or 
C.  No trespassing signs. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (n))  
17.56.350 - Production operations—Landscaping. 
Shrubs shall be planted and maintained along the exterior of the fence or wall enclosing the drill site. This requirement shall not be construed to limit or prohibit additional site beautification by landscaping or other planting. 
(Prior code § 9248.2 (o))  
17.56.360 - Idle wells—Defined. 
A well shall be deemed to be an idle well: 
A.  Unless it has produced one or more barrels of oil or other hydrocarbon substances or ten thousand or more cubic feet of gas within any twelve-month period after effective date of this regulation; or 
B.  If there has been a cessation of production therefrom of oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances, and it appears that the operator thereof intends to permanently cease production. The removal from the drill site of any necessary integral part of the equipment or machinery necessary for the production of oil or gas, including, but not limited to, the pumping unit, rods or tubing, for purposes other than repair or replacement, shall be prima facie evidence of such intent; thereafter the operator shall have the burden of proof to show that no such intent to cease operations exists; or 
C.  If the drilling or redrilling of a well has been commenced, but the facility has not produced one or more barrels of oil or other hydrocarbon substances, or ten thousand or more cubic feet of gas, within twelve months thereafter; or 
D.  An injection well shall be deemed to be an idle well within the meaning hereof where the owner or operator thereof has not, within any period of twelve months or more, utilized the same for injecting hydrocarbon substances, and other substances utilized in connection therewith, into the earth. 
(Prior code § 9248.3 (1))  
17.56.370 - Idle wells—Notice. 
Whenever the building inspector determines that a well is an idle well, he shall give notice thereof, to: 
A.  The owner of the fee simple interest in the land on which such well is situated; and 
B.  The owner of the mineral lease on which such well is situated; and 
C.  The license of such well as shown on the records of the license inspector of the city. For the purposes hereof, the licensee of a well shall be deemed to be the operator of such well. 
(Prior code § 9248.3 (2))  
17.56.380 - Idle wells—Abandonment required—When. 
Within ninety days after: 
A.  The building inspector has given notice of an idle well; or 
B.  A notice of intention to abandon a well has been given to the State Division of Oil and Gas by the owner or the operator pursuant to Section 3229 of the State Public Resources Code or any amendment thereto; 
the owner and/or operator of such well shall abandon the well pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 5.52 of this code. 
(Prior code § 9248.3 (3))  
17.56.390 - Idle wells—Application for reversal of determination or exception—Filing. 
A.  Within thirty days after notice of an idle well is given as provided in Section 17.56.370, the owner or the operator of such facility may, in writing, apply to the planning commission of the city (1) for a decision that the well is not an idle well, as defined in Section 17.56.360, or (2) if such well is an idle well, for an exception to the provisions of Section 17.56.380. Such application, in the form prescribed by the city planner, shall be filed with the secretary of the planning commission and shall be accompanied by a filing fee of twenty-five dollars. 
B.  The provisions of Section 17.56.380 shall be suspended from the date an application for a decision or exception is filed with the planning commission as provided in subsection A of this section, until a decision thereon is rendered or the exception is granted or denied. 
(Prior code §§ 9248.3 (4) and (5))  
17.56.400 - Idle wells—Application for reversal of determination or exception—Hearing. 
Upon receipt of such application the secretary of the commission shall set the same for public hearing before the commission, and shall give notice thereof to the applicant and to all persons known to have an interest in the land on which the well is situated. The commission shall conduct the hearing and determine whether the application should be approved, disapproved or denied in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(Prior code § 9248.3 (6))  
17.56.410 - Idle wells—Application for reversal of determination or exception—Decision of planning commission. 
At the conclusion of the hearing on an application for a decision that the well is not an idle well, the commission shall decide whether or not the well is an idle well in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.56.360. If the commission determines that the well is an idle well, the owner and/or operator thereof shall cause the same to be abandoned as provided in Section 17.56.380 unless an appeal from such decision is taken in the time and manner prescribed in Chapter 17.78 of this code. 
(Prior code § 9248.3 (7))  
17.56.420 - Idle wells—Application for reversal of determination or exception—Grant of exception. 
A.  At the conclusion of the hearing on an application for an exception, the commission shall grant the exception if the commission finds: 
1.  That the conclusion has shown good cause why there has been no production during the twelve-month period or why there has been a cessation of production; and 
2.  That there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships resulting from the strict enforcement hereof; and 
3.  That permitting further operation will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or to the use of adjacent properties; and 
4.  That such continuation will not substantially interfere with the orderly development of the city as provided for in the land use element of the community general plan. 
B.  Where an exception is granted, the commission may impose thereon such conditions as it may deem reasonable and proper. Unless stated otherwise by the commission, the exception shall be in effect for a period of two years from the date the same is granted. If the commission denies the application, the owner/or operator shall abandon the well as provided in Section 17.56.380. The determination of the commission shall be final and conclusive in the absence of an appeal from such decision to the city council perfected in the time and in the manner prescribed in Chapter 17.78 of this code. 
(Prior code § 9248.3 (8))  
17.56.430 - Idle wells—Appeal to city council. 
In the event of an appeal to the council, the council shall hold a hearing thereon, and based upon the evidence presented, affirm, modify or reverse the commission's determination, based upon the criteria set forth in Sections 17.56.360 through 17.56.420. Such hearings may be continued from time to time by the council. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 9248.3 (9)  
17.56.440 - Conclusively idle wells. 
Notwithstanding any other provision hereof to the contrary, in the case of a well for which a notice of intention to abandon has been given to the State Division of Oil and Gas pursuant to Section 3229 of the Public Resources Code or any amendment thereto, such well shall be conclusively deemed an idle well and the abandonment procedures set forth in Chapter 5.52 of this code shall be followed. 
(Prior code § 9248.3 (10))  
17.56.450 - Conformance with provisions. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this code dealing with the abatement of nonconforming uses or buildings, all uses, incident and accessory to the exploration and/or production of gas and oil, as regulated hereby, shall be made to conform to the following: 
A.  Whenever a property is reclassified so as to remove it from a designated O-zone, all uses thereon, as described herein shall be made to conform to the provisions hereof, within a period of one year from the effective date of such reclassification. 
B.  All uses described herein which exist on the effective date hereof shall be made to conform to the provisions hereof within a period of three years. 
(Prior code § 9248.4)  
Chapter 17.58 - MODEL HOMES 
 
17.58.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the provisions contained herein is to regulate the construction, use and sale of model homes within the city and to permit the advertising of new developments within the city while ensuring that the provisions of this code are met. 
(Prior code § 9260)  
17.58.020 - Location and/or erection. 
Model homes shall be located and/or erected only in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 zones, subject to the provisions hereof. 
(Prior code § 9260.1)  
17.58.030 - Number permitted. 
Within the boundaries of an approved tentative tract map, no more than eight single-family or condominium units or other permitted buildings are to be used as: 
1.  Model units; and/or 
2.  Temporary realty offices (one single-family dwelling or other permitted building); and 
3.  Outdoor advertising structure (no more than two such structures), each having no more than two hundred fifty square feet of sign face area, used exclusively to sell lots and dwelling units located on the property included on the tentative subdivision tract map. The location of these structures is subject to the approval of the city planner. 
B.  The development standards applicable, pursuant to this title, shall apply to uses permitted pursuant to subsections A (1) and (2) of this section. (See Chapter 17.10, residential zone requirements chart.) 
(Prior code § 9260.2)  
17.58.040 - Building permit—Plot plan required—Processing. 
Prior to the issuance of any building permit for buildings and structures permitted pursuant to Sections 17.58.020 and 17.58.030, the owner of the property which is included in the tentative subdivision tract map (or the owner's agent) shall submit a plot plan for each building or structure to the city planner for approval. Such plot plans shall be processed as follows: 
A.  The city planner shall notify the owner of his/her decision as to whether the proposed models are in conformity with the conditions of approval relating to tentative subdivision tract map. The notice shall be in writing. An adverse decision shall be subject to written appeal to the planning commission. The appeal shall be filed with the secretary of the planning commission within fourteen days of the mailing of notice of decision to the owner. 
B.  At the time of the hearing, the commission shall give the applicant a reasonable opportunity to be heard on the matter and shall determine whether such plot plans conform to the tentative subdivision map, as approved. If the plans do conform, they will be approved. If the plans do not conform to the tentative map, the commission may give conditional approval or deny the plot plans. 
C.  The commission's decision shall become final, in the absence of an appeal to the city council perfected in the time and manner set forth in Chapter 17.78 of this code. 
D.  If an appeal is filed, the commission's file shall be transmitted to the city council. The council shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove such plot plans. Such action will be final. 
(Prior code § 9260.3)  
17.58.050 - Building permit—Approval—Conditions. 
The applicant shall accept, as conditions of approval on any building permit for buildings or structures permitted by Chapters 17.10 through 17.20 of this code, conditions which will be endorsed on the face of each permit, the following: 
A.  That such buildings and/or structures shall not be used for the conduct of a general real estate business, but only as temporary facilities to assist in sales of lots and dwelling units located within the boundaries of the tentative subdivision tract map; and 
B.  That such buildings and/or structures will not be used for human habitation unless a final subdivision tract map has been approved and recorded, and until a certificate of occupancy for dwelling purposes has been duly issued for each such structure; and 
C.  That if final subdivision tract map is not submitted, approved and recorded within the time allowed by law that the applicant will, within sixty days: 
1.  Demolish or remove each building or structure, at applicant's sole cost, or 
2.  Obtain approval of a subdivision of the land, by a parcel map, in accordance with the provisions of this code, relating to the land on which such buildings and/or structures are built; and 
D.  That the applicant will deposit with the city cash, or an instrument of credit in a form approved by the city attorney, sufficient to guarantee that such buildings and/or structures will be demolished or removed, if required pursuant to this code; and 
E.  That the temporary real estate sales office and outdoor advertising structures shall be removed within thirty days following the sale of subdivision. 
(Prior code § 9260.4)  
Chapter 17.59 - HOME OCCUPATION PERMITS 
 
17.59.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to permit the conduct of home based businesses in residential districts and to establish a comprehensive set of regulations applicable to the establishment and operation of home based business within the City of Montebello without any way changing the appearance or conditions of the residence and neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 2360, § 5, 6-25-2014)  
17.59.020 - Definitions. 
Refer to the definitions contained in Chapter 17.08 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2360, § 5, 6-25-2014)  
17.59.030 - Home occupation permit application and procedure. 
A.  Application for Permit Required. An application for a home occupation permit shall be filed with a business license application on a form prescribed by the city. The request shall consist of all of the following items: 
1.  An application for a home occupation permit, which must include the names, addresses, and notarized signatures of both the business operator(s) and the property owner, which serves as authorization to operate the home occupation for rental property, and the board of the home owners' association, if applicable; 
2.  Proof of full-time residency as provided by a California Identification Card or California Driver's License issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles; 
3.  Any additional information, plans, or drawings the planning manager may require to determine whether the proposed use will comply with all of the applicable provisions of this subsection. The planning manager may authorize omission of any or all of the plans and drawings required by this section if they are deemed not necessary. 
B.  Review, Within twenty working days of the date of filing a complete home occupation application by the applicant, the planning manager shall approve, approve in modified form, or deny the application. The action of the planning manager shall be final and conclusive, unless within thirty days of the decision, an appeal is filed appealing the decision of the planning manager to the planning commission, in accordance with Section 17.78.060 of this code. Upon approval, the applicant shall proceed with the processing of a business and home occupation license from the business license division. 
(Ord. No. 2360, § 5, 6-25-2014)  
17.59.040 - Permit not transferrable. 
A home occupation permit shall not be transferrable. 
(Ord. No. 2360, § 5, 6-25-2014)  
17.59.050 - Operation standards. 
A.  Home occupations, governed by subsection B below, are permitted, provided that: 
1.  Only the applicant/resident of the dwelling unit shall be employed in the operation of the home occupation use. No volunteers, interns, or independent contractors shall be part of the home occupation. 
2  Clients, customers, and/or associates shall not be permitted on the subject site. 
3.  Display or storage of items, goods, or merchandise, shall not be permitted; provided however that this condition is not intended to prohibit the temporary interior storage of materials used in the operation of the home occupation so long as such storage does not create a health or safety problem or a neighborhood nuisance. 
4.  A home occupation shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed dwelling unit. 
5.  Equipment which emits dust, fumes, noise or odor, or other equipment as determined by the planning manager which could interfere with the peaceful use and enjoyment of adjacent and surrounding properties shall be prohibited. 
6.  On-site signs advertising a home occupation shall not be permitted. 
7.  Alteration of the residential character of the subject site shall not be permitted. 
8.  Vehicles in conjunction with the home occupation permit shall not exceed a height of seven feet nor be larger than what can easily fit within the universal stall dimension of ten feet wide by twenty feet long. 
9.  The area to be used for home occupation shall not encompass more than one room of the dwelling unit, and shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the floor area or two hundred square feet, whichever is lesser. 
10.  No portion of the required parking area shall be used for the home occupation. 
11.  Guns and ammunition shall not be sold as part of a home occupation except that a home occupation permit for a gunsmith or firearms collector licensed by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms as a gunsmith, or firearm collector shall be allowed. 
12.  The home occupation shall not create noise levels in excess of those allowed in the applicable residential areas in the noise element of the general plan or in excess of those allowed on residential property of the Montebello Municipal Code. 
13.  The home occupation shall conform to all applicable federal, state, and municipal laws and regulations applicable to the residential area in which the home occupation is located. 
B.  Exclusions. The following uses are examples of those uses specifically prohibited as home occupations: 
(1)  Schools of any size or type; 
(2)  Boarding or lodging house; 
(3)  Antique shop; 
(4)  Barber shop and/or beauty parlor; 
(5)  Funeral chapel or home, mortuaries; 
(6)  Gift shop; 
(7)  Medical or dental clinic or hospital, animal hospital or grooming facilities; 
(8)  Day care centers or nursery schools, except those permitted by right; 
(9)  Private clubs; 
(10)  Restaurants; 
(11)  Auto or motorcycle, boat or trailer, similar type repair shops; 
(12)  Kennels; and 
(13)  Office of a health care provider when special mechanical equipment is required. 
(Ord. No. 2360, § 5, 6-25-2014)  
17.59.060 - Revocation of permit. 
The director of planning and community development may void any home occupation permit for noncompliance with the criteria set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2360, § 5, 6-25-2014)  
17.59.070 - Appeals. 
The applicant or any interested person may appeal to the city council from any ruling of planning commission made pursuant to this chapter in accordance with this section. Notice of any appeal from the ruling of the planning commission must be filed within ten days of the date that such ruling is made. The appeals procedures must conform to those requirements outlined in Chapter 17.78. 
(Ord. No. 2360, § 5, 6-25-2014)  
17.59.080 - Penalties and enforcement. 
The city may enforce the provisions of this chapter by any means authorized and set forth under Chapters 1.12 or 17.06 of this code. Violators may be subject to the fines and/or penalties authorized under Chapters 1.12 or 17.06 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2360, § 5, 6-25-2014)  
Chapter 17.60 - ADULT BUSINESS ZONING REGULATIONS* 
 
17.60.010 - Findings. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide for the reasonable and uniform regulation of adult businesses in the city. It is recognized that adult businesses have a serious deleterious effect upon adjacent areas, as well as the areas in which they are located. It is therefore the purpose of this chapter to establish criteria and standards for the establishment and conduct of adult businesses which will protect the public health, safety and welfare, preserve locally recognized values of community appearance, minimize the potential for nuisances related to the operation of adult businesses, and maintain local property values. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish proper regulations and to provide for a reasonable number of approximately located sites for adult businesses within the city, based upon the following findings: 
A.  The city council has reviewed the detailed studies, reports and letters prepared by other jurisdictions and its own staff with respect to the detrimental social, health and economic effects on persons and properties surrounding adult businesses. These studies included Upland, California (1992); Garden Grove, California (1991); Tucson, Arizona (1990); Seattle, Washington (1989); Austin, Texas (1986); Oklahoma City, Oklahoma (1986); Indianapolis, Indiana (1984); Houston, Texas (1983); Beaumont ,Texas (1982); Minneapolis, Minnesota (1980); Phoenix, Arizona (1979); Whittier, California (1978); Amarillo, Texas (1977); Cleveland, Ohio (1977); Los Angeles, California (1977); state of Minnesota, Attorney General Report (1989); Newport News, Virginia (1996); St Paul, Minnesota (1987); Corpus Christi, Texas (1995); and National Law Center (1995); (collectively "studies"). The studies substantiate the adverse, secondary effects of adult businesses. 
B.  Based on the foregoing studies and the other evidence presented, the city council finds that: 
1.  Adult businesses are linked to increases in the crime rates of those areas in which they are located and that surround them; and 
2.  Both the proximity of adult businesses to sensitive land uses and the concentration of adult businesses tend to result in the blighting and downgrading of the areas in which they are located. 
C.  The studies conducted in various communities in other jurisdictions have demonstrated that the proximity and concentration of adult businesses adjacent to residential, recreational, religious, educational or other adult businesses can cause other businesses and residents to move elsewhere. 
D.  The studies conducted in various communities in other jurisdictions have demonstrated that adult businesses are linked to increases in the crime rates and blighting of those areas in which they are located and that surround them. 
E.  The special regulation of adult businesses is necessary to ensure that their adverse secondary effects will not contribute to an increase in the crime rates or the blighting or downgrading of the areas in which they are located or surrounding areas. The need for the special regulation is based on the recognition that adult businesses have serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances or located in direct proximity with sensitive uses such as residential zones and uses, parks schools, churches or day care centers, thereby having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas. 
F.  It is the purpose and intent of these special regulations to prevent the concentration or location of adult businesses in a manner that would create such adverse secondary effects. Thus, in order to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare of the citizenry, especially including minors, the special regulation of the time, place and manner of the location and operation of adult businesses is necessary. 
G.  The protection and preservation of the public health, safety and welfare require that certain distances be maintained between adult businesses and residential uses and zones, churches, schools, day care centers, parks and other adult businesses. 
H.  The need to regulate the proximity of adult businesses to sensitive land uses such as residential, religious, educational, recreational and other adult businesses are documented in studies conducted by other jurisdictions as listed elsewhere in this section. 
I.  The report of the state of Minnesota Attorney General's Working Group on the regulation of sexually oriented businesses dated June 6, 1986, indicated that: 
1.  Community impacts of sexually oriented businesses are primarily a function of two variables, proximity to residential areas and concentration. Property values are directly affected within a small radius, typically one block, of the location of a sexually oriented business. Concentration may compound depression of property values and may lead to an increase of crime sufficient to change the quality of life and perceived desirability of property in a neighborhood; and 
2.  The impacts of sexually oriented businesses are exacerbated when they are located near each other. When sexually oriented businesses have multiple uses (i.e. theater, bookstore, nude dancing, peep booths), one building can have the impact of several separate businesses. 
J.  In consideration of the findings of the report of the state of Minnesota Attorney General's Working Group on the regulation of sexually oriented businesses dated June 6, 1986, it is appropriate to prohibit the concentration of multiple adult businesses within one building in order to mitigate the compounded adverse secondary effects associated with such concentrations as described above. 
K.  The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually-oriented materials, that are protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution and the relevant provisions of the California State Constitution. 
L.  The proposed parking standards are necessary in the interests of the public health, safety and welfare to provide for an appropriate amount of off-street parking. 
M.  The city council takes legislative notice of the Penal Code provisions authorizing local governments to regulate matter that is harmful to minors (e.g. Penal Code Section 313 et seq.) The city council further takes legislative notice of cases that recognize that protection of minors from sexually explicit materials is a compelling government interest, including, but not limited to, Crawfore v. Lungren (9th Cir., 1996) 96 F.3d 380, cert. denied 520 U.S. 1117 (1997) and Berry v. City of Santa Barbara (1995) 40 Cal.App.4th 1075. 
N.  In adopting these regulations, the city council is mindful of legal principles relating to regulation of adult businesses and does not intend to suppress or infringe upon any expressive activities protected by the First Amendments of the United States and California Constitutions, but instead desires to enact reasonable time, place and manner regulations that address the adverse secondary effects of adult businesses. The city council has considered decisions of the United States Supreme Court regarding adverse secondary effects and the local regulation of adult businesses, including but not limited to: Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc., 427 U.S. 50 (1976) (Reh. denied 429 U.S. 873); Renton v. Playtime Theaters, 475 U.S. 41 (1986) (Reh. denied 475 U.S. 1132); FW/PBS. Inc. v. Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); Barnes v. Glenn Theater, 501 U.S. 560 (1991), and City of Erie v. Paps A.M. (2000) 529 U.S. (2000 Daily Journal DAR 3255), United States Court of Appeals 9th Circuit decisions, including but not limited to: Topanga Press, et al. v. City of Los Angeles, 989 F.2d 1524 (1993); Kev, Inc. v. Kitsap County, 793 F.2d 1053 (9th Cir. 1986); Colacurcio v. City of Kent, 163 F.3d 545 (9th Cir. 1998), pet. For cert. Filed (1999); several California cases including but not limited to: Tily B. v. City of Newport Beach, 69 Cal.App.4th 1 (1998); City of National City v. Wiener, 3 Cal. 4th 832 (1993); People v. Superior Court (Lucero) 49 Cal.3d 14 (1989); and City of Vallejo v. Adult Books, et al., 167 Cal.App.3d 1169 (1985); and other federal cases including Lakeland Lounge v. City of Jacksonville (5th Cir. 1992) 973 F.2d 1255, Hang On, Inc. v. Arlington (5th Cir. 1995) 65 F.3d 1248, Mitchell v. Commission on Adult Entertainment (3rd Cir. 1993) 10 F.3d 123, International Eateries v. Broward County (11th Cir. 1991) 941 F.2d 1157, and Star Satellite v. City of Biloxi (5th Cir. 1986) 779 F.2d 1074. 
O.  The city has conducted its own study of its land use districts and planning areas and has determined that the establishment of adult business in the M-1 and M-2 zone designations is appropriate, subject to locational and distance requirements that promote the health, safety and general welfare of the public. The city also evaluated the locational and distance regulations in this chapter for separating adult businesses from sensitive land uses, and other adult businesses, and determined the location and distance requirements are appropriate to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
P.  The locational requirements do not unreasonably restrict the establishment or operation of constitutionally protected speech in the city and a sufficient reasonable number of appropriate locations for adult businesses are provided. 
Q.  The city council recognizes that the standards and regulations in this chapter do not preclude reasonable alternative avenues of communication. The city council takes note of the proximity of at least five adult businesses within thirty minutes (drive time) of the city in determining that the proposed standards do not preclude reasonable alternative avenues of communication. 
R.  The city council recognizes that a sufficient number of appropriate locations for establishing an adult business in the city are provided considering the city's predominant residential character (approximately fifty-nine percent is zoned for residential land use) and the fact that no formal requests to establish an adult business have been received by planning department staff. 
S.  Finally, the city council also takes note of the proliferation of adult material on the Internet and its availability as an alternative avenue of communication. The city council also considers and relies on published decisions examining the proliferation of communications on the Internet. Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union (1997) 521 U.S. 844 (the principal channel through which many Americans now transmit and receive sexually explicit communication is the Internet); see also: Anheuser-Busch v. Schmoke, 101 F.3d 325, 329 (4th. Cir. 1996) (rejecting First Amendment challenge to Baltimore ordinance restricting alcohol advertisements on billboards and acknowledging that the Internet is an available channel of communication); U.S. V. Hockings, 129 F.3d 1069 (9th Cir. 1997); and U.S. v. Thomas, 74 F.3d 701 (6th Cir. 1996) (cert denied 519 U.S. 820). The emergence of the Internet provides a virtually unlimited additional source of adult oriented sexual material available to persons without regard to geographic boundaries. An adult business no longer needs to be actually physically located within a city to be available to the community. 
(Ord. 2288 § 4 (part), 2005)  
17.60.020 - Definitions—Adult business. 
An "adult business" is any business where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities, or any business which offers to its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, exposing, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult businesses do not include bona fide medical establishments operated by properly licensed and registered medical personnel with appropriate medical credentials for the treatment of patients. 
In determining whether a use is an adult business, only conduct or activities which constitute a regular and substantial course of conduct or a use which has a majority of its floor area, stock-in-trade or revenue derived from material characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, exposing, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall be considered. Isolated instances of conduct or activities described in this section as characterizing an adult business shall not be considered except where such activities, taken together, constitute a regular and substantial course of conduct. Adult businesses include, but are not limited to, the following: 
A.  Adult Arcade. An "adult arcade" means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines projections or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
B.  Adult Bookstore, Novelty Store, Video/DVD Store. "Adult bookstore, novelty store, video/DVD store," is an establishment which has as a substantial portion of its stock in trade, a majority of its floor area or revenue derived from and offering for sale for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following: 
1.  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, photographs films motion pictures, video cassettes slides or other visual representations which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas; 
2.  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities; or 
3.  Goods which are replicas of or which simulate, specified anatomical areas, or goods which are designed to be placed on or in specified anatomical areas or to be used in conjunction with specified sexual activities to cause sexual excitement. 
A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and still be categorized as an adult bookstore adult novelty store or adult/video/DVD store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult/video/DVD store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
C.  Adult Cabaret. An "adult cabaret" is a bar, nightclub or similar establishment which features dancers, strippers or similar entertainers who expose specified anatomical areas of their bodies or simulate specified sexual activities. 
D.  Adult Motel. An "adult motel" means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
1.  Offer accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions films motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and has a sign visible from the public right of way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions, videos or films; and 
2.  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
3.  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
E.  Adult Motion Picture Theater. An "adult motion picture theater" means a commercial establishment where for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depictions or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
F.  Adult Tanning Salon. An "adult tanning salon" or "parlor" means a business establishment where patrons receive tanning services in groups of two or more and where patrons or employees of the establishment expose specified anatomical areas. Adult tanning salon or parlor also includes a business establishment where a patron and an employee of the establishment are nude or expose specified anatomical areas. An adult tanning salon or parlor also includes a business establishment where the employees thereof are nude or expose specified anatomical areas. 
G.  Adult Theater. An "adult theater" is any place, building, enclosure, theater, concert hall auditorium or structure, partially or entirely used for live performances or presentations, which place, building, enclosure, theater, concert hall, auditorium or structure is used for presenting matter characterized by an emphasis on depicting, exposing, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. Such place shall also include an adult theater wherein persons are regularly featured appearing in a state of nudity or giving live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified sexual activities or by specified anatomical areas. 
H.  Employee. "Employee" means a person who performs any service on the premises of an adult business on a full time, part time or contract basis whether or not the person is denominated as an employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of the adult business. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises to conduct repair or maintenance for the premises or equipment on the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
I.  Nude Model Studio. A "nude model studio" means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be conversed with or be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons, for any form of consideration. Nude model studio shall not include any classroom of any school licensed under state law to provide art education, while such classroom is being used in a manner consistent with such state license. 
J.  Sex Supermarket/Sex Mini-Mall. A "sex supermarket/sex mini-mall" means the establishment or operation of more than one type of adult business or use as defined in this chapter within the same building or properly. 
K.  Sexual Encounter Center. "Sexual encounter center" means a business or commercial enterprise that as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
1.  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
2.  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or is semi-nude. 
L.  Sexually Oriented Business. A "sexually oriented business" is any business where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in or simulate specified sexual activities or any business which offers to its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting exposing describing discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(Ord. 2288 § 4 (part), 2005)  
17.60.030 - Additional definitions. 
In addition to the terms defined in Section 17.60.020, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth below: 
A.  Appeal. Wherever reference to an appeal being filed or available to be filed, such right of appeal shall also include the right to appeal administrative determinations concerning the interpretation of this chapter made by the city manager/designee to the planning commission and city council. 
B.  Establishment. An "establishment" means and includes any of the following: 
1.  The opening or commencement of any adult business as a new business; 
2.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult business, to any adult business; 
3.  The addition of any adult business to any other existing adult business; or to another existing non adult business, with or without expansion of floor area; 
4.  The relocation of any adult business; or 
5.  The expansion or enlargement of the premises by ten percent or more of the existing floor area. 
C.  Nudity or a State of Nudity. "Nudity" or a "state of nudity" means the showing of the human male or female genitals, buttocks, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the areola. 
D.  Private Viewing Area. "Private viewing area" means an area or areas in an adult business designed to accommodate no more than five or less patrons or customers for purposes of viewing or watching a performance, picture, show, film, videotape, slide, movie or other presentation. No private viewing areas shall be established, maintained or authorized and there shall be no doors curtains, stalls or other enclosures creating a private viewing area. 
E.  School. "School" means any public or private educational institution which is run by the state or a subdivision thereof or which is licensed by the state to offer preschool, elementary or secondary academic instruction, including kindergartens, elementary schools, middle or junior high schools and high schools. 
F.  Semi-Nude. "Semi-nude" means the showing of the male genitals or female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the showing of a substantial portion of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
G.  Specified Criminal Act. A "specified criminal act" also means "specified criminal acts" and includes sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult business including, but not limited to, the distribution of obscenity; violations involving the distribution, display or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering. Specified criminal acts shall exclude those acts which are authorized or required to be kept confidential pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 600-900. 
(Ord. 2288 § 4 (part), 2005)  
17.60.040 - Definitions—Specified anatomical areas and specified sexual activities. 
The following words and phrases when used in this title shall have the meaning set forth below: 
A.  Specified Anatomical Areas. "Specified anatomical areas" include any of the following human anatomical areas: 
1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
2.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
B.  Specified Sexual Activities. "Specified sexual activities" include all of the following: 
1.  The fondling or other erotic touching of the following human anatomical areas: genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses or female breasts; 
2.  Human sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
3.  Human masturbation, actual or simulated; 
4.  The actual or simulated infliction of pain by one human upon another or by an individual upon himself or herself for the purpose of the sexual gratification or release of either individual, as a result of flagellation, beating, striking or touching of an erogenous zone, including without limitation, the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region or, if such person is a female, a breast; 
5.  Sexual intercourse, actual or simulated, between a human being and an animal; or 
6.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (5), above. 
(Ord. 2288 § 4 (part), 2005)  
17.60.050 - Adult use planning permit—Adult business—Application. 
In order to operate an adult business within this city, the applicant or proprietor of the business must obtain the license required by Chapter 5.76 and any other license required by this code and an adult use planning permit as required herein. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Title 1 of this code, for an owner, operator, manager or employee to operate an adult business without processing an adult use planning permit, including an interim adult use planning permit required by this chapter and any license required by Chapter 5.76 of this code. All applicants for such a permit, in addition to any application or documents required to be filed pursuant to the provisions of this title shall file a written signed and verified application on a form provided by the planning department: 
A.  The name and permanent address of the applicant; 
B.  The name and business address of the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation the applicant shall provide the name of the state of incorporation, the name shall be exactly as set forth in its chapters of incorporation and the applicant shall show the name and address each of the officers, directors and controlling stockholders owning at least fifty percent of the stock of the corporation and/or each officer, director and controlling stockholder with day to day management of the business. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall show the name and address of each of the partners including limited partners with at least a fifty percent ownership in the business or having day-to-day management responsibilities in the business; 
C.  Location and address of the proposed adult business; 
D.  Legal description of the subject property; 
E.  A detailed description of the manner of providing proposed entertainment, including type of entertainment and the number of persons engaged in the entertainment; 
F.  Proposed hours of operation; 
G.  A floor plan showing where the specific entertainment uses are proposed to be conducted within the building; 
H.  A site plan; 
I.  The name or names of the person or persons having responsibility for the management or supervision of the applicant's business and of any entertainment; 
J.  Statement of the nature and character of the applicant's business if any, to be carried on in conjunction with such entertainment. 
K.  A signed and notarized authorization and waiver authorizing the chief of police, the Montebello police department or any law enforcement body or authorized law enforcement contractor to verity all of the information on the application. 
L.  A statement in writing, signed and dated by the applicant, that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that all information contained in the application is true and correct. 
Within two business days of the receipt of the application, the director of planning, or his designee shall determine whether it is complete and contains all information required by this section. If the application is incomplete, the director of planning shall deny the application and immediately inform the applicant in writing of the items needed to complete the application. 
Notwithstanding the fact that an application filed hereunder may be a "public record under Government Code Section 6250 et seq., certain portions of such application contain information vital to the effective administration and enforcement of the licensing and/or permit scheme established herein which is personal, private, confidential or the disclosure of which could expose the applicant to a risk of harm. Such information includes, but is not limited to, the applicant's residence address and telephone number, the applicant's date of birth and/or age, the applicant's driver's license and/or Social Security Number, and/or personal financial data. The city council in adopting the application and licensing and/or permit system set forth herein has determined in accordance with Government Code Section 6255 that the public interest in disclosure of the information set forth above is outweighed by the public interest in achieving compliance with this chapter by ensuring that the applicant's privacy confidentiality or security interests are protected. The city clerk shall cause to be obliterated from any copy of a completed license application made available to any member of the public, the information set forth above. 
(Ord. 2288 § 4 (part), 2005)  
17.60.060 - Referral of application for investigation. 
The community development director shall refer the completed permit application to the chief of police to investigate and verify the information contained in the application. The chief of police may refer the application to any law enforcement body or authorized law enforcement contractor to assist in this determination. 
A.  After the investigation, including obtaining the information contained in the application, the chief of police shall issue a report to the director of planning the planning commission or city council as appropriate, and the community development director, the planning commission or city council, as appropriate, shall approve the adult use planning permit unless one or more of the following findings are true: 
1.  That the applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, controlling stock holder or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a permit or in any report or record required to be filed with any city or county agency or department; 
2.  That on the date that the business for which a permit is required herein commences or thereafter, there will be no responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the adult business is open; 
3.  That an applicant is less than eighteen years of age; 
4.  That an applicant has been convicted of a specific criminal act for which: 
a.  Less than eight years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; distribution, display or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering, 
b.  Less than eight years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; distribution, display or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering, 
c.  Less than eight years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanors for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; distribution, display or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering; conviction of any such offense occurring within twenty-four months prior to application, 
d.  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on disqualification of the applicant, 
e.  An applicant who has been convicted of any of the above described specified criminal acts may qualify to own, operate or manage an adult business only when the required time period has elapsed; 
5.  That the application is incomplete. 
B.  In the event the information requested pursuant to this section is not immediately available, the chief of police shall, if the application otherwise meets the requirements of this code and the investigation conducted reveals none of the factors set forth in subsection A of this section report thereon. Whereupon, the director of planning, or designee thereof, shall issue an interim adult use planning permit within ten days of the receipt of the application. Should the background information obtained by the chief of police materially vary from that on the application, such variance shall be cause to revoke the interim adult use permit and any other permit or licenses upon which such information is necessary. Any permit issued prior to the city receiving the background information required shall state clearly on its face that the permit is subject to suspension or revocation pursuant to this code. 
C.  The city's decision to grant or deny the permit shall not include information authorized or required to be kept confidential pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 600 to 900. 
(Ord. 2288 § 4 (part), 2005)  
17.60.070 - Reservation of right to review adult use planning permit—-Changed conditions. 
Any adult use planning permit granted or approved hereunder shall be granted or approved with the city and its city council and planning commission retaining and reserving the right and jurisdiction to review and modify the adult use planning permit, including the conditions of approval, based on changed circumstances. Changed circumstances include but are not limited to the modification of the business, the change in scope emphasis, size or nature of the business, and the expansion, alteration or change of use. The reservation of the right to review any permit granted or approval hereunder by the city, city council and planning commission is in addition to, and not in lieu of, the right of the city, city council and planning commission to review and revoke or modify any permit granted or approved hereunder for any violations of the conditions imposed on such permit. 
(Ord. 2288 § 4 (part), 2005)  
17.60.080 - Time limit for land use review and decisions—Adult use planning permits. 
A.  Interim Adult Use Planning Permit. In order to avoid undue delay or suppression of any protected expression, the director of planning shall make an initial determination of the required information contained in the application to process an adult use planning permit within five days of the date of filing the complete application. If the application is sufficient to issue an interim adult use planning permit such shall be issued by the director of planning within ten days of the date the application was deemed complete. A sufficient application shall include, but not be limited to, the applicant's meeting the requirements to be issued an adult business license required by Chapter 5.76 of this code and the proposed business must be located in the M-1 or M-2 zoning districts and subject to the locational and setback requirements of this chapter. The granting of the interim adult use planning permit by the director of planning is without prejudice to and does not preclude the denial of the final adult use planning permit application filed by the applicant. The interim adult use planning permit shall terminate upon the planning commission taking action on the final adult use planning permit. No right to operate beyond the termination of the interim adult use planning permit shall vest in the applicant if the applicant is unable or unwilling to obtain the adult business license required by Chapter 5.76 of this code and the final adult use planning permit required by this chapter. 
B.  Final Adult Use Planning Permit. The planning commission shall approve or disapprove the completed adult use planning permit application within ninety days of its acceptance as complete by the director of planning or designee. The time limit established by this section may be extended once for a period not to exceed ninety days upon consent of the director of planning and the applicant. The application shall be processed and noticed in the same manner as conditional use permits are processed and noticed under state law. 
1.  To approve the final adult use planning permit, the planning commission, or city council on appeal, must first make the following findings: 
a.  That all applicable filing fees have been paid; 
b.  That the applicant is not overdue in payment to the city of any taxes fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed in relation to an existing or former adult business; 
c.  That the building, structure, equipment and location used by the business for which an adult business license is required complies with the requirements and standards of the health, building, zoning, fire and safety laws of the state of California, the Montebello fire department, Los Angeles County health services department and the city; 
d.  That the conduct of the adult business as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, will comply with all applicable laws including but not limited to, the city's building, zoning, fire and health and safety regulations; 
e.  That the city currently has no evidence demonstrating that the applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material facts in the adult use planning permit application or any other document required by the city in conjunction therewith; 
f.  That the use is permitted in the zone, district or area in which it is proposed to be located and is in conformity with the applicable development standards of that zone, district or area, including the provision of required parking; 
g.  That the use is in conformity with the locational criteria set forth in this chapter; 
h.  That the design of the site and the proposed improvements are in compliance with any applicable precise plan of design approved for the site; 
i.  That the proposed conduct of the adult business is in compliance with all applicable performance standards of Section 17.60.140 of this chapter. 
2.  In the event the planning commission, or the city council on appeal, denies the final adult use planning permit application, the business shall cease its operations as an adult business and no further activities regulated by this chapter or Chapter 5.76 of this code shall be conducted on the premises unless and until an adult use planning permit and all licenses required by this code are obtained. The interim adult use planning permit shall also terminate on the date the adult use planning permit application is denied. 
3.  If the permit requested is for a development project for construction or reconstruction subject to the Permit Streamlining Act (Government Code Section 65920 et seq.), the time limits provided in the Permit Streamlining Act shall apply to the development project for construction. The adult use planning permit's approval or denial shall be conditioned upon operation within the building to be constructed or reconstructed. 
4.  Upon the filing of an appeal, in accordance with Section 5.76.040(E) of this code, the city council or a designated hearing officer shall render its decision on the appeal within forty-five days. 
C.  The decision of the city council or hearing officer concerning the appeal of a denial, denial of renewal, suspension or revocation of a permit shall be final. The applicant or permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 et seq. The city shall make all reasonable efforts to expedite judicial review in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
(Ord. 2288 § 4 (part), 2005)  
17.60.090 - Applicability and nonconforming period. 
All design and performance standards set forth in this chapter are deemed to be necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare and shall be applicable and govern all existing and proposed adult businesses immediately upon adoption and passage of this chapter. 
In the event that there is any adult business lawfully in existence prior to the adoption of this chapter and is not in compliance with the design and performance standards of this chapter, any such adult business shall conform to all design and performance standards within six months of the effective date of this chapter. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section, the amortization period for a nonconforming use that is governed by consent decree or other court action shall have the amortization period established by such consent decree or court actions. 
(Ord. 2288 § 4 (part), 2005)  
17.60.100 - Extension of nonconforming amortization period, adult businesses. 
A.  An application for extension of the amortization period for an adult business which is a nonconforming use shall be made as provided in subsection (C) and (D) of this section. 
B.  The owner of the property on which an adult business is located or the owner of the adult business who desires to extend the amortization period must apply for approval of an extension not later than six months prior to expiration of the amortization period, unless the director of planning determines that good cause is shown for late filing of the application. Such application shall be made in writing on a form as prescribed by the director of planning and shall be accompanied by the required fee as established by resolution of the city council. The party requesting the extension of the amortization period shall bear the burden of proof in establishing that the amortization period established by Section 17.60.090 is unreasonable and that the requested extension is a reasonable amortization period for the owner to receive a fair rate of return on the investment in the business. The party applying for the extension shall furthermore be required in order to meet its burden of proof to submit the documentation set forth in this section. 
C.  Not later than thirty days after submittal of an application to extend the amortization period, the director of planning shall notify the applicant, in writing, if the application is not complete. A complete application shall include: 
1.  The applicant's signature; 
2.  A written request for an extension of the amortization period which shall include information relevant to the factors listed in subsection F of this section and shall identify the term of the requested extension; 
3.  The required fees; 
4.  A mailing list and a set of gummed labels with the names, addresses and tax assessor parcel numbers of all owners of real property within a radius of three hundred feet from the external boundaries of the property on which the adult business is located; and 
5.  A tax assessor's parcel map identifying the properties to be notified within the three hundred foot radius. 
If the application is not complete, the director of planning shall specify in writing those parts which are incomplete and shall identify the manner by which the application can be made complete. If a written determination is not provided to the applicant within thirty calendar days after it is submitted, the application shall be deemed complete. 
D.  The planning commission shall hold a noticed public hearing on the request for an extension, 
E.  Reserved. 
F.  Criteria and Findings. In determining whether to grant an extension of the amortization period for an adult business which is a nonconforming use, and in determining the appropriate length of such an extension, the planning commission shall consider the amount of investment in the business, the opportunities for relocation to a legally permissible site, the costs of relocation, the effects of the business on the surrounding area, and the following additional factors: 
1.  The present actual and deprecated value of business improvements; 
2.  The applicable Internal Revenue Service depreciation schedule or functional nonconfidential equivalents; 
3.  The remaining useful life of the business improvements; 
4.  The remaining lease term; 
5.  The ability of the business and/or land owner to change the use to a conforming use; and 
6.  The date upon which the property owner and/or business operator received notice of the nonconforming status of the adult business and the amortization requirements. 
G.  The planning commission, or city council or hearing officer on appeal shall receive and consider evidence presented by the applicant and any other persons, and shall make findings that the amortization period it establishes is reasonable in view of the evidence and the criteria set forth in this section. 
(Ord. 2288 § 4 (part), 2005)  
17.60.110 - Continuation of nonconforming buildings and uses. 
A.  Any nonconforming building may be continued and maintained, except as provided in this chapter, provided there are no structural alterations, except as provided in this chapter. 
B.  Any nonconforming use may be continued, except as provided in this chapter, provided that the use shall not be increased, enlarged extended or altered, except as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2288 § 4 (part), 2005)  
17.60.120 - Removal or alterations of nonconforming uses. 
The following provisions shall apply to nonconforming adult businesses: 
A.  The owner of any adult business which is a nonconforming use may apply for extension of the amortization period, pursuant to Section 17.60.100 of this chapter. Such application shall be made prior to the expiration of the amortization period unless the reviewing authority determines that good cause is shown for late filing of the application. 
B.  Upon the conclusion of the amortization period, any adult business which is a nonconforming use shall cease all business operations and all signs, advertising and displays relating to said business shall be removed within thirty days. 
(Ord. 2288 § 4 (part), 2005)  
17.60.130 - General provisions. 
Adult businesses shall only be permitted to be established in the M-1 and M-2 zone designations and shall be subject to the location and design standards specified by this chapter and the requirement of an adult use planning permit as otherwise provided in this chapter and code. 
(Ord. 2288 § 4 (part), 2005)  
17.60.140 - Location, design and performance standards. 
A.  An adult business shall not be established or located within five hundred feet of: 
1.  Any residential zone, residential land use district or property used for residential purposes, including mobilehome parks and trailer parks, within the city; 
2.  Any church, chapel or similar place of worship or property zoned, planned or otherwise designated for such use by city action; 
3.  Any funeral parlor, mortuary, cemetery or similar facility, or property zoned, planned or otherwise designated for such use by city action; 
4.  Any school, nursery, day care center, park or playground or property zoned, planned or otherwise designated for such use by city action; 
5.  Reserved; 
6.  Any other recreational facility where minors congregate or property zoned, planned or otherwise designated for such use by city action; or 
B.  An adult business shall not be established or located within five hundred feet of an existing adult business. If two or more existing adult businesses are located in closer proximity to each other than five hundred feet, then in determining which of the businesses is or are nonconforming, preference shall be given in the order of the respective lengths of continuous uninterrupted operation of the businesses. 
C.  For the purposes of this section, all distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the nearest point of the building or structure in which the adult business is or will be located to the nearest property line of any land use, land use district or zone described in subsection A of this section, or to the nearest point of the building or structure in which an existing adult business described in subsection B of this section, is located. 
D.  No advertising sign or structure, advertisement, display or other promotional material depicting specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities or displaying instruments, devices or paraphernalia designed for use in connection with specific sexual activities, shall be shown or exhibited so as to be visible from any exterior area. 
E.  All building openings, entries and windows shall be located, covered or screened to prevent viewing the interior from any exterior area. 
F.  No loudspeaker or sound equipment audible to persons in any public exterior area shall be used in connection with an adult business, and the business shall be so conducted that sounds associated with the business are not emitted into any public exterior area. 
G.  The establishment of an adult business shall comply with the applicable site development standards including parking of the zone, district or area in which the adult business is located, the building code, fire code and the health and safety code of the city. An adult business shall comply with the applicable city permit and inspection procedures. In addition, adult businesses shall comply with the following performance standards: 
1.  Each adult business shall have a business entrance separate from any other non-adult business located in the same building. 
2.  No adult business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation by the public of any material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any public way or from any location beyond the walls of the building or portion thereof in which the adult business is conducted. 
3.  The building entrance to the adult business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that minors are precluded from entering the premises. 
4.  Each adult business shall be provided with a manager's station for the purpose of supervising activities within the business. A manager shall be on duty on the premises during all times that the adult business is open to the public. 
5.  Any viewing room shall be visible from the manager's station of the adult business, and visibility of the entire viewing room from the manager's station shall be neither obscured nor obstructed by any curtain, door, wall or other structure. 
6.  All exterior areas of adult businesses, including buildings, landscaping and parking areas, shall be maintained in a clean and orderly manner free of trash, weeds and debris. 
7.  The maximum occupancy load, fire exits, fire lanes and fire suppression equipment shall be regulated, designed and provided in accordance with the regulations and standards of the county fire department and the city's building department. 
9.  Off-street parking shall be provided for the adult business as specified for the zone, district or area in which the business is located in accordance with the parking provisions of this code and as follows: 
Adult Theater, Adult Cabaret or Adult Motion Picture Arcade. One parking space shall be provided for every two seats in the viewing room, or one parking space shall be provided for every two occupants per the allowable occupant load as established by the chief building official and/or the fire marshal, whichever standard is greater. In addition, one parking space shall be provided for each employee on the maximum shift. 
10.  Any person who operates or causes to be operated an adult business, other than an adult motel and regardless of whether or not an adult business license has been issued to said business under this code, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room or viewing booth of less than one hundred fifty square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Upon application for an adult business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures, and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons shall not be permitted. A manager's station(s) shall not exceed thirty-two square feet of floor area. 
b.  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station shall be made without the prior written approval of the director of planning. 
c.  It is the duty of the permit-holder to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated at each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
d.  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms shall not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises have two or more manager's stations designed, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection shall be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
e.  It shall be the duty of the permit-holder and any employees present on the premises to insure that the view area specified in subsection (G)(10)(d) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times and to insure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designed as an area in which patrons shall not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to this chapter. 
11.  An on-site security program shall be prepared and implemented including the following items: 
a.  All off-street parking areas and building entries serving the adult business shall be illuminated during all hours of operation with a lighting system designed to provide an average maintained horizontal illumination of ten foot candle of light on the parking surface and/or walkway. This required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the adult business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and theft. The lighting shall be shown on the required site or plot plan and shall be subject to review for compliance through the design review process by the director of planning and the chief of police. 
b.  All interior portions of the adult business, except those areas devoted to mini-motion or motion pictures, shall be illuminated during all hours of operation with a lighting system designed to provide a minimum maintained horizontal illumination of not less than five foot candles of light. 
c.  For adult businesses, the use of uniformed private patrol personnel, who are regularly employed by a private patrol, qualified under Chapter 5.04 of the Montebello Municipal Code, and licensed to do business in the city, shall be required in accordance with the following schedule: 
Number of Persons In Attendance/ Occupant Load 	Number of Patrolmen Required 
0—100 	2 
100—200 	4 
Over 200 	4 plus 2 for each additional 100 persons. 
 
d.  The private patrol officers must be licensed, must be in an easily recognizable complete private patrol officer's uniform which is in contrast to the uniform of the officers of the Montebello police department. 
e.  The city manager may, upon consideration of an application for such permits, require a greater number of private patrol officers or such patrol officers may be waived, if the city manager finds that such patrol officers are not required to preserve the public peace, health and safety. 
12.  Adult Motion Picture Theater. 
a.  A manager's station shall be located near the main entrance and the station shall be provided with an unobstructed view of all motion picture private viewing areas. 
b.  No adult motion picture arcade shall be maintained or operated unless the complete interior of the adult motion picture theater is visible upon entrance to such adult motion picture theater. No partially or fully enclosed booths or partially or fully concealed booths shall be maintained. 
c.  Maximum Number of Devices. No person shall operate an adult motion picture theater in which the number of image producing devices exceeds the maximum occupancy load permitted in any room or partitioned portion of a room in which an image producing device is located. 
13.  Adult Hotel/Motel. 
a.  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or a similar commercial establishment has been rented or subrented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours on a recurring basis creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult hotel/motel as that term is defined in this chapter. 
b.  A person is in violation of the provisions of this chapter if such person rents or sub-rents a sleeping room at a location without an adult business license and an adult use planning permit to a person or persons and within ten hours thereafter rents or sub-rents the same room to another person(s) or sub-rents the same room to the prior renter. 
(Ord. 2288 § 4 (part), 2005)  
17.60.150 - Couch dancing/straddle dancing and other sexual activities prohibited. 
For purposes of this section, "couch dancing" or "straddle dancing" shall be defined as an employee of the adult business intentionally touching any patron while engaged in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area, or while simulating any specified sexual activity. 
A.  No person shall operate or cause to be operated an adult business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued under this code knowingly or with reason to know, permitting, suffering or allowing any employee: 
1.  To engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a patron at the business; 
2.  To contract or otherwise agree with a patron to engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a person at the business or property; 
3.  To intentionally touch any patron at an adult business while engaged in the display or exposure of a specified anatomical area or engaged in or simulating a specified sexual activity; 
4.  To voluntarily be within six feet of any patron while engaged in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area or engaged in or simulating a specified sexual activity. 
B.  No employee of an adult business shall: 
1.  Engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a patron at the business; 
2.  Contract or otherwise agree to engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a patron at the business; 
3.  Engage in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area or engage in or simulate a specified sexual activity while intentionally touching a patron at the adult business; 
4.  Engage in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area or engage in or simulate a specified sexual activity closer than six feet from any patron. 
C.  No person at any adult business, regardless of whether or not said business is permitted under this code, shall intentionally touch an employee who is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area or engaging in or simulating a specified sexual activity at the adult business. 
D.  No person at any adult business, regardless of whether or not said business is permitted under this code, shall engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with an employee at the business who is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area or engaging in or simulating a specified sexual activity. 
E.  No employee of an adult business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter, shall engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service or solicit a service between the hours of two a.m. and nine a.m. of any particular day. 
(Ord. 2288 § 4 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 17.61 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
17.61.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to preserve a healthy environment for residents and businesses by establishing a set of consistent standards for the safe operation of alcoholic beverage establishments. It is recognized that hospitality, entertainment, recreation and related businesses are a significant part of the city's economy, and that alcoholic beverage sales are important to the operation of these businesses. It is also recognized that alcohol abuse can create environments which jeopardize the continued success of these businesses and seriously affect the health, safety and general welfare in surrounding areas, particularly residential neighborhoods. 
The city council finds and determines that establishments engaged in the on-sale and off-sale of alcoholic beverages present problems that are encountered by residents of Montebello, including, but not limited to, littering, loitering, obstruction of pedestrian traffic, vehicular traffic, parking crime, interference with children on their way to school, interference with shoppers using the streets, defacement and damaging of structures, discouragement of more desirable and needed commercial uses and other similar zoning problems connected primarily with the operation of establishments engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on and off the premises. 
This chapter is intended to deal with and prevent these alcohol-related problems and conditions by: (a) imposing restrictions on the location of such establishments in relation to one another and in relation to facilities primarily devoted to use by children and families and the general public; and (b) requiring that each establishment obtain a conditional use permit in connection with its business operations or its events and activities which involve the sale of alcoholic beverages, and imposing conditions therein on a case by case basis, thereby limiting the number of such establishments in the city and preventing undesirable community impact of such uses by the imposition of reasonable conditions upon the operation of all such uses, both existing and in the future. 
(Ord. 2228 (part), 2001)  
17.61.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words or terms shall be defined as follows: 
"Alcoholic beverage" means a fermented or distilled beverage including alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume which is fit for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances, and sales of which require a license from the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC). 
"Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC)" means the California State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
"Bona fide restaurant" means a business enterprise which is conducted, or proposed to be conducted in compliance with the following requirements: 
A.  A kitchen and a dining area that constitute permanent and identifiable portions of the business premises; 
B.  Not less than fifty-one percent of the business enterprise is derived from the sale of food and non-alcoholic beverages; 
C.  At least one full-time cook is engaged by the business enterprise to prepare meals for patrons on the premises during the permissible hours of operation; 
D.  Any bar or cocktail lounge operated by the business enterprise is separated from the dining area by a wall or other partition. 
Fast food restaurants are not considered bona fide restaurants. 
"Entertainment" means any form of entertainment, whether live, televised, audio or video taped, including, but not limited to, any type of performance for the purpose of amusing an audience, such as: dancing, singing, playing a musical instrument, acting, etc. 
"Existing deemed approved alcoholic beverage establishment" means any establishment lawfully engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages for on and off-sale consumption which is in existence prior to the effective date of this chapter, retains the same type of alcoholic beverage license and continues to legally operate without substantial change in the mode or character of operation. 
"Drug store" means any business establishment which is characterized primarily by the sale of prescription drugs, which has a floor area of more than ten thousand square feet. 
"Fast food restaurant" means a restaurant that sells prepared food or beverages either indoors or outdoors in nondisposable containers, or whose business is primarily related to take out food. 
"Grocery store" means any business establishment selling food products, household merchandise, and/or drugs to the public which has a floor area of more than ten thousand square feet. 
"Mini-mart" means any business establishment not connected with a petroleum products service station, and which is characterized by retail sales of pre-packaged food products household items, or food items such as fresh meat or produce. 
"Off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment" means any business establishment which is making application for or which has obtained a retail liquor license from ABC authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises in original, unopened containers. Such retail liquor licenses include type 20 (off-sale beer and wine) or a type 21 (off-sale general). Typical off-sale alcoholic beverage establishments include, but are not limited to, food markets, supermarkets, grocery stores, drug stores, liquor stores, and mini-marts. 
"On-sale alcoholic beverage establishment" means any business establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold, served or given away for consumption on the premises that is licensed, or proposed to be licensed, by ABC. Such retail licenses include: type 40 (on-sale beer eating place), type 41 (on-sale beer and wine eating place), type 42 (on-sale beer and wine), type 47 (on-sale general eating place), type 48 (on-sale general bar), type 51 (club), type 52 (veterans club) and type 63 (hospital—beer and wine). Typical on-sale alcoholic beverage establishments include, but are not limited to, beer bars, restaurants, ballrooms, dance bars, piano bars, billiard and/or game parlors, night clubs or other private clubs, and veterans clubs. 
"Substantial change in mode or character of operation" includes, but is not limited to, the following situations: 
A.  The alcoholic beverage establishment has changed, or proposes to change, its type of retail liquor license with the department of alcoholic beverage control; 
B.  The off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment increases the floor area or shelf space principally devoted to alcohol sales; 
C.  The on-sale alcoholic beverage establishment increases the floor area or number of seats principally devoted to alcohol sales; 
D.  The alcoholic beverage establishment proposes to reinstate alcohol sales after the retail liquor license has been revoked or suspended for a period greater than ninety days by the department of alcoholic beverage control; or 
E.  The establishment is a bona fide restaurant with an alcohol license from the department of alcoholic beverage control that adds entertainment consisting of more than fifty square feet in size; 
F.  The alcoholic beverage establishment is found to have violated any of the city's nuisance and public welfare laws as set forth in Chapter[s] 8.16, 9.04, 9.08 and 0.12 of this code. 
"Specialty food store" means any business establishment selling ethnic, imported, and/or gourmet food products including cheeses, meats, baked goods, condiments, seasoning and novelty foods and beverages that has a floor area of more than ten thousand square feet. 
"Supermarket" means any business establishment selling food products, household merchandise, and/or drugs to the public which has a floor area of more than ten thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 2256 § 1, 2002; Ord. 2228 (part), 2001; Ord. No. 2351, § 3, 6-12-2013)  
17.61.030 - Conditional use permit required. 
On or after the effective date of this chapter, no place where alcoholic beverages are sold, served, or given away as a normal course of business for on-sale or off-sale consumption, shall be established without first obtaining a conditional use permit from the city of Montebello. No existing deemed approved alcoholic beverage establishment shall substantially change its mode or character of operation as such term is defined in Section 17.61.020, without first obtaining a conditional use permit. No existing deemed approved alcoholic beverage establishment shall rebuild or replace a structure or portion of a structure when the total reconstruction cost exceeds thirty-seven percent of the fair market value of the structure in accordance with subsection 17.54.040(C), of this code without first obtaining a conditional use permit. A site that has not been operating for more than ninety days shall not be allowed to operate without first obtaining a conditional use permit. 
Issuance of a conditional use permit shall be in accordance with the requirements set forth in Chapter 17.70 of this code and the requirements of this chapter. The planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove an application for conditional use permit for alcoholic beverage establishments. Following a public hearing at which all parties may present testimony, the planning commission shall state the findings of fact which serve as the basis of its decision, and record its decision in writing. 
A copy of the conditions of approval for the conditional use permit must be kept on the premises of the establishment and be presented to any peace officer or any authorized city official upon request. 
Any establishment, such as a supermarket, grocery store, a specialty food store, and a drug store, that have a floor area of more than ten thousand square feet, is exempt from the provisions of this section if the floor area dedicated to the sale of alcoholic beverages does not exceed twenty percent of the establishment's retail floor area. 
(Ord. 2256 § 2, 2002: Ord. 2228 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2351, § 3, 6-12-2013)  
17.61.040 - Conditional use permit—Public notification requirements. 
A.  Any new proposed on-sale or off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment, or any existing deemed approved alcoholic establishment that undergoes a substantial change in mode or character of operation that is located within three hundred feet from another such establishment or any residential use, church or other place of worship, or clinic or other healthcare facility; or within one thousand feet from a school (public or private), public park, playground or other similar use shall be subject to the following increased public notification requirements in lieu of the public notification requirements in Chapter 17.78 of this code. 
1.  Notice shall be mailed and posted at least twenty days prior to hearing; 
2.  Notice shall be mailed to occupants of buildings within five hundred feet of the site boundaries; 
3.  Notice shall be mailed to all property owners within three hundred feet of the site boundaries. 
B.  The increased public notification requirements outlined in Section 17.61.040.(A) above shall not apply to any on-sale or off-sale alcoholic beverage establishments within a bona fide restaurant as such term is defined in Section 17.61.020. 
(Ord. 2256 § 3, 2002: Ord. 2228 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2351, § 3, 6-12-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2351, § 3, adopted June 12, 2013, changed the title of § 17.61.040 from "Conditional use permit—Distance requirements" to "Conditional use permit—Public notification requirements."  
17.61.050 - Conditional use permit—Findings. 
In order to approve a conditional use permit for an alcoholic beverage establishment (whether for on-sale or off-sale consumption), the planning commission, or the city council on appeal, shall find that the proposed use is consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter. In addition, the planning commission, or the city council on appeal, shall make the following findings in lieu of the findings required by Section 17.70.070: 
That the proposed use: 
A.  Would not adversely affect the general welfare of the surrounding property owners; 
B.  Would not result in an undesirable concentration of premises for the sale of alcoholic beverages, including beer and wine, in the area; 
C.  Would not detrimentally affect the nearby surrounding area after giving special consideration to the proximity and nature of the proposed use with respect to other on-sale or off-sale alcoholic beverage establishments, residential districts and uses, schools (public or private), day care centers, public parks, playgrounds and other recreational facilities, churches and other places of religious worship, hospitals, clinics or other health care facilities; 
D.  Would not aggravate existing problems created by the sale of alcohol (e.g. littering, loitering, noise, public drunkenness, calls for service, and sales to minors); 
E.  Is in conformance with the goals, policies, and objectives of the general plan and the purpose and intent of this code and any applicable specific plan; and 
F.  Serves the public convenience or necessity, based upon the factors outlined in Section 17.61.060 herein. This finding shall apply only to conditional use permit applications for bars, off-sale alcoholic beverage establishments, and any other applications that the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control determines are located in an area of undue concentration as defined by state law (California Business and Professions Code Section 23958.4.) 
In order for the planning commission or city council to establish the required findings listed above, the burden shall be on the applicant for the conditional use permit utilizing clear and concise evidence, that the proposed use will not adversely affect the welfare of nearby residents, or detrimentally affect nearby residentially zoned communities. 
(Ord. 2228 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2351, § 3, 6-12-2013)  
17.61.060 - Conditional use permit—Factors regarding public convenience or necessity. 
In deciding whether to issue the conditional use permit, the planning commission, or the city council on appeal, shall consider whether the public convenience or necessity is being served and make the necessary findings, as required in Section 17.61.050. A determination of whether public convenience or necessity is being served shall be based upon review and consideration of relevant factors, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  Whether the proposed use will result in a net employment gain in the city (especially of local residents); 
B.  Whether the proposed use will result in a substantial increase in business taxes; 
C.  Whether the proposed establishment is a unique business addition to the community; 
D.  Whether the proposed use will contribute to the long-term economic development goals of the community; 
E.  Whether the aesthetic character and ambiance of the proposed use will result in an overall positive upgrade in the area and community; 
F.  The viability of the business to operate profitably without alcohol sales. 
(Ord. 2228 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2351, § 3, 6-12-2013)  
17.61.070 - Mandatory conditions of approval for on-sale alcoholic beverage establishments. 
Establishments engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption shall be operated in a manner which does not interfere with the normal use of adjacent properties. In addition to those conditions which the planning commission, or the city council on appeal, may otherwise impose, all conditional use permits for on-sale beverages establishments shall be subject to the following mandatory conditions for approval: 
A.  That a decorative masonry wall of six feet in height shall be constructed around the parking area of such establishments when said area is adjacent to properties zoned or used for residential purposes or any other sensitive use, such as schools, churches, parks, etc. 
B.  That the noise levels generated by the operation of such establishment shall not exceed sixty-five dBA between the hours of seven a.m. to ten p.m., and not exceed sixty dBA between the hours of ten p.m. to seven a.m., so as to mitigate the impact on adjoining properties zoned or used for residential purposes. The measurement of noise levels shall be taken at the location of the shared property line. 
C.  That exterior lighting of the parking area shall be kept at an intensity of between one- and two-foot candles, so as to provide adequate lighting for patrons while not disturbing surrounding residential or commercial areas. Light sources shall be screened from adjacent properties and from the sky. 
D.  That the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption outside or off the premises shall be prohibited; except, that this provision shall not apply to bona fide restaurants with approved outdoor or sidewalk dining, or to a bona fide restaurant with an approved conditional use permit and an approved license with the ABC for off-sale consumption. 
E.  That adequate security measures shall be provided as specified by the police department, including but not limited to, retaining trained staff and security personnel and providing security devices such as surveillance or burglar alarm systems. 
F.  All bona fide restaurants shall possess a supply of food and goods adequate to make substantial food sales and comply with Section 23038 of the Business and Professions Code. All food must be maintained in a sanitary condition and comply with all health department regulations. Failure to serve food (for any reason) shall result in the automatic suspension of all alcoholic beverage sales that are served for on-site consumption until food sales are resumed. 
G.  The sorting of empty bottles and other recyclable products shall be limited to the hours between 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. daily. 
H.  That no signs shall be installed on the site until a sign permit has been approved by the Planning and Building Departments in conformance with the provisions set forth in Chapter 17.62 of the Montebello Municipal Code. 
I.  As stated in Section 9.04.010 of the Montebello Municipal Code, no person shall drink any intoxicating liquor in or upon any public street or public place within the city. Signs shall be posted on the premises both inside and outside, citing Section 9.04.010 of the Montebello Municipal Code. 
J.  That premises shall be kept clean and the operator of the establishment shall insure that no trash or litter originating form the site is deposited onto neighboring properties or onto the public right-of-way. 
K  Reserved. 
L.  That the management of any establishment selling alcohol shall take the necessary steps to assure the orderly conduct of employees, patrons and visitors on the premises. 
M.  That the owner of the establishment shall maintain all required permits and/or licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages in good standing. 
N.  That no person shall sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption if there has been any lapse or breach in the good standing of any one or more of the permits and/or licenses required for such sale. 
O.  Reserved. 
P.  In addition to the conditions enumerated above, any other condition may be imposed by city staff. 
(Ord. 2228 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2351, § 3, 6-12-2013)  
17.61.080 - Mandatory conditions of approval for off-sale alcoholic beverage establishments. 
Establishments engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption shall be operated in a manner which does not interfere with the normal use of adjacent properties. In addition to those conditions which the planning commission, or the city council on appeal, may otherwise impose, all conditional use permits for off-sale alcoholic beverage establishments shall be subject to the following mandatory conditions of approval: 
A.  Any off-sale alcoholic beverage establishments seeking to sell or store motor fuels on the same premises as alcoholic beverages shall comply with the following conditions: 
1.  No beer or wine shall be displayed within five feet of the cash register or the front door unless it is in a permanently affixed cooler. 
2.  No advertisements of alcoholic beverages shall be displayed at motor fuel islands and no self-illuminated advertising for alcoholic beverages shall be located on buildings or windows. 
3.  No sale of alcohol beverages shall be made from a drive-up window. 
4.  No display or sale of beer or wine shall be made from an ice tub. 
5.  Employees on duty between the hours of ten p.m. and two a.m. shall be at least twenty-one years of age to sell beer and wine. 
6.  The permittee at all times shall comply with all terms and provisions of the license issued by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control and/or the terms and provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. 
7.  No sale of single containers of beer and/or wine coolers shall be made. 
8.  In addition to the conditions enumerated above, additional conditions may be imposed by city staff. 
B.  That a masonry wall of six feet in height shall be constructed around the parking area of such establishments when said area is adjacent to properties zones or used for residential purposes, or any of the above referenced consideration points. 
C.  That the noise levels generated by the operation of such establishment shall not exceed sixty-five dBA between the hours of seven a.m. to ten p.m., and not exceed sixty dBA between the hours of ten p.m. to seven a.m., so as to mitigate the impact on adjoining properties zoned or used for residential purposes. The measurement of noise levels shall be taken at the location of the shared property line. 
D.  That exterior lighting of the parking area shall be kept at an intensity of between one- and two-foot candles, so as to provide adequate lighting for patrons while not disturbing surrounding residential or commercial areas. Light sources shall be shielded from adjacent properties and from the sky. 
E.  The sorting of empty bottles and other recyclable products shall be limited to the hors between eight a.m. to nine p.m. daily. 
F.  That the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises shall be prohibited and appropriate posting of signs stating that drinking on the premises is prohibited by law shall be posted both inside and outside the establishment. The premises shall include the establishment proper and/or the appurtenant common area if located in a commercial center. 
G.  That special security measures such as security guards and burglar alarm systems as specified by the police department may be required. 
H.  That exterior public telephones that permit incoming calls may not be located on the premises. 
I.  That exterior storage of any kind shall be prohibited. 
J.  That litter and trash receptacles shall be located at convenient locations inside and outside establishments, and operators of such establishments shall remove trash and debris on a daily basis. 
K.  That paper or plastic cups shall not be sold or given away in quantities less than their usual and customary packaging. 
L.  Reserved. 
M.  Reserved. 
N.  Reserved. 
O.  That no signs shall be installed on the site until a sign permit has been approved by the building and safety division and the planning department in conformance with the provisions set forth in Chapter 17.62 of the Montebello Municipal Code. 
The planning commission, and the city council on appeal, shall have the right to impose additional conditions for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 2228 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2351, § 3, 6-12-2013)  
17.61.082 - Outdoor patio and patio seating. 
A.  Approval. Prior to establishing any outdoor patio and/or patio seating area, the planning commission, or the city council on appeal, shall make the following findings in addition to those specified in Section 17.61.050 of this code: 
1.  The proposed outdoor patio and/or patio seating area is accessory to the establishment; 
2.  The establishment, maintenance or operation of the accessory outdoor patio and/or patio seating area will not be detrimental to the health, safety, peace, comfort and general welfare of persons in the neighborhood or injurious to property or improvements in the area; 
3.  The proposed accessory outdoor patio and/or patio seating area will not eliminate any required on-site parking, interfere with public easements, and will comply with all applicable regulations of the Montebello Municipal Code. 
B.  Conditions of approval. Unless conditioned otherwise by the approval authority, all outdoor dining and patio seating areas shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  That the outdoor patio and/or patio seating area shall be subject to all the existing hours of operation, operational characteristics and conditions of approval for any valid entitlement applicable to the establishment, except as otherwise set forth herein; 
2.  No amplified music or amplified entertainment is permitted outdoors, except wherein normal conversation is not impeded; no music (live or recorded) or entertainment (including televisions) shall be permitted on a patio after ten p.m. Sunday through Thursday, and after eleven p.m. Friday and Saturday; 
3.  All doors and windows leading to the outdoor patio and/or patio seating areas shall remain closed (except for employee/patron ingress and egress) after ten p.m. Sunday through Thursday, and after eleven p.m. Friday and Saturday, while any approved indoor amplified music or live entertainment is occurring; 
4.  Roof coverings for the outdoor patio and/or patio seating area shall not have the effect of creating a permanent enclosure. Fences, walls, and similar barriers around the outdoor patio area shall only serve to define the outdoor patio area. The maximum height shall be determined by the approval authority; 
5.  All outdoor patios and/or patio seating areas in which alcoholic beverages are served shall be enclosed by a sufficient barrier with a minimum height of three feet, as required by the department of alcoholic beverage control. However, the city's applicable approval authority may require additional design features beyond the minimum requirements set by the department of alcoholic beverage control for any proposed barrier, including but not limited to: the type of materials, color, height, etc. Exiting from the outdoor patio and/or patio seating area only shall be permitted as required by the building code; 
6.  Such additional conditions that the approval authority deems appropriate to mitigate potential adverse impacts the outdoor patio and/or patio seating area may cause to the adjacent property and surrounding community. 
(Ord. No. 2351, § 3, 6-12-2013)  
17.61.085 - Wall, landscaping and off-street parking requirements (on-sale and off-sale). 
The mandatory conditions of approval stated in Sections 17.61.070 and 17.61.080, with respect to the requirements for masonry walls, landscaping and off-street parking standards shall be observed, except where the planning commission and/or the city council finds that specific deviations are required to be made because of physical constraints or limitations of the site or property of the respective on-sale or off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment. 
(Ord. 2256 § 4, 2002)  
17.61.090 - Existing establishments selling alcoholic beverages (on-sale and off-sale). 
Any establishment lawfully existing prior to the effective date of this chapter and licensed by the state of California for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for on sale and off-sale consumption shall be considered as a "deemed approved alcoholic beverage establishment" and shall be required to obtain a conditional use permit in the situations described in Section 1761.030 herein. The distance requirements set forth in Section 17.61.040 shall not apply to any existing "deemed approved alcoholic beverage establishment." 
(Ord. 2256 § 5, 2002: Ord. 2228 (part), 2001)  
17.61.100 - Performance standards to prevent public nuisance. 
Any on-sale or off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment with a conditional use permit or any existing establishments having a "deemed approved" status shall comply with the following performance standards. The purpose of these standards is to control dangerous or objectionable environmental effects of alcoholic beverage sales and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Any on-sale or off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment with a conditional use permit or deemed approved alcoholic beverage establishment status is subject to citation for public nuisance as defined in the Montebello Code and the California Penal Code. In addition, any conditional use permit shall be subject to amendment, modification or revocation, and in the case of existing establishments, loss of the "deemed approved" status, if the following is found to exist: 
A.  Nuisance activities within the premises or in close proximity of the premises, including, but not limited to, disturbance of the peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, drinking of alcoholic beverages in public or vehicles on or about the premises, harassment of passerby. 
B.  Repeated nuisance activities within the premises or in close proximity of the premises such as public urination, assault and battery, excessive littering, loitering, graffiti. 
C.  Nuisance activities within the premises or in close proximity of the premises consisting of illegal parking, excessive loud and raucous noise as defined in Chapter 9 of the Montebello Municipal Code, especially in the late night or early morning hours, traffic violations, curfew violation and lewd conduct. 
D.  Where the operation of the premises is in violation of any applicable city ordinance or state or federal regulation or statute. 
E.  Failure to comply with any condition imposed in the issuance of a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 2228 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2351, § 3, 6-12-2013)  
17.61.110 - Administrative review of conditional use permits. 
The city reserves the right to review the conditional use permit (CUP). After reviewing the existing manner and conditions of operation of the permitted business establishment, the city planner may add, amend or delete any conditions of approval based upon changed circumstances, which necessitate a modification to the conditions of approval. The city planner's determination shall be final and binding on the business operator unless appealed to the planning commission pursuant to the provisions of the Montebello municipal Code Section 17.78.060. The planning commission shall adopt findings in support of its actions. 
(Ord. 2228 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2351, § 3, 6-12-2013)  
17.61.120 - Severability. 
If any part or provision of this chapter is found to be invalid or unenforceable by a court of law, such invalidity shall not affect any other part or provision herein, and all remaining provisions of this chapter will be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. 2256 § 6, 2002)  
Chapter 17.62 - SIGNS 
 
17.62.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The intent of this chapter is to promote community appearance and effective business identification through the regulation of signs and sign structures within the city of Montebello. The location, number, size and design of signs and graphics have a significant influence upon the community's environment and appearance. The regulation of signs and outdoor advertising is therefore necessary for the following purposes: 
A.  To promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare by minimizing hazards and obstructions to traffic and promoting traffic safety, and through consideration of the aesthetics of signs and outdoor advertising to be installed within the city; 
B.  To protect persons and property values from damage due to indiscriminate and harmful use of signs, outdoor advertising and advertising structures; 
C.  To preserve a pleasing and attractive appearance in all areas of the city. 
(Ord. 2160 § 5 (part), 1997)  
17.62.020 - Location and code provisions. 
Signs shall be constructed and located in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with the applicable requirements of the California Outdoor Advertising Act, Uniform Building Code and Uniform Sign Code, and the California Electrical Code, whichever code or code provision(s) is more restrictive, as may be adopted and amended from time to time. Approval from the City of Montebello departments of planning and building services shall be obtained prior to erecting, constructing, altering, rebuilding, replacing, or moving any sign. Approval by the department of public works is also required for any freestanding or projecting sign located within twenty feet of, or projecting over, the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 2160 § 5 (part), 1997) 
(Ord. No. 2375, § 1, 2-24-2016)  
17.62.030 - Materials, construction and identification. 
A.  All signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be permanently attached to the ground, a building, or another structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame or structure. 
B.  All wooden signs must be at least three-quarter-inch thick. 
C.  All electric signs shall be composed entirely of noncombustible materials. 
D.  Unless specifically exempted, all signs shall be identified with a durable label or tag specifying the name and date of the manufacture, weight, installation date and permit number. In addition, for electrical signs the voltage, amperage and any other information required for the safety certification or listing for the equipment shall be included. This information shall be placed where it is readily visible for inspection after the sign has been installed. 
E.  Every electrical sign of any type shall be constructed, inspected and approved by the Underwriters Laboratories (UL) or equal and display a label of approval from said laboratory. 
(Ord. 2160 § 5 (part), 1997)  
17.62.040 - Maintenance. 
A.  All signs and sign structures including those otherwise specifically exempt from the provisions of this chapter, including all parts, portions, and materials, shall be maintained and kept in good repair. The display surface of all signs shall be kept clean, neatly painted, and free from rust and corrosion. Any crack, broken surfaces, malfunctioning light(s), missing sign copy or other unmaintained or damaged portion of a sign shall be repaired or replaced within thirty calendar days following notification by the city. Noncompliance with such a request shall constitute a public nuisance. 
B.  All businesses must service and wash their signs at least once every twelve months. 
C.  Upon vacating a business location, the business or property owner shall remove the sign copy that advertises the business. At no time shall a signcabinet remain empty and without copy exposing the internal lighting and electrical fixtures. During any period when a sign cabinet is not being utilized for identification of a business, a blank opaque face shall be installed in the sign cabinet structure. Any damage to a building caused by the removal of a sign structure shall be repaired to the condition the building was in prior to the installation of the sign. 
(Ord. 2160 § 5 (part), 1997)  
17.62.050 - Prohibited signs. 
A.  The following signs are prohibited except as provided in Section 17.62.160, Nonconforming signs, Section 17.62.160, Temporary signs, and Section 17.62.105, Off-Premises Digital Display Signs: 
1.  Signs that include video, blink, or move in any manner, have any portions that move, or have the appearance of moving, including animated or scrolling electronic text that clocks, time and temperature displays, civic and public services, and unique/creative signs allowed through the approval of a Planned Sign Program are exempt from this prohibition; 
2.  Flags (except those which are raised and lowered on permanently fixed flag poles), pennants, banners, paper, wind driven signs (except where specifically provided for within this code); 
3.  Roof signs; 
4.  Sign structures and supports no longer in use; 
5.  Portable signs; 
6.  Commercial advertising statuary; 
7.  Signs painted directly onto exterior wall surfaces (such as exterior building walls and masonry block walls, etc.); 
8.  Inflatable signs (except as provided in Sections 17.62.110 and 17.62.170 of this chapter); 
9.  New off-premises signs, except those permitted pursuant to this chapter; 
10.  Murals. 
B.  No person shall construct, place or maintain any sign, signboard, billboard, street bulletin board, sign or advertisement in, over, along, across or upon any public street or public parkway, or other public place within the city, except as provided in Section 17.62.110 or Section 17.62.105 of this chapter. 
C.  Nothing contained in this title shall be construed to prohibit the erection or placing in any public street, parkway or other public place, of signs, notices or signals under the authority of the city council or of this code. 
D.  No person shall paint, post, attach or affix any handbill, notice, sign or advertisement upon any object in the public right-of-way, or to any bridge, fence, light pole, building, structure, or other property within public view, nor to any tree in any public right-of-way or public place; nor shall any person deface, mar or disfigure any such bridge, fence, light pole, building, tree, etc. 
(Ord. 2160 § 5 (part), 1997) 
(Ord. No. 2375, § 2, 2-24-2016)  
17.62.060 - Exemptions. 
The provisions and regulations hereof shall not apply to the following types of signs: 
A.  Official notices issued by any court, public body or officer; 
B.  Notices posted by any person or public officer in performance of a public duty; 
C.  Signs required or authorized by any federal, state, county or city regulation, ordinance or resolution; 
D.  Any signs used for emergency purposes only; 
E.  Official flags of the United States of America, the state of California, the county of Los Angeles or the city of Montebello. 
(Ord. 2160 § 5 (part), 1997)  
17.62.070 - Sign measurements. 
A.  Sign Area. 
1.  Cabinet Signs. The area of a cabinet sign is determined by the area of the sign face(s) enclosed by a frame or cabinet and is determined by the outer dimensions of the frame or cabinet surrounding the sign area. This includes the total area of the copy and the background. This applies to wall mounted cabinet signs and cabinet signs mounted on freestanding pole structures. (See Figures 17.62.070A and 17.62.070B) Architectural features are not considered in the sign area. (See Figure 17.62.070B) 
Figure 17.62.070A 
  
Figure 17.62.070B 
  
2.  Channel Letters and Individual Elements. When signs are constructed of individual elements such as channel letters and attached to a building wall, the sign area is determined by calculating the area of an imaginary box drawn around the most exterior area of all the letters and/or elements. (See Figure 17.62.070C) 
Figure 17.62.070C 
  
3.  Awnings. When signs are incorporated into an awning, the sign area is determined by computing the area of an imaginary box drawn around the sign elements. 
4.  Multiple Sign Cabinets. For freestanding signs that contain multiple cabinets on one structure, the area of each cabinet counts toward a combined total. If these are double or multiple faced cabinets, the sign area shall be calculated to include all faces of the sign. (See Figure 17.62.070D) 
Figure 17.62.070D 
  
B.  Height. The overall height of a sign or sign structure is measured from the ground directly below the sign to the highest point of the sign or sign structure. (See Figure 17.62.070E) 
C.  Clearance. Clearance is measured from the ground directly below the sign to the bottom of the sign structure enclosing the sign face. (See Figure 17.62.070E) 
Figure 17.62.070E 
  
(Ord. 2160 § 5 (part), 1997)  
17.62.080 - Signs—Residential zones. 
Signs are allowed in residential zones in accordance with the following: 
A.  In All R Zones: 
1.  One nonilluminated sign a maximum of twelve square feet in area pertaining only to the sale or lease of the particular building or property upon which it is displayed. 
2.  Outdoor advertising structures in conjunction with model homes (See Chapter 17.58 of this title, Model Homes). 
3.  Temporary architect's or builder's sign identifying persons engaged in construction on a site are permitted as long as construction is in progress. 
B.  R-A Zone. One sign a maximum of twelve square feet in area advertising the sale of agricultural products raised on the premises. 
C.  R-3 and R-4 Zones. One wall sign a maximum of twenty square feet in area, provided the sign contains no advertising copy except the name and street address of the building upon which it is placed. 
(Ord. 2160 § 5 (part), 1997)  
17.62.090 - Signs—C-R zone. 
A.  Signs are allowed in the C-R zone in accordance with the following: 
1.  The sign area shall not exceed one square foot per two linear feet of building frontage, or three linear feet of lot width for outdoor uses. 
2.  No sign may exceed fifty square feet in area. 
3.  No more than two signs are permitted for each use or business on a lot. 
4.  Freestanding signs are prohibited. 
5.  Each legally established use or business on a lot may have one additional accessory sign that is a maximum size of six square feet in area. 
B.  For the purpose of giving information on the availability of the premises for sale or lease, one sign not exceeding twelve square feet in area shall also be allowed. 
(Ord. 2160 § 5 (part), 1997)  
17.62.100 - Signs—C-1, C-2, C-M, M-1 and M-2 zones. 
A.  Individual Sign Criteria. 
Figure 17.62.100A 
  
1.  Wall and Marquee Signs. 
a.  Maximum Size. 
i.  Front Facade. For wall and marquee signs, the total sign area on the front facade of a building shall not exceed two square feet of sign area per one linear foot of the building facade (front) width of the subject business. On lots which are occupied by more than one business, the sign area for each business shall not exceed two square feet per one linear foot of building frontage for the respective business. However, in no event must the overall sign area on the front facade be less than twenty square feet. This sign area allotment for the front facade cannot be transferred to other facades on the building. 
ii.  Side and Rear Building Facades. The total sign area for wall and marquee signs on the side and rear facades of a building shall not exceed one square foot of sign area per two linear feet of the facade length of the building or subject business, except that when the facade faces a side street, total sign area shall not exceed one square foot of sign area per one linear foot of facade length. This sign area allotment cannot be transferred to other facades on the building. 
Location 	Wall Sign Area Computations 
Front Facade 	2 sq. ft. × 1 linear foot of building facade width = maximum allowable sign area 
Side and rear facade 	½ sq. ft. × 1 linear foot of building facade width = maximum allowable sign area 
Side facade facing street 	1 sq. ft. × 1 linear foot of building facade width = maximum allowable sign area 
All facades 	Width of facade × 60% = maximum sign length 
 
iii.  No limit shall be placed on the number of wall or marquee signs except that the combined total sign area shall not exceed the allowable sign area ratio per facade. 
iv.  The combined length of all signs placed on a building facade shall not be greater than sixty percent of the length of the facade on which the sign is attached. (See Figure 17.62.100B) 
Figure 17.62.100B 
  
b.  Placement. 
i.  Wall and marquee signs shall not extend beyond the surface of the wall or marquee to which they are attached nor shall they extend above the roof line the building on which the sign is placed. 
ii.  In multiple story buildings, wall and marquee signs may be used by businesses which are located in stories above the ground level subject to the same limitations which would apply if the business were located on the ground level. 
2.  Pole Signs. 
a.  Site Requirements. 
i.  One pole sign may be permitted on a site provided that the site has a minimum street frontage of seventy-five feet in length. On corner lots, one additional pole sign may be established provided that each street frontage is at least seventy-five feet in length. Each pole sign shall be oriented to the street frontage on which it is erected. 
ii.  The area of a double faced pole sign shall be calculated to include both sides of the sign cabinet. The area of a multi-cabinet sign shall be calculated to include all the cabinets. 
b.  Maximum Size and Height. 
i.  The total sign area of a pole sign shall not exceed one square foot of sign area for every one linear foot of street frontage on which the business is located, and shall not exceed a total sign face area of two hundred forty square feet, with a maximum of one hundred twenty square feet per individual sign face. (See Figure 17.62.100C) 
ii.  The maximum height of a pole sign shall not exceed twenty feet. (See Figure 17.62.100C) 
Figure 17.62.100C 
  
iii.  Architectural projections of not more than two feet may be added to the top of a pole sign. At no time shall the total height of a pole sign exceed twenty-two feet. The architectural projection shall be used for design purposes only and no sign copy or internal illumination shall be located within this area. 
c.  Location. 
i.  Pole signs shall be located in a landscape planter the size of which is at least half the size of the sign's total sign area. 
ii.  Pole signs shall be located at a distance of at least five feet from the street abutting property line. This setback distance shall be measured from the property line to the leading edge of the pole sign. (See Section 17.62.170 of this chapter.) 
iii.  If a pole sign is located within twenty feet of the public right-of-way, only one supporting column shall be permitted. 
iv.  Pole signs shall be located at a distance of at least ten feet from any driveway access. This setback distance shall be measured from the edge of the driveway closest to the freestanding sign to the leading edge of the pole sign closest to the driveway. 
v.  Pole signs shall be located at a distance of at least twenty-five feet from a lot line of any residential zoned property. 
vi.  For property which qualifies for two pole signs, the pole signs shall be located at least one hundred and fifty feet apart. 
vii.  On corner lots, no pole sign or support structure shall be located within the triangular vision clearance area which covers the area between the two street abutting property lines for a length of fifteen feet along each property line from their point of intersection. (See Figure 17.62.100D) 
Figure 17.62.100D 
  
viii.  No pole sign or portion thereof shall be located so as to project across any property line except as provided for in Section 17.62.120 of this chapter. 
d.  Appearance. 
i.  All pole signs shall be architecturally compatible with the building(s) on the site where the pole sign is located. In most cases, square or box sign cabinets which have no architectural treatment compatible with the building(s) on the site are discouraged. 
ii.  All pole signs shall be constructed so as to conceal any structural members, bracing, wiring and/or lighting fixtures. 
iii.  The supporting structure(s) of any pole sign shall be of a design and material consistent with that of the exterior of the building(s) on the site. Pole covers/sleeves shall be provided as a decorative feature around the supporting structure of a pole sign. 
e.  Minimum Height and Clearance. 
i.  Pole signs projecting over a pedestrian way shall have a minimum height clearance of eight feet. Signs projecting over a vehicular access, parking or circulation area shall have a minimum height clearance of fifteen feet. Signs projecting over public property shall comply with the Montebello Municipal Code requirements for such sign. 
ii.  Pole signs shall not project over any building. 
3.  Monument and Pylon Signs. 
a.  Site Requirements. 
i.  One monument or pylon sign may be permitted on a site provided that the site has a minimum street frontage of seventy-five feet in length. On corner lots, one additional monument or pylon sign may be established provided that each street frontage is at least seventy-five feet in length. Each sign shall be oriented to the street frontage on which it is erected. 
ii.  The total sign area of a monument or pylon sign with two or more faces shall be calculated to include the area of all faces. 
b.  Maximum Size and Height. 
i.  The total sign area of a monument or pylon sign shall not exceed eighty square feet, with a maximum of forty square feet per individual sign face. 
ii.  The maximum height of a monument sign shall not exceed six feet measured from grade level to the uppermost edge of the sign cabinet. (See Figure 17.62.100E) 
Figure 17.62.100E 
  
iii.  The maximum height of a pylon sign shall not exceed ten feet measured from grade level to the upper most edge of the sign face cabinet. The maximum width of a pylon sign shall not exceed four feet. (See Figure 17.62.100F) 
Figure 17.62.100F 
  
c.  Location. 
i.  Monument or pylon signs shall be located in a landscape planter the size of which is at least half the size of the sign's total sign area. 
ii.  Monument and pylon signs shall be located at a distance of at least five feet from the street abutting property line. This setback distance shall be measured from the property line to the leading edge of the monument or pylon sign. 
iii.  Monument or pylon signs shall be located at a distance of at least ten feet from any driveway access. This setback distance shall be measured from the edge of the driveway closest to the monument or pylon sign to the leading edge of the sign closest to the driveway. 
iv.  Monument or pylon signs shall be located at a distance of at least of twenty-five feet from a lot line of any residential zoned property. 
v.  For property which qualifies for two monument or pylon signs, the monument or pylon signs shall be located at least one hundred fifty feet apart. 
vi.  On corner lots, no monument or pylon sign shall be located within the triangular vision clearance area which covers the area between the two street abutting property lines for a length of fifteen feet along each property line from their point of intersection. (See Figure 17.62.100D) 
vii.  No monument or pylon sign or portion thereof shall be located so as to project across any property line except as provided for in Section 17.62.120 of this chapter. 
d.  Appearance. 
i.  All monument or pylon signs shall be architecturally compatible with the building(s) on the site on which the monument sign is to be located. In most cases, square or box sign cabinets which have no architectural treatment compatible with the building(s) on the site are discouraged. 
ii.  All monument and pylon signs shall be constructed so as to conceal any structural members, bracing, wiring and/or lighting fixtures. 
iii.  No exposed concrete bases are permitted without providing a decorative treatment such as a textured or stucco finish or other treatment which is compatible with the architecture or materials of the building(s) on the site where the sign is located. 
4.  Mansard Signs. 
a.  Maximum Size. Mansard signs are subject to the regulations in Section 17.62.100(A)(1) relating to wall and marquee signs. 
b.  Placement. Such signs shall be mounted on a mansard roof so that the lowest portion of the sign cabinet is recessed into the roof structure and the uppermost portion of the cabinet is flush with the roof. At no point shall there be an open area behind the sign cabinet and the mansard roof. (See Figure 17.62.100A) 
5.  Under Marquee. 
a.  Maximum Size. The sign area of an under marquee sign shall not exceed three square feet per sign face, not to exceed two faces. 
b.  Placement. Mounted underneath a marquee and over a sidewalk, under marquee signs shall be no lower than eight feet above ground level. Signs projecting over public property shall comply with Section 17.62.120 of this chapter. (See Figure 17.62.100A) 
6.  Projecting Signs. 
a.  Maximum Size. The sign area of a projecting sign shall not exceed three square feet per sign face, not to exceed two faces. 
b.  Placement. Projecting signs shall be placed no lower than eight feet above ground level and shall extend no higher than twelve feet. (See Figure 17.62.100A) 
7.  Changeable Copy Signs. 
a.  Maximum Size. The sign area of a changeable copy sign shall not exceed twenty square feet. 
b.  Placement. Changeable copy signs shall be placed in a permanently mounted sign structure either attached to the building or freestanding, consistent with the other provisions of this chapter. 
8.  Awning Signs. 
a.  Maximum Size. The sign area of signs on awnings shall not exceed thirty percent of the exterior surface of the awning. The length of the sign shall not be greater than sixty percent of the length of the awning. (See Figure 17.62.100A) 
9.  Window Signs. 
a.  Maximum Size. The sign area of signs located on the glazed area of a building window shall not exceed twenty five percent of the area of the window containing the sign. (See Figure 17.62.100B) 
b.  Placement. Window signs shall be placed on the interior of a building within a window frame. (See Figure 17.62.100A) 
10.  Outdoor Business Signs. For outdoor businesses (such as auto dealerships, nurseries, and auto rentals, but not service stations and carwashes) the total sign area on the site shall not exceed one square foot of sign area for every one linear foot of street frontage on which the business is located. All other applicable requirements as set forth in this chapter shall apply. 
11.  Fence Mounted Signs. In the M-1 or M-2 zones when a building is not visible from the public right-of-way and visually blocked by a view obscuring fence, one twenty square foot sign shall be permitted to be mounted on a fence facing the public right-of-way. The sign shall be mounted in a permanent manner flush with the fence and visible to the public right-of-way. The sign shall also not extend above the top of the fence upon which it is mounted. 
12.  For Sale or For Rent Signs. The area of for sale, for lease or for rent signs shall not be included in the calculation of overall sign area for a site. Although a building permit is not required for this type of sign, all ground mounted for sale and for lease signs shall be reviewed and approved by the planning department and the department of public works. 
a.  Maximum Size. The area of a for sale or for rent sign shall not exceed twenty square feet. 
b.  Number. The number of for sale or for rent signs on a site shall be limited to one per building or one per business. For large commercial and industrial centers, one freestanding for sale or for rent sign shall be permitted per street frontage. 
c.  Placement. For sale or for rent signs may be displayed in the same location as permanent signs. 
i.  For sale or for rent signs shall not be placed in the path of pedestrian traffic. 
ii.  Ground mounted for sale and for rent signs shall be located at a distance of at least five feet from the street abutting property line. This setback distance shall be measured from the property line to the leading edge of the freestanding for sale or for rent sign. 
iii.  Ground mounted for sale and for rent signs shall be located at a distance of at least ten feet from any driveway access. This setback distance shall be measured from the edge of the driveway closest to the for sale or for rent sign to the leading edge of the for sale or for rent sign closest to the driveway. 
13.  Flags. Flags (not including official national, state or local flags per Section 17.62.060 of this chapter) which can be raised and lowered on permanently fixed flag poles are not limited to the height and area requirements of freestanding signs; however, the area of the flag will be calculated as part of the total sign area for a site. The height of a flag pole supporting such a flag is subject to the maximum building height limitation of the zone in which it is located. 
B.  Freeway-Oriented Signs. 
1.  In addition to any other signs permitted on a site subject to the provisions of this chapter, one freeway-oriented sign may be located on any site which is within five hundred feet of a freeway right-of-way, and which is developed with either: 
a.  A service station or detached restaurant; or 
b.  A commercial, industrial or recreational center or a single business provided that such center or business is located on a site with an area of at least two acres. 
2.  Such signs may be erected subject to the following criteria: 
a.  Maximum Height. Twenty-five feet above the grade of the freeway or above the grade of the location where the sign is erected, whichever is greater; 
b.  Maximum Size. 
i.  Service Stations. One hundred sixty square feet per sign face. 
ii.  All Others. One hundred sixty square feet per sign face plus one square foot of sign face per one thousand square feet of the building housing the advertised use, and shall not exceed a maximum sign face area of six hundred square feet. 
c.  Support Structures. The supporting structures of any sign must: 
i.  Be of a design and material(s) consistent with that of the exterior of the building(s) on the site. Pole covers/sleeves shall be provided as a decorative feature around the supporting structure of a freeway-oriented sign; 
ii.  Not create any visual obstruction or adverse safety or aesthetic impact. 
d.  No freeway-oriented sign or portion thereof shall be located so as to project across any property line except as provided for in Section 17.62.120 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2160 § 5 (part), 1997)  
17.62.105 - Off-premises digital display signs. 
A.  Intent. The provisions of this section shall apply to all off-premises digital display signs as defined under Section 17.62.170, within the city. With authority provided to the City in Government Code Section 65864 and Business and Professions Code section 5412 to enter into development and relocation agreements, the intent of this section is reduce visual clutter, eliminate non-conforming signage, facilitate the orderly development and relocation and redistribution of existing displays to more appropriate locations within the city, to allow for the incorporation of modern technology into relocated displays and limited new displays; and to eliminate the need for the city to pay compensation for removal of existing displays to accommodate a public project. The provisions of this section shall govern the processing of applications for off-premises digital display signs. 
B.  Off-Premises Digital Display Sign Corridors. The construction of a new off-premises digital display sign or the relocation of an off-premises sign shall be permitted only within the Interstate 5 Freeway Digital Display Sign Corridor or the California State Route 60 Freeway Digital Display Sign Corridor. 
1.  For purposes of this section, "Interstate 5 Freeway Digital Display Sign Corridor" shall mean any area along the southern terminus of the city within two hundred feet of the I-5 Interstate Freeway right-of-way boundary. 
2.  For purposes of this section, the "California State Route 60 Freeway Digital Display Sign Corridor" shall mean any area within six hundred feet of the California State Route 60 Freeway right-of-way boundary. 
C.  Development Agreement Required. 
1.  New Off-Premises Digital Display Signs. The construction of a new off-premises digital display sign within either digital display sign corridor shall be allowed only with the approval of a development agreement by the city council, containing appropriate standards and public benefits to be negotiated between the sign owner and the city, and in compliance with all other standards imposed by this chapter. 
2.  Relocation of Off-Premises Sign. The relocation of an off-premises sign, and its replacement with a new off- premises digital display sign, is allowed only upon approval of a development agreement by the city council, containing appropriate standards and public benefits to be negotiated between the sign owner and the city, and compliance with all other standards imposed by this chapter. 
D.  Off-Premises Digital Display Sign Permit. No person or entity shall construct, build, erect, or relocate an off-premises display sign or an off-premises digital display sign without first being issued an off-premises digital display sign permit by the planning manager or designee. The planning manager shall issue an off-premises digital display sign permit only if the applicant satisfies all of the general conditions set forth in Section 17.62.105(E). An applicant shall provide visual simulations or renderings of the proposed off-premises digital display sign as may be directed by the planning manager and a photometric study prepared by a city approved lighting engineer. 
E.  General Standards and Conditions. The provisions of this subsection are in addition to any standards imposed in the development agreement. To be issued an off-premises digital display sign permit, the off-premises digital display must comply, at a minimum, with all of the following requirements: 
1.  The city council shall have approved a development agreement pursuant to Section 17.62.105(C) between the city and applicant. 
2.  Off-premises digital display signs shall be located within the Interstate 5 or California State Route 60 Freeway Digital Display Sign Corridor, as defined in Section 17.62.1 05(8). 
3.  An off-premises digital display shall not be erected within five hundred feet of any off-premises display on the same side of the freeway. An off-premises digital display shall not be erected within one thousand feet of any other off-premises digital display on the same side of the freeway. 
4.  An off-premises digital display sign face area shall not have more than six-hundred and seventy-two square feet, but excluding border, trim, base or apron supports, and other special advertising features or additions or other structural members. 
5.  The interval between the change in digital content shall be a minimum of eight seconds and the images shall change instantaneously, without special transitional effects. 
6.  No digital display sign may include any illumination or message change that is in motion or that changes intensity. 
7.  The height of any off-premises digital display sign structure shall not exceed seventy-five feet measured from the lower of either the ground level at the base of the sign structure or the finished grade of highway the sign is advertising thereto, subject to specific site conditions and visibility factors as determined by the Planning Manager. For purposes of this Section, "finish grade" shall be measured from the shoulder elevation of the highway immediately next to the "slow lane." 
8.  An off-premises digital display shall not be permitted to structurally attach on the roof of a building. 
9.  An off-premises digital display shall not encroach over public rights-of-way. 
10.  An off-premises digital display shall not be permitted within two-hundred feet of a residentially zoned property. 
11.  The back or rear of an off-premises digital display structure, which is visible to the public, shall be suitably covered to conceal the inner structures and shall be properly maintained. 
12.  An off-premises digital display must utilize automatic dimming technology to adjust the brightness of the sign relative to ambient light so that at no time will the sign exceed a brightness level of 0.3 footcandle above the ambient light for both daytime and nighttime condition. 
Pre-set distances to measure the foot candles impact vary with the face size of each size sign. Measurement distance criteria: 
Nominal 
Face Size 	Distance to 
be measured from: 
12' × 25' 	150' 
10'6" × 36' 	200' 
14' × 48' 	250' 
 
After commencement of operation, the city may, at the permittee's expense, retain a lighting engineer to conduct follow-up testing and recommend any necessary corrective measures if the city reasonably believes brightness levels exceed this code's requirement. If directed to take corrective measures by city staff based on the lighting engineer's report, the permittee must promptly implement such corrective measures at its sole expense within seven days of the date of the city's demand for corrective measures. 
13.  All off-premises digital displays must revert to a black screen or turn off immediately if ten percent of the digital display screen malfunctions. 
14.  Bidirectional or double-faced signs shall be located on the same structure. For parallel double-faced signs, the distance between the back sides of the sign faces shall not exceed eight feet. For "V-shaped" double-faced signs, the distance between sign faces shall not exceed thirty-five feet at their widest point and shall not exceed eight feet at their closest point. 
15.  An off-premises digital display structure shall have a single support structure (monopole) and shall be constructed of noncombustible material. 
16.  All off-premises digital displays shall be maintain in good condition and working order, as determined by the city manager or designee, and free of graffiti, peeling paint, faded colors and/or broken and damaged materials. Violators shall be subject to any and all penalties or remedies authorized under the Montebello Municipal Code, state law, and federal law. 
17.  The permittee shall underground all utilities installed in connection with off-premises digital display. 
18.  No off-premises digital display shall be placed or maintained in violation of the state Outdoor Advertising Act or any other applicable state, federal, or local law. 
19.  Off-premises digital displays shall be oriented away from residential areas. 
(Ord. NO. 2375, § 3, 2-24-2016)  
17.62.110 - Temporary signs. 
The area of temporary signs shall not be subject to the limitations of this chapter on maximum permissible sign area for a site's permanent signs. However, areas of a window devoted on a continuous basis to paper signs or other such advertisements which are changed on a regular basis, will be subject to the limitations of this chapter on maximum permissible sign area. 
A.  Duration. Temporary signs may be displayed subject to a temporary use permit. A minimum of fifteen days between display periods shall be required. Temporary signs may be displayed up to one hundred twenty days in any given three-hundred-sixty-five-day period subject to one of the following alternatives: 
1.  Thirty-day display periods, not to exceed four in any given days period; 
2.  Fifteen-day display periods, not to exceed eight in any given three-hundred-sixty-five-day period; 
3.  Any combination of individual temporary use permits for thirty-day display periods or fifteen-day display periods, provided that the total number of display days does not exceed one hundred twenty days in any given three-hundred-sixty-five-day period, and at least fifteen days are provided between display periods; 
4.  An annual temporary use permit for any combination of thirty-day periods and fifteen-day periods, provided that the total number of display days does not exceed one hundred twenty days in any given three-hundred-sixty-five-day period, and at least fifteen days between display periods are provided; or 
5.  An annual temporary use permit which would allow the applicant, subject to the approval of the director of planning, to tailor a permit to the particular needs of a business, provided that the total number of days does not exceed one hundred twenty days in any given three-hundred-sixty-five-day period. 
Figure 17.62.110 
  
B.  Maximum Size. The sign area of a temporary sign shall not exceed thirty square feet per facade (except inflatable signs). 
C.  Placement. Temporary signs may be displayed in the same location as permanent signs. At no time may temporary signs be affixed to a temporary structure. All components of a temporary sign shall be removed when the permit expires. Paper signs shall not be displayed on the exterior of any building and shall be limited only to interior window displays. 
D.  Types. The use of temporary signs shall be limited to the following purposes: 
1.  Change of ownership or new management announcements; 
2.  Announcements of special sale events or promotional activities. 
E.  Exemptions. Temporary election posters and posters for charitable causes are exempted from the preceding limitations, but must be placed on private property and must be removed after the event to which the poster is associated has ended. 
F.  Inflatable Signs. The use of inflatable signs shall be limited to a total of twenty-eight days in any given three-hundred-sixty-five-day period. A temporary use permit shall be required for the use of an inflatable sign, and each such permit shall be valid for a display period not to exceed seven days. A minimum of fifteen days between display periods shall be required. Days on which an inflatable sign is displayed shall be included among the maximum of one-hundred twenty days per year for the display of temporary signs by a business. 
G.  Cabinet Cover Signs. Where one business vacates a property and a new business occupies the same site, the new business may utilize a cabinet cover(s) over the existing sign cabinet structure(s) subject to issuance of a temporary use permit until permanent sign faces can be installed in the existing freestanding or wall mounted sign cabinet(s). The use of a cabinet cover(s) shall be limited to a period not to exceed one hundred twenty days. This one hundred twenty-day period shall not be counted among the maximum number of days per year for which the display of temporary signs is allowed. 
H.  Public Works Contingency. Where a business sign or entrance is obstructed due to a public works project, or where such a project creates the need for additional directional signage, such business may be granted a temporary use permit for the duration of the obstruction. Such a temporary sign shall be used for business identification or directional purposes only. There shall be no charge for a permit for such a sign, nor shall the display period be counted among the maximum number of days per year for which the display of temporary signs is allowed. 
I.  Fees. Fees for temporary use permits shall be established per resolution by the city council. 
J.  Prohibited Signs. The following temporary signs shall be prohibited at all times: 
1.  Temporary signs in the public right-of-way; 
2.  Inflatable signs made of mylar, or other similar metal-coated plastics. 
(Ord. 2160 § 5 (part), 1997)  
17.62.120 - Limits on projecting into pedestrian or vehicular use areas. 
No sign shall project over public right-of-way without first obtaining permission in writing from the city council. Otherwise, no sign, or portion thereof, shall extend or project over any public sidewalk, parkway, street, or other public property, or over any private property used, or intended to be used as a sidewalk, pedestrian path, bikeway, street, driveway, parking lot, driving aisle, parking space, loading area or other pedestrian or vehicular access area, except as provided for in the following provisions: 
A.  Below Eight Feet. No part of any sign may project or extend into such a pedestrian or vehicular use area below a height of eight feet above ground level. 
B.  Between Eight and Twelve Feet. Above a height of eight feet and below a height of twelve feet, no sign shall project more than twelve inches into such a pedestrian or vehicular use area. 
C.  Above Twelve Feet. Above a height of twelve feet, no sign shall project or extend more than thirty inches into such a pedestrian or vehicular use area. 
(Ord. 2160 § 5 (part), 1997)  
17.62.130 - Business identification. 
A.  Legibility. Every business utilizing any signs pursuant to this chapter must identify itself to the public with a sign which identifies the business using Roman letters and/or Arabic numerals at the front of the business facing the street, and in contrasting colors to the background. This business identification shall be legible from the same or greater distance as any other sign copy for the business on the site. 
B.  Address. In addition to any signs permitted under the provisions of this chapter, the correct street address number of every commercial and industrial building shall be displayed on the building facing the street, and shall be illuminated during the hours of darkness so that it shall be easily visible from the street. The numerals in these numbers shall be no less than six inches in height and be of a color contrasting to the background. In addition, any business which affords vehicular access to the rear through any driveway, alleyway or parking lot shall also display the same numbers on the rear of the building. (See Section 15.08.110(L) of this code) 
(Ord. 2160 § 5 (part), 1997)  
17.62.140 - Planned sign program. 
The purpose of a planned sign program is to encourage consistency of design and regulation and to allow flexibility of design for signs which are harmonious throughout a commercial or industrial development and which promote a positive identification and image. A planned sign program may be approved for freeway signs or for commercial or industrial centers on sites of twenty thousand square feet or more. An application for such program must be reviewed and approved by the planning commission. A planned sign program is intended to provide maximum incentive and latitude to encourage variety and good design of signs, and to allow response to special circumstances, but shall not be used to circumvent the objectives of this chapter. It is intended that signs approved per a planned sign program not be subject to the specific limitations contained in the foregoing provisions of this chapter, but that such signs be equal to or better than that which the specific code standards would otherwise yield. A planned sign program shall be evaluated on the merit of the program being presented (i.e., comprehensiveness, consistency, aesthetics, orientation and need of the advertisement). Conditions may be imposed to the extent that findings required for a sign program cannot be made without imposition of those conditions. 
A.  Review Standards. A planned sign program may be approved or conditionally approved by the planning commission only if the following findings are made: 
1.  The proposed signs are consistent with the intent of this chapter, the general plan and any applicable specific plans; 
2.  The proposed signs are aesthetically and architecturally consistent with each other; 
3.  The proposed signs are aesthetically and architecturally compatible with the buildings and developments they identify, taking into account building materials, colors and design; 
4.  The proposed signs are aesthetically compatible with the surrounding commercial development and existing sign treatment in the vicinity; and 
5.  Approval does not constitute a grant of special privilege or allow substantially greater overall visibility than the standard provisions of this chapter would otherwise provide. 
B.  Planned Sign Program—Application Form, Filing Fee. Application for a planned sign program shall be made by the property owner, the owner of an existing or proposed business on the site, or an authorized agent thereof, to the planning commission on a form provided for that purpose by the city. Such application shall be submitted to the planning department accompanied by filing fees in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
1.  The following shall be submitted as a part of the application: 
a.  A completed application on a form provided for this purpose by the planning department; 
b.  A planned sign program narrative which provides a written description of the goals, objectives and sign criteria; and 
c.  Seventeen copies of the following: 
i.  A fully dimensioned and detailed plot plan of the site indicating the location of all existing and proposed signs, 
ii.  Facade elevations of all buildings showing all existing or proposed signs, 
iii.  Architectural details of all signs and sign structures, and 
iv.  Other material the city planner may deem necessary to communicate the intent of the proposal to the planning commission. 
(Ord. 2160 § 5 (part), 1997)  
17.62.150 - Deviation from requirements. 
When it is found that the strict or literal interpretation of the provisions set forth in this chapter would cause undue difficulties and unnecessary hardship inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter, a minor deviation or deviation may be granted subject to specific requirements and findings as set forth in this chapter. 
A.  Minor Deviations. When an application for a sign permit has been submitted to the planning department, the director of planning shall have authority to grant or conditionally grant a minor deviation to allow no more than one of the following: a ten percent increase in the height or area of an allowable sign, or a ten percent decrease in the area of a required landscape planter, subject to the findings contained in subsection D of this section. 
B.  Planning Commission Deviations. The planning commission shall have the authority to grant deviations that are greater than the limitations on minor deviations per subsection A of this section; and to the provisions relating to: (1) the placement of the sign on the land or building; (2) the separation from other signs; (3) the abatement of nonconforming signs. Deviations approved by the planning commission shall be processed in the same manner as a zone variance except that public notice of the hearing is not required. 
C.  Planning Commission Deviations—Application Form, Filing Fee. Application for a planning commission deviation shall be made by the property owner, or the business owner of an existing or proposed business on the site, or by an authorized agent thereof, to the planning commission on a form provided for that purpose by the city. Such application shall be submitted to the planning department accompanied by filing fees in an amount established by resolution by the city council. 
The following shall be submitted as part of the application: 
1.  A completed application on a form provided for this purpose by the planning department; and 
2.  Seventeen copies of the following: 
a.  A fully dimensioned and detailed plot plan of the site indicating the location of all existing and proposed signs, 
b.  Facade elevations of all buildings with existing or proposed wall signs, 
c.  Architectural details of all signs and sign structures, and 
d.  Other material the city planner may deem necessary to communicate the intent of the proposal to the planning commission. 
D.  Deviation Findings. Deviations may be approved or conditionally approved only if the granting authority finds that: 
1.  The strict or literal interpretation of the provisions set forth in this chapter would cause undue difficulties and unnecessary hardships inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter; 
2.  The sign is in proportion to the structure or use to which it relates; 
3.  The sign's external features are in balance and unity, and present a harmonious appearance; 
4.  The sign is compatible with the style or character of improvements on adjacent property; and 
5.  The sign is consistent with the objectives of the general plan or any applicable specific plan. 
(Ord. 2160 § 5 (part), 1997)  
17.62.160 - Nonconforming signs. 
It is the intent of this section to recognize that the eventual elimination, as expeditiously as possible, of existing signs that are not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter is as important, as is the prohibition of new signs that would violate these regulations. It is also the intent of this section that any elimination of nonconforming signs shall be effected so as to avoid any unreasonable invasion of established property rights. 
A.  Definition. A nonconforming sign is a sign which had been lawfully established prior to the time of the adoption of these standards which: 
1.  Does not now conform to these standards; or 
2.  Is neither specifically permitted or prohibited under these standards. 
B.  General Requirements. A nonconforming sign shall be properly maintained m accordance with Section 17.62.040 of this chapter but may not be: 
1.  Changed to another nonconforming sign; 
2.  Improved or structurally altered so as to extend its useful life, outside of a change in copy; or 
3.  Expanded, moved or relocated, except as provided in Section 17.62.105, Off-Premises Digital Display signs. 
C.  Removal or Replacement. Nonconforming signs and other signs must be removed or replaced by conforming signs when any of the following applies: 
1.  A sign which was erected without first complying with all ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of its construction and erection or use; 
2.  A sign which was lawfully erected but the use of which has ceased, or the structure upon which the display was erected has been abandoned by its owner for a period of not less than ninety days; 
3.  The business represented by the sign replaces or expands the existing signs on the site; 
4.  A sign which has been more than fifty percent destroyed and the destruction is other than facial copy replacement, and the display cannot be repaired within thirty days of the date of its destruction; 
5.  A sign for which there has been an agreement between the sign owner and the city for its removal as of any given date; 
6.  A sign which may become a danger to the public or is unsafe; 
7.  A sign which constitutes a traffic hazard not created by relocation of streets or highway or by acts of any city or county; or 
8.  In addition to the preceding, any nonconforming sign located within a redevelopment project area must also be removed according to the amortization period as specified in the following table and as measured from 10/12/87 or the subsequent date of adoption of any amendment of this chapter which created the nonconformity: 
Amortization Table 
Permit Value of Sign 	Period for Removal 
$0 to $1,000 	12 months 
1,001 to 2,000 	18 months 
2,001 to 3,000 	24 months 
3,001 to 4,000 	30 months 
4,001 to 5,000 	36 months 
5,001 to 6,000 	42 months 
6,001 to 7,000 	48 months 
7,001 to 8,000 	54 months 
8,001 to 9,000 	60 months 
9,000 to 10,000 	68 months 
10,001 and over 	72 months (6 years) 
 
(Ord. 2160 § 5 (part), 1997) 
(Ord. No. 2375, § 4, 2-24-2016)  
17.62.170 - Definitions. 
For the purpose hereof, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Awning sign" means a sign which is painted, sewn, stained, etc., permanently onto the exterior surface of an awning. For the purpose of this chapter, an awning is a permanent or temporary structure attached to and entirely supported by a wall of a building and installed over and partially in front of doors, windows or other openings in a building and over all or any portion of a building wall. Said awning consists of a frame with a canvas or other similar material covering the entire frame. 
"Cabinet cover sign" means a temporary sign cover constructed of cloth, vinyl, plastic, canvas, or other similar light-weight materials. This temporary sign is designed to cover a sign cabinet of a freestanding or wall mounted sign. 
"Cabinet sign" means a sign which contains all the text and/or logo symbols within a plastic single faced area, which may or may not be internally illuminated, and is held within a structural casing usually fabricated of sheet metal. This metal sign structure shall be referred to as a sign cabinet. Cabinet signs that are mounted on a building shall be referred to as a wall sign. 
"Changeable copy sign" means a sign that is designed so that the individual characters, letter, or illustrations can be changed or rearranged on a regular basis without altering the face of the surface of the sign. 
"Channel letter sign (individual letter sign)" means individual three dimensional letters, characters, logos or figures mounted individually on a wall surface or on a race-way. Channel letter signs shall be referred to as wall signs. 
"Clearance of a sign" means the vertical space or distance between the lowest most horizontal ornamental or structural element of the sign to the ground immediately below such point. 
"Commercial advertising statuary" means a statue or other three dimensional structure in the form of an object that identifies, advertises or otherwise directs attention to a product or business. 
"Digital display" means "message center" as defined in Business and Professions Code section 5216.4, which is any advertising display where the message is changed more than once every two minutes, but not more than once every four seconds. 
"Elevation" means the exterior walls of a building exposed to public view. 
"Facade" means the exterior walls of a building which are exposed to public view. 
"Front facade" means the main building elevation containing the primary entrance of the building which typically faces a public street. In cases where a business is located in a multiple tenant commercial or industrial center, the front facade shall be the main entrance to the business. 
"Flag," "pennant" or "banner" means a device generally made of flexible materials, usually cloth, paper or plastic. They may or may not contain any sign copy and are primarily intended to draw attention. 
"Flashing illuminated sign" means any directly or indirectly illuminated sign which exhibits changing natural or artificial light or color effects by any means whatsoever. 
"For sale sign" or "for rent sign" means a sign indicating the availability for sale, rent or lease of the specific lot, building or portion of a building upon which the sign is displayed. 
"Freestanding sign" means a sign that is independent of or not affixed to any building or structure, permanent in nature, entirely supported by one or more poles with a solid base or other structural elements and either placed on or anchored in the ground. Pursuant to this chapter, pole signs, monument signs, and pylon signs are all considered to be freestanding signs. 
"Freeway sign" means a sign whose purpose is to identify a specific service-oriented business (those offering eating facilities, lodging accommodations or automobile services) which is located adjacent to the freeway right-of-way, or separated from the right-of-way by a frontage road. 
"Height of a sign" means the vertical distance measured from the highest point of the sign including any architectural, ornamental or structural element of the sign to the ground immediately below such point. 
"Inflatable sign" means a balloon or other object inflated with lighter-than-air gaseous elements for buoyancy, which is attached or anchored to any building, structure or the ground, and shall include all parts, portions, units and material composed of the same, including the support or anchor. 
"Leading edge" means the closest vertical edge of a sign to the property line or other point of reference as specified in this chapter. 
"Linear" refers to length only. 
"Mansard sign" means any cabinet sign that is mounted permanently to a mansard roof or other similar roof structure such as an angled roof structure directly above a marquee. 
"Marquee" means any permanent construction/structure which projects from the wall of a building and which usually extends out over the front entrance of a building. 
"Marquee sign" means any sign mounted to the top of a marquee but which is below the roof line or top of a building parapet. 
"Monument sign" means a freestanding, low profile structure with a solid base which may be internally or externally illuminated and is affixed in or upon the ground with no air space between the ground and the bottom of the sign cabinet. The sign's horizontal dimension is greater than its vertical dimension. 
"Mural" means a large painting or picture, which may be pictorial or abstract, applied to or made a part of a wall, or a large painting done on a panel which is then affixed to a wall. 
"Off-premises sign" means any sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located. The phrase "off-premises sign" includes signs referred to as subdivision or tract advertising and/or directional signs and billboards. 
"Painted wall sign" means any sign which is painted directly to the exterior wall of a building or masonry block wall. 
"Planned sign program" means an adopted master sign plan providing coordinated signs for a site using one or more common design elements such as colors, materials, lettering, sign type or style, or illumination. 
"Pole cover" means a decorative architectural feature which covers the supporting pole(s) or other structural supports of a sign. 
"Pole sign" means a freestanding structure which is supported by a structural member(s) with air space between the ground level and the bottom of the sign. 
"Portable sign" means any sign capable of being carried or moved from one spot to another and which is not permanently affixed or attached to the ground or to any structure. 
"Projecting sign" means a sign attached to an exterior wall and/or to the roof of a building, which sign is oriented at an angle up to ninety degrees to or from the building. 
"Pylon sign" means a freestanding structure which is affixed in or upon the ground with no air space between the ground and the bottom of the sign cabinet. The sign's vertical dimension is greater than its horizontal dimension. 
"Relocation" means removal of an existing off-premises display or advertising structure and the construction of a new digital display to substitute or replace the display or advertising structure removed. 
"Roof sign" means a sign supported by or attached to the roof of a building or projecting higher than the roof line, parapet wall or cornice of a building. 
"Setback" means the distance between the property line abutting the street right-of-way line and the front line of a building, structure, freestanding sign or any projection thereof. 
"Sign" means any device for visual communication, including any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration or insignia, which is used to advertise or promote the interests of any person, business group or enterprise, including, but not limited to, outdoor advertising structures. 
"Sign area" means the entire surface area of the sign copy, which includes the total area of the copy and background whether or not there is sign copy on all surfaces. Architectural design embellishments and structural elements such as sign pedestal or pole are not part of the sign area. The sign face includes the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle or combination of irregular shapes that will encompass the extreme limits of the copy together with the frame or structural trim of the display such as a sign cabinet. 
"Sign copy" means any words, characters, logos, letters, numbers, figures, designs or other symbolic representations incorporated into a sign. The sign copy may consist of individual channel letters or a plastic, lexan or plexiglas face of a cabinet sign. 
"Site" means one or more contiguous lots or parcels which are jointly used or developed in any manner. 
"Street frontage" means the length of a lot or parcel of land contiguous with or adjacent to a public right-of-way, street or highway. 
"Temporary sign" means a sign or display constructed of cloth, plastic, canvas, or similar lightweight materials, with or without frames, or an inflatable sign, other than a standard twelve-inch latex balloon, which are intended to be displayed for a temporary period, and which is used for advertising, promotion or directing of the public interest to: the sale or lease, or change of ownership or management of a business or property, announcement of special sale events or promotional activities, election posters and campaign literature, charitable causes. 
"Under marquee sign" means any sign mounted beneath and affixed to the marquee of a building. 
"Wall sign" means any sign posted on, suspended from, or otherwise affixed in an essentially flat position to the wall of a building. Such signage shall not include signs painted directly onto the building. 
"Wind driven sign" means any sign consisting of one or a series of two or more banners, flags, pennants, ribbons, spinners, streamers, captive balloons, or other objects or material fastened in such a manner as to move upon being subjected to pressure by wind or breeze. 
"Window sign" means any sign affixed to a window or within twelve inches of a window that is intended to be seen from the exterior of a building through a window. 
(Ord. 2160 § 5 (part), 1997) 
(Ord. No. 2375, § 5, 2-24-2016)  
Chapter 17.63 - SIGNIFICANT TOBACCO RETAILERS 
 
17.63.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the adoption of the provisions hereof is to establish a comprehensive set of regulations applicable to the establishment of significant tobacco retailers within the City of Montebello. 
(Ord. No. 2334, § 3, 9-23-2009)  
17.63.020 - Definitions. 
Refer to Chapter 17.08 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2334, § 3, 9-23-2009)  
17.63.030 - Conditional use permit. 
A conditional use permit shall be required for all new significant tobacco retailers as designated in Appendix A of the Zoning Code, Index of Primary Uses. The application submittal, review, and approval procedures set forth in Chapter 17.70 of the City's Zoning Code shall apply to all conditional use permit applications under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2334, § 3, 9-23-2009)  
17.63.040 - Standards for significant tobacco retailers. 
A.  Operation Standards. 
1.  The significant tobacco retailer shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal laws regarding the use, advertising, display, or sales of tobacco products and/or tobacco paraphernalia including posting prominently near the cash register or other point of sale the legal age to buy tobacco products and/or tobacco paraphernalia, and checking the identification of all purchasers to ensure they are of legal age. 
2.  Tobacco products and/or tobacco paraphernalia shall be secured so that only store employees have immediate access to the tobacco products and/or tobacco paraphernalia. Self-service displays are prohibited. 
3.  No person younger than the minimum age designated in federal or state law may distribute, exchange, or sell tobacco products. 
4.  Sampling of tobacco products by individuals younger than the minimum age designated in federal or state law shall be prohibited. 
5.  Smoking shall be prohibited in a premises deemed a significant tobacco retailer. 
B.  One Thousand-Feet Separation Required. No significant tobacco retailer shall be located within one thousand feet of any residential zone, sensitive land use, or other significant tobacco retailer. A sensitive land use shall include (i) a public or private kindergarten, elementary, middle, junior high or high school; (ii) a licensed child-care facility or preschool other than a small or large family day care facility; (iii) playground; (iv) youth center; (v) recreational facility; (vi) amusement arcade or internet gaming center; (vii) park; or (viii) library. 
C.  How to Measure Operation. The distance between any structure used as a significant tobacco retailer and the residential zone or sensitive land uses detailed above shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest property line of the structure used as a significant tobacco retailer to the closest property line of the residentially zoned property or sensitive land use. 
(Ord. No. 2334, § 3, 9-23-2009)  
17.63.050 - Existing significant tobacco retailers. 
Pre-existing Significant Tobacco Retailers. Every significant tobacco retailer legally in existence as of the date of enactment of this chapter shall be considered a legal non-conforming use as a significant tobacco retailer. This status shall be retained by the significant tobacco retailer as long as the use complies with the operation standards of Section 17.63.040(A) of this chapter. Any intensification, expansion, or substantial alteration of the significant tobacco retailer use shall require the approval of a conditional use permit subject to the application submittal, review, and approval procedures set forth in Chapter 17.70 of the City's Zoning Code. 
(Ord. No. 2334, § 3, 9-23-2009)  
Chapter 17.64 - RECYCLING-RELATED LAND USES 
 
17.64.010 - Purpose. 
The provisions contained herein are to establish a comprehensive set of regulations applicable to recycling-related land uses, and facilities involved in the recycling of C&D materials. 
(Prior code § 9263) 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 4, 8-14-2013)  
17.64.020 - Definitions. 
Refer to the definitions contained in Chapter 17.08 of this code. 
(Prior code § 9263.1)  
17.64.030 - Regulations—Compliance. 
All uses subject to the provisions hereof shall comply with all of the regulations contained in this title and any regulations included herein. Any such facility must be certified by the state and display an official certification sign at the facility. 
(Prior code § 9263.2 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 4, 8-14-2013)  
17.64.040 - Public recycling collection facilities. 
"Public recycling collection facility" means a facility established to receive presorted redeemable beverage containers; provided that such facility is composed of reverse vending machine(s), collection storage unit(s) or a mobile cycling unit. Recycling materials shall be presorted, and shall include absolutely no hazardous or biodegradable wastes. The requirements applicable to these facilities include the following: 
A.  Any such facility must include provisions for recycling all redeemable beverage containers made of glass, plastic, aluminum, and bimetal. 
B.  Any such facility may include one of the following: 
1.  Reverse vending machines, which are automated mechanical devices which accept one or more empty beverage containers including glass, plastic, aluminum and bimetal, and which issue a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container's redemption value as determined by the state. A reverse vending machine may sort and process containers mechanically; provided, that the entire process is enclosed within the machine; 
2.  Collection storage unit(s), which are storage containers manufactured specifically for the purpose of receiving redeemable beverage containers without the use of power-driven processing equipment. Collection storage units fitted with reverse vending machines will be considered as collection storage unit facilities; 
3.  A mobile recycling unit, which is an automobile, truck trailer or van licensed by the department of motor vehicles which is used exclusively for the collection of recyclable (redeemable) beverage containers. 
C.  The following recycling collection facilities will be permitted as a use by right in the C-1 through M-2 zones subject to the limitations as specified. collection facilities which do not meet these limitations may be permitted in the C-1 through M-2 zones subject to approval of a conditional use permit: 
1.  Reverse vending machine(s); provided that: 
a.  The facility not occupy more than fifty square feet; and 
b.  The facility be located immediately adjacent to the building housing the responsible business and be adjacent to the same façade as the main entrance. 
2.  Collection storage unit(s); provided that: 
a.  Such units be entirely enclosed except for small openings for the deposit of recyclable materials; 
b.  The total storage area not exceed one hundred twenty-five square feet; 
c.  The facility be located within close proximity to the building housing the responsible business and must be situated at a location approved by the planning manager; 
d.  The facility shall not obstruct a three-foot pedestrian access along the store front; 
e.  All storage units shall be sealed in such a manner as to preclude the deposit of nonredeemable materials in the unit during hours when the facility is unmanned; and 
f.  Such collection storage unit does not occupy any required parking spaces, backup area, or aisles. 
3.  A mobile recycling facility; provided that: 
a.  All storage shall be completely enclosed in a truck or van which does not exceed a three-quarter ton capacity; 
b.  Such truck or van does not obstruct any pedestrian access, or occupy any required parking spaces, backup area, or aisles; 
c.  An attendant is at the facility at all times; 
d.  The operation of such facility does not encourage pedestrians or motorists to occupy required parking or aisles while waiting for a redemption, nor expose pedestrians or motorists to any safety hazard; 
e.  The operation is not within forty feet of a public right-of-way; and, 
f.  Each mobile facility must be removed from the premises each day. 
D.  A business license shall be obtained by the owner/operator of each facility. Each machine, collection storage unit and mobile unit must be posted with proper business license information. 
E.  No advertisement for any product or use other than recycling of beverage containers may be affixed to any machine or unit. 
F.  All facilities must be maintained in a clean and attractive manner and serviced on a daily basis. A trash receptacle should be provided adjacent to each facility. 
G.  Curb fronts within fifty feet of a recycling collection facility shall be painted and posted as "No Parking." 
H.  A plan of operation including a correctly dimensioned site plan or layout of the facility, actual days and hours of operation, anticipated volume of recyclable material to be collected and any other information requested by the planning manager must be submitted for review and approval by the planning manager. 
(Prior code § 9263.2 (2a)) 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 4, 8-14-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2352, § 4, adopted Aug. 14, 2013, deleted former §§ 17.64.040 and 17.64.050 which pertained to community recycling centers, and recycling stations, respectively; and derived from prior code §§ 9263.2[1], [2]. Ord. No. 2352 also renumbered former §§ 17.64.060 and 17.64.070 as §§ 17.64.040 and 17.64.060. Ord. No. 2352 changed the title of § 17.64.040 from "Recycling collection facilities" to "Public recycling collection facilities."  
17.64.050 - Recycling facility (Materials recovery facility and waste transfer facility). 
"Recycling facility" means a totally enclosed building within which the receipt, separation, storage, conversion, baling and/or processing of recyclable materials can occur for the purpose of reutilization of such materials. Hazardous and biodegradable materials including, but not limited to, food, beverages, drugs, cosmetics, hazardous chemicals, poisons, electronic wastes, medical wastes, syringes, needles, pesticides, and other similar materials shall not be brought into or handled by a recycling facility. A recycling facility may consist of a waste transfer facility, a materials recovery facility, or both. The requirements applicable to these facilities include the following: 
A.  All outdoor storage of salvageable materials shall be contained within bins or pallets, or located on a paved area. 
B.  All storage areas shall be enclosed by view-obscuring walls, fences or buildings. No storage facilities shall be seen from a public right-of-way or from any residential land use. 
C.  All separation, sorting, processing, baling or other activities shall occur entirely within an enclosed building. 
D.  The ambient noise level shall not be increased as measured at any property line. 
E.  The facility and signage shall be unobtrusive and compatible with the area surrounding the subject site. 
F.  No garbage or food wastes shall be permitted at the site. If any incidental amounts of biodegradable refuse materials enter the site, it shall be removed by the next working day or within forty-eight hours of entering the site, whichever is sooner. 
G.  Liquid wastes, hazardous and biodegradable materials, including, but not limited to, food, beverages, drugs, cosmetics, hazardous chemicals, poisons, medical wastes, syringes, needles, pesticides and other similar materials shall not be permitted on the site. 
H.  The owner/operator of the salvage site shall prevent or eliminate immediately any nuisance created by dust, odors, blowing material, litter, ponding water, noise or other nuisance. 
I.  All buildings and structures within the site shall be rodent-proofed and any rodent infestation shall be controlled immediately. 
J.  Any infestation or accumulation of flies or other insects of public health significance shall be immediately controlled. 
K.  In anticipation of emergency situations (breakdown of facilities, power failure, landfill closure), provisions shall be made to ensure nonsalvageable waste materials will be properly contained and that no continuous storage be allowed. 
L.  Any representative of a regulatory governmental agency shall be permitted access to the recycling facility at any reasonable time for the purpose of obtaining information or inspecting operations. 
M.  Burning of wastes shall be prohibited. 
N.  Fire protection and prevention facilities, including, but not limited to, fire sprinklers, shall be provided in a manner subject to approval of the fire marshal. 
O.  A detailed site and operations plan, including, but not limited to, traffic routes, shall be subject to approval of the planning commission. 
P.  Violation of any condition or any terms set forth shall result in the immediate closing of the recycling facility until such times as the violations are corrected to the satisfaction of the applicable regulatory agency. 
Q.  A recycling facility shall not be located on a property located within four hundred feet of any R-zoned property or any property containing a public institutional land use (for example, a church, school, park or library). 
R.  The applicant/operator of a recycling facility shall bear the full administrative costs of monitoring and inspection activities to be conducted by city staff or consultant representatives. A yearly permit fee and violation of fine schedule shall be prepared and approved prior to any recycling-related use being established. Failure to pay the city all fees and/or fines shall constitute a violation of Montebello Municipal Code. 
(Prior code § 9263.2 [3]) 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 4, 8-14-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2352, § 4, adopted Aug. 14, 2013, changed the title of § 17.64.050 from "Recycling stations" to "Recycling facilities (Materials recovery facility and waste transfer facility)." See also the editor's note following § 17.64.040.  
17.64.060 - Construction and demolition (C&D) facility. 
"Construction and demolition facility" means a facility within a totally enclosed building established to operate for the express purpose of receiving C&D waste, debris, and materials as defined in Section 17.08.577. The requirements applicable to these facilities include the following: 
A.  All outdoor storage of salvageable materials shall be contained within bins or pallets, or located on a paved area. 
B.  All storage areas shall be enclosed by view-obscuring walls, fences or buildings. No storage facilities shall be seen from a public right-of-way or from any residential land use. 
C.  All separation, sorting, processing, baling or other activities shall occur entirely within an enclosed building. 
D.  The ambient noise level shall not be increased as measured at any property line. 
E.  The facility and signage shall be unobtrusive and compatible with the area surrounding the subject site. 
F.  Only construction and demolition material, as defined in Section 17.08.577, shall be received for collection at the site. 
G.  The owner/operator of the salvage site shall prevent or eliminate immediately any nuisance created by dust, odors, blowing material, litter, ponding water, noise or other nuisance. 
H.  Any representative of a regulatory governmental agency shall be permitted access to the C&D facility at any reasonable time for the purpose of obtaining information or inspecting operations. 
I.  Burning of wastes shall be prohibited. 
J.  Fire protection and prevention facilities, including, but not limited to, fire sprinklers, shall be provided in a manner subject to approval of the fire marshal. 
K.  A detailed site and operations plan, including, but not limited to, traffic routes, shall be subject to approval of the planning commission. 
L.  Violation of any condition or any terms set forth shall result in the immediate closing of the C&D facility until such times as the violations are corrected to the satisfaction of the applicable regulatory agency. 
M.  The applicant/operator of a C&D facility shall bear the full administrative costs of monitoring and inspection activities to be conducted by city staff or consultant representatives. A yearly permit fee and violation of fine schedule shall be prepared and approved prior to any recycling-related use being established. Failure to pay the city all fees and/or fines shall constitute a violation of Montebello Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 4, 8-14-2013)  
17.64.070 - Construction and demolition debris collection. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this Section of Title 17 is to: 
1.  Implement California law as embodied in the California Waste Management Act of 1989 (California Public Resources Code Sections 40000 et seq.). Towards this end, the City of Montebello is required to prepare, adopt and implement source reduction and recycling plans to reach in order to meet these goals. 
2.  Promote the reduction of solid waste and is required to make substantial reductions in the volume of waste materials going to the landfills. 
3.  Acknowledge that solid waste materials from construction, demolition, and the renovation of buildings represent a significant portion of the volume of waste presently coming from the City of Montebello and much of this waste is particularly suitable for recycling and reuse. 
4.  Commit to the reduction of waste through the establishment of programs for recycling and salvaging of construction and demolition (C&D) waste. 
B.  CALGreen Requirements. The State of California requires certain construction projects to divert the current required percentage of project generated construction materials from disposal in landfills. This section of Title 17 of the City of Montebello Municipal Code will implement the state requirements at the local level. 
C.  Thresholds for Covered Projects. The following thresholds must be used to determine if a project is a covered project: 
1.  Private project where all construction, demolition, and renovation are projected to be one thousand square feet or greater, and all demolition-only projects shall be considered covered projects. 
2.  All city-sponsored construction, demolition and renovation projects that are projected to be one thousand square feet or greater shall be subject to this chapter, and consequently, shall be considered covered projects. 
D.  Diversion Requirements (Goals). The diversion goal for asphalt and concrete demolition debris will conform to state requirements. Clean inert waste used in engineered fills may not be counted as disposal or diversion (CalRecycle's CDI regulations [PRC Section 41821.3(h)]). 
E.  Waste Management Plan (WMP). 
1.  Application Submittal. Applicant(s) for construction or demolition permits involving a covered project is required to complete and submit a waste management plan (WMP), on a form approved by the City of Montebello for this purpose. The WMP shall be included in the application packet for the construction or demolition permit. The completed WMP shall be reviewed and approved by the compliance official prior to the issuance of a building permit, and shall indicate all of the following: 
a.  The estimated volume or weight of the project C&D material, by material type, to be generated (in estimating the volume or weight of materials identified in the WMP, the applicant shall use the conversion rates approved by the city for this purpose); 
b.  The maximum volume or weight of the materials that may be feasibly diverted or recycled; 
c.  The vendor or facility where the applicant proposes to use, collect or receive that material; and, 
d.  The estimated volume or weight of C&D materials that will be disposed of in Class III landfills and inert disposal facilities. 
2.  Performance Security Deposit. As a condition precedent to the issuance of any permit for construction or demolition for a covered project, the applicant shall submit a performance security deposit to the building and safety division along with the submittal of the WMP: 
a.  For construction and demolition projects, the amount of the performance security shall be calculated as the lesser of three percent of total project cost or thirty thousand dollars. 
b.  For demolition-only projects, the amount of the performance security required shall be calculated at the rate of one dollar per square-foot with a one thousand-dollar minimum and thirty thousand-dollar maximum. 
c.  The City of Montebello intends to use the deposit for the payment of diversion deposit refunds, as well as administrative costs associated with the C&D diversion program and/or program costs associated with the C&D diversion program, including infrastructure improvements to facilitate C&D waste diversion. 
3.  Compliance with WMP. Within thirty days after the completion of the demolition phase of any covered project, the applicant shall submit to the WMP compliance official, documentation that the diversion requirement for the project has been met. The applicant shall provide a summary of efforts used to meet the diversion requirement and also provide the following documentation: 
a.  Receipts from the vendor or facility which collected or received each material showing the actual weight or volume of that material; 
b.  Weight slips/count of material salvaged or reused in current project; 
c.  A copy of the previously approved WMP for the project adding the actual volume or weight of each material type diverted and disposed of in landfills; 
d.  Any additional information the applicant believes is relevant to determining its efforts to comply in good faith with this section; 
e.  The WMP compliance Official shall review the information submitted under subsections a. through d. of this section to determine whether the applicant has complied with the diversion requirement as follows: 
i.  If the WMP compliance Official determines that the applicant has fully complied with the diversion requirement applicable to the project, he or she shall cause the full performance security to be released to the applicant. 
ii.  If the WMP compliance official determines that the diversion requirement has not been met, he or she shall return only that portion of the performance security equivalent to the portion of C&D material actually diverted compared to the portion that should have been diverted according to the WMP. Any portion of the performance security not released to the applicant shall be forfeited to the city, and shall be used to recover any city costs associated with sorting of mixed C&D loads, and its transfer. If the WMP compliance official determines that the applicant has fully failed to comply with the diversion requirement or if the applicant fails to submit the documentation required by subsections 1. through 4. of this section within the required time period, then the entire performance security shall be forfeited to the city. All forfeited performance securities shall be used to recover city costs associated with sorting of mixed C&D loads, and its transfer. The city may, by formal resolution, modify the amount of the required deposit. 
F.  Weighing of Wastes. Applicants shall ensure that all C&D material diverted or disposed of in landfills are measured and recorded using the most accurate method of measurement available. To the extent practical, all C&D material shall be weighted by measurement on scales. Such scales shall be in compliance with all state and county regulatory requirements for accuracy and maintenance. For C&D material for which weighing is not practical due to small size or other considerations, a volumetric measurement shall be used. For conversion of volumetric measurements by weight, the applicant shall use the standardized conversion rates approved by the city for this purpose. 
G.  Diversion Requirement Exceptions. If an applicant for a covered project experiences circumstances that the applicant believes make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement, the applicant may apply for a diversion requirement exemption at the time that he or she submits the waste management plan required under subsection E: 
1.  Exemptions may be granted based on the following factors: 
a.  Lack of storage space on-site; 
b.  Contamination by hazardous substances; or, 
c.  Low recyclability of specific materials. 
2.  Types of projects where exemptions may be granted are listed below: 
a.  Emergency situations to protect the public health and safety (for example, debris removal after disasters such as floods, fires, earthquakes, etc.); 
b.  Seismic tie-down projects; 
c.  Pools and spas; 
d.  Non-structural; 
e.  Work for which a building or demolition permit is not required; 
f.  New construction projects below a certain dollar amount or below a certain number of units; 
g.  New nonresidential construction projects below a certain dollar or square footage amount; 
h.  Residential or nonresidential remodeling or renovation projects below a certain dollar or square footage amount; 
i.  Roofing projects that do not include removal of an existing roof; 
j.  Work for which only a plumbing, only an electrical, or only a mechanical permit is required; or, 
k.  Projects where no foundation or other structural building modifications are required. 
3.  The applicant shall indicate on the WMP the maximum rate of diversion he or she believes is feasible for each material and the specific circumstances that he or she believes make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement. 
4.  If the WMP compliance official determines that it is infeasible for the Applicant to meet the diversion requirement due to unique circumstances, he or she shall determine the maximum feasible diversion rate for each material and shall indicate this rate on the WMP submitted by the Applicant. 
5.  Upon a denial by the WMP compliance official, the applicant shall have thirty days to resubmit a WMP form in full compliance with subsection E. If the applicant fails to resubmit the WMP, or if the resubmitted WMP does not comply with subsection E, the WMP compliance official shall deny the WMP. 
H.  Appeals. The applicant or any interested person may appeal to the city council from any ruling of the WMP compliance official made pursuant to this chapter in accordance with section. Notice of any appeal from the ruling of the WMP compliance official must be filed within ten days of the date that such ruling is made. The appeals procedures must conform to those requirements outlined in Chapter 17.78. 
I.  Penalties and Enforcement. the city may enforce the provisions of this chapter by any means authorized and set forth under Chapters 1.12 or 17.06 of this Code. Violators may be subject to the fines and/or penalties authorized under Chapters 1.12 or 17.06 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 4, 8-14-2013)  
Chapter 17.65 - WATER CONSERVATION IN LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS 
 
17.65.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and procedures for the design, installation, and management of water conserving landscapes in order to utilize available plant, water and land resources to avoid excessive landscape water demands while ensuring high quality landscape design. 
(Ord. 2085 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 9249)  
17.65.020 - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as defined in this section. 
"Application rate" means the rate of irrigation (inches/hour or gallons per minute) at which water is applied by an irrigation system. 
"Automatic control valve" means a valve in an irrigation system which is activated by an automatic electric or hydraulic controller. 
"Automatic irrigation system" means an irrigation system that can be controlled without manual manipulation and which operates on a pre-set program. 
"Contour" means a line drawn on a plan which connects all points of equal elevation above or below a known or assumed reference point. 
"Controller" means an automatic timing device with enclosure, which signals automatic valves to open and close on a pre-set program. 
"Cycle" means in irrigation, the complete operation of a controller station. 
"Designer" means a person qualified to practice landscape architecture and/or irrigation design as defined under the Business and Professional Code of the state of California. 
"Director" means the director of planning of the city. 
"Grading" means earthwork performed to alter the natural contours of an area to be planted. 
"Hydrazone" means a portion of the planting area having plants grouped according to water need. 
"Infiltration rate" means the rate (inches per hour) in which water moves through soil under natural conditions. 
"Irrigation system" means a complete connection of system components, including the water distribution network and the necessary irrigation equipment and downstream from the backflow prevention device. 
"Planting area" means the parcel area less building pad(s), driveway(s), patio(s), deck(s), walkway(s) and parking area(s). Planting area includes water bodies (i.e., fountains, ponds, lakes) and natural areas. 
"Planting plan" means a plan which identifies location, spacing, numbers, container sizes of all plant materials including common and botanical names. 
"Rehabilitated landscape" means any planting area in which fifty percent of existing landscape materials are replaced or modified within any twelve-month period. Examples include a change of plants or ground cover, installation of a new irrigation system, and grading modifications. 
"Station" means a position on an automatic irrigation controller which indicates the control point of automatic irrigation valves. 
"Turf" means a surface layer of earth containing grass with its roots. 
(Ord. 2085 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 9249.1)  
17.65.030 - Applicability. 
A.  These requirements shall be applicable to landscaped areas of two thousand five hundred square feet or more of new and rehabilitated landscaping for industrial, commercial, office and institutional developments; to parks and other public recreational areas; to multifamily (three or more units) residential and PUD common areas; to model home complexes; and to city road medians and corridors. 
B.  These requirements shall not be applicable to: 
1.  Homeowner provided landscaping at single-family and two-family residential projects; 
2.  Cemeteries; 
3.  Registered historical sites; 
4.  Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; 
5.  Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; 
6.  Any project with a landscaped area less than two thousand five hundred square feet. 
C.  Exemptions. The director may authorize exemptions to any of the design and improvement standards in this chapter. Such exemptions may be granted if the director finds that the proposed design or improvement is in substantial compliance with the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2085 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 9249.2)  
17.65.040 - Landscape plan submission. 
1.  Landscape Plan—Required. Landscape plans shall be prepared in accordance with the standards set forth herein and with any guidelines developed to help implement the provisions of this chapter. Such plans shall be submitted and approved prior to the issuance of building permits to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
2.  Landscape Plan—Application. Prior to the issuance of a building permit a landscape plan application shall be submitted and reviewed in accordance with this chapter. Applications for landscape plan approval shall be filed by the owner of the affected property or his agent, or by a public entity to which the provisions of the chapter apply, on forms furnished by the director. 
3.  Landscape Plan—Approval. No landscape plan application shall be approved unless the director finds that the plan compliments the design of the project, is consistent with the provisions of this chapter and applicable landscape guidelines; compatible with adjacent existing or future public landscaped areas, and with the elevations and appearances with existing structures located upon lots within the immediate vicinity of the lot which is the subject of such application. 
4.  Landscape Plan—Content. Each landscape plan shall consist of the following elements including, but not limited to the following: 
a.  Water Conservation Concept Statement. Each landscape plan shall include a cover sheet referred to as the water conservation concept statement, which serves as a checklist to verify that the elements of the landscape plan have been completed and includes a brief narrative summary of the project. The statement shall include calculations of the project's: 
i.  Maximum applied water allowance; 
ii.  Estimated applied water use. 
b.  Planting Plan. The planting plan shall identify location, spacing, numbers, container sizes of all plant materials including common and botanical names, drawn on project base sheets in a clear and legible fashion in accordance with the administrative guidelines established to implement the provisions of this chapter. 
c.  Irrigation Plan. The irrigation plan shall identify components of the irrigation system drawn on project base sheets in a clear and legible fashion in accordance with the guidelines established to implement the provisions of this chapter. 
d.  Annual Irrigation Schedule. The annual irrigation schedule shall be prepared, with a minimum four-season water schedule, for both the plant establishment period and established landscape. The irrigation schedule shall include run time and frequency of irrigation for each station. 
e.  Soils Test. The landscape plan shall include a report of soils test which includes information on soil infiltration rate, soil texture, and agricultural suitability. A soils test shall be required if substantial amounts of soil are imported to the property. 
(Ord. 2085 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 9249.3)  
17.65.050 - Landscape standards. 
A.  Water Features. Decorative water features such as ponds, and waterfalls used in landscaped areas shall incorporate the recycling of water to minimize water loss. Where available, and appropriate, the use of reclaimed water shall be designed and incorporated into the water features. 
B.  Water Meters. Each landscape irrigation system shall be metered for water use, separately from domestic and other non-landscape uses. 
C.  Landscape Irrigation Audit. Each landscape irrigation system that services a landscape area of two thousand five hundred square feet or more shall be audited every five years by the property owner for conformance with the approved plan, in accordance with the state of California Landscape Water Management Program, Landscape Irrigation Auditor Handbook, incorporated by reference. Landscaped area of less than two thousand five hundred square feet shall be exempt from the requirement to conduct an irrigation audit. 
D.  Landscape Maintenance. The property owner shall permanently and continuously maintain all landscaping and irrigation in a neat, clean and healthy condition, including removal of litter, proper pruning, mowing of lawns, weeds, fertilizing, and watering; and replacement of diseased and/or dead plants and malfunctioning or missing irrigation system components. 
E.  Model Home Landscaping. For each subdivision with model homes the developer shall submit a landscape plan and install landscaping for each model home, incorporating the requirements of this chapter and including: 
1.  Signs identifying elements of the water conserving landscape and irrigation system design placed around the model homes; 
2.  Literature describing water conserving landscapes to be available to individuals touring the model homes; 
3.  The location, text, and size of signs shall be clearly shown on the landscape plan and shall be in substantial accordance with the guidelines established to implement the provisions of this chapter. 
F.  Landscape Certificate. Upon completion of the installation of the landscaping, the designer shall certify that the landscape complies with all requirements of this chapter. Certification shall be accomplished by completion of a landscape certificate on a form approved by the director. Failure to submit a complete and accurate landscape certificate will delay final approval of the project and/or discontinue water service. 
G.  Relative Water Requirements of Commonly Used Plants. The director shall develop a list of plants that are commonly used in landscape designs with water requirement classifications of low, medium, and high to assist landscape designers to choose species of appropriate water demands to comply with this chapter and to group species of similar water demands to facilitate efficient irrigation. This list shall be included in the landscape guidelines developed to implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2085 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 9249.4)  
Chapter 17.66 - AMUSEMENT ARCADES 
 
17.66.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the adoption of the provisions hereof is to establish a comprehensive set of regulations applicable to the establishment of amusement arcades. 
(Prior code § 9264)  
17.66.020 - Definitions. 
Refer to Chapter 17.08 of this code. 
(Prior code § 9264.1)  
17.66.030 - Conditional use permit—Required—Application. 
All uses subject to the provisions hereof shall comply with all of the regulations contained in this title, and the following regulations: 
A.  That prior to the establishment or conducting of an amusement arcade business, a conditional use permit therefor must be obtained pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.70 of this code; and 
B.  That an amusement arcade business shall be considered for a conditional use permit only when it is located: 
1.  In a commercial development with at least twenty-five thousand square feet of building floor area, and 
2.  Not within one thousand feet from any existing amusement arcade, and 
3.  Not within one thousand feet from any public or private school; 
C.  That a statement of operation be provided in addition to the application for a conditional use permit for an amusement arcade business containing the following information: 
1.  The name and address of the establishment, 
2.  The name and address of the owner, partner or corporate officers of the establishment, 
3.  The number of amusement game machines to be placed at the establishment, 
4.  The name and address of the distributor or supplier of the amusement game machines, 
5.  A statement setting forth the manner and method of providing adult supervision at the establishment, 
6.  A statement setting forth the number of off-street parking spaces and storage facilities for automobiles, bicycles, skateboards and other modes of transportation, 
7.  A statement setting forth any arrests or convictions of owner, partner or corporate officers of the establishment for crimes involving minors within the past ten years. Arrests or convictions may be cause for denial or revocation of an application, 
8.  Such other information as may be required by other city divisions for determination of the applicant's qualifications. 
(Prior code § 9264.2)  
17.66.040 - Conditional use permit—Conditions of approval. 
Approval of a conditional use permit for an amusement arcade business shall be made subject to the following provisions as well as any other conditions found to be necessary by the planning commission: 
A.  Bicycles. The arcade shall provide storage facilities to prevent an accumulation of bicycles and skateboards on pedestrian walkways or parking areas. These facilities shall be provided so as not to interfere with the use of sidewalks, parking lots, or streets by the public. Parking for bicycles shall be provided art one bicycle space for every two amusement game machines. 
B.  Arcade Supervisors/Operators. No amusement arcade shall be open to the public without at least one adult (over eighteen years of age) employee present on the premises. The adult personnel shall provide continuous supervision of the amusement arcade during all hours of operation with the authority and ability to close and lock the premises upon police orders. 
C.  Hours of Operation. The hours of operation shall be considered by the planning commission after examination of the location and surrounding properties and uses. 
D.  Security. Amusement arcades shall provide sufficient security measures so as to effectively regulate interior and exterior loitering, parking congestion, disturbing noise and light, loud conversations, criminal activities, and maintenance of the subject site. No owner, proprietor or employee of any amusement arcade shall permit the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
E.  Continuing Jurisdiction of the Planning Commission. The planning commission shall have continuing jurisdiction over conditional use permits granted for amusement arcades for the purpose of periodically reviewing the adequacy of security and supervision. When in its discretion, the planning commission deems such review to be necessary, it shall hold a public hearing of which the owner or proprietor shall be given ten days' written notice. Further notice shall be provided as directed by the planning commission. If the planning commission finds that adequate security is not being provided, it may impose such further conditions on the use of the premises necessary to improve such security, including, but not limited to, modification of the hours of operation and requiring the owner or proprietor to post a state-licensed security guard. The decision of the planning commission can be appealed to the city council as in other cases. 
(Prior code § 9264.3)  
Chapter 17.68 - HORSES 
 
17.68.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of these regulations is to allow for the keeping of horses as an accessory use in residential zones and to protect persons and property values from indiscriminate and harmful horsekeeping operations. Commercial horsekeeping requires a conditional use permit (see Chapter 17.70 of this code.) 
(Prior code § 9265)  
17.68.020 - Private horse and animal keeping regulations. 
No horse shall be maintained on a lot containing less than ten thousand square feet in area. 
A.  Required Lot Area—R-A. No horse shall be maintained on a lot or parcel containing less than ten thousand square feet of area if a riding trail abuts the property or twenty thousand square feet if no riding trail abuts the property. A lot that abuts a riding trail shall have not less than ten thousand square feet with not less than ten thousand square feet for each horse. 
B.  Number of Horses Allowed—R-1 through R-4. No horse shall be maintained on a lot containing less than ten thousand square feet in area. The following ratio of horses to acreage shall not be exceeded for noncommercial horsekeeping operations. 
1.  Less than one and one-half acres: two horses; 
2.  Between one and one-half acres and four acres: four horses; 
3.  More than four acres: two horses per acre. 
C.  R-A Zone. The following poultry and animals may be kept under the following conditions: 
1.  Poultry or rabbits for private noncommercial uses; provided, that all such poultry and rabbits shall be confined at all times within an enclosure; 
2.  The grazing of horses and bovine animals (excluding dairies); provided, that sites of four acres or less have no more than two horses or two bovine animals per acre of ground devoted to grazing for same; 
3.  Animals raised for bearing, feed or scientific purposes, subject to a conditional use permit. 
D.  Occupancy Permit Required. To insure compliance with these regulations, an occupancy permit shall be required for all sites and facilities where horses are kept. 
E.  Plot Plan Approval Required. At the time an occupancy permit is requested for keeping of horses, or at the time any additions or changes are requested for an existing horsekeeping facility, a scaled, dimensioned plot plan showing all structures, their use, access and egress, parking areas, corrals, arena area, stalls, hay or feed storage, drinking water and restroom facilities, hose bib locations, stable exits, riding and hiking trails shall be submitted and approved by the city planner. 
(Prior code § 9265.1)  
17.68.030 - Commercial horsekeeping regulations. 
A.  Required lot area: The lot shall contain ten thousand square feet and abut a riding trail as shown on the adopted parks and recreation element of the Montebello general plan; and 
B.  Lot coverage: Not more than seventy percent of any lot utilized for such purposes may be covered with structures; and 
C.  Signs: One sign not more than fifteen square feet in area may be maintained identifying such lot; and 
D.  Number of horses: The total number of horses on any such lot shall not exceed the total number of stalls on the lot and shall in no case exceed the ratio of fifty horses per acre; and 
E.  Sanitation facilities: Drinking water and toilet facilities shall be provided and maintained for the use of those persons authorized to be on the premises. The health official may allow the common use of facilities on adjacent properties when written permission has been given by the owner and when the distance from the horsekeeping site to the sanitary facilities does not exceed three hundred feet. 
(Prior code § 9265.2)  
17.68.040 - Site development standards—Compliance. 
All sites where horses are kept shall comply with the following site development standards. 
(Prior code § 9265.3 (part))  
17.68.050 - Site development standards—Site improvement. 
All on-site excavating and grading shall be done in compliance with the excavating and grading regulations as contained in Chapter 15.48 of this code. 
(Prior code § 9265.3 (A))  
17.68.060 - Site development standards—Site drainage. 
All sites shall be improved and maintained to provide adequate site drainage into acceptable drainage course or storm drain facilities. All drainage facilities shall be maintained to prevent accumulation of debris, obstructions and standing water. 
(Prior code § 9265.3 (B))  
17.68.070 - Site development standards—Fences and gates. 
All areas where horses are kept shall be surrounded by a substantial fence with gates having a minimum height of five feet. The lowest member of the fence shall not be more than one foot above the ground. Horizontal intermediate members in open-type railings shall not be spaced more than two feet apart. 
(Prior code § 9265.3 (C))  
17.68.080 - Site development standards—Screening. 
All areas where horses are kept shall be separated from adjoining public streets by a minimum setback of one hundred feet or by screen-type landscaping at least five-feet high that obscures the view. All such landscaping shall be provided with irrigation and maintained. 
(Prior code § 9265.3 (D))  
17.68.090 - Site development standards—Feed storage. 
All grain or pellet feed shall be stored in a verminproof container. 
(Prior code § 9265.3 (E))  
17.68.100 - Site development standards—Paving. 
All vehicular driveways, parking and turning areas shall be paved and maintained in compliance with Chapter 17.52 of this code, Off-Street Parking.) 
(Prior code § 9265.3 (F))  
17.68.110 - Site development standards—Fire protection. 
A.  All sites shall have a minimum of one-inch service supply line from a one-inch full-flow meter. A standard approved hose valve and a minimum of fifty feet of three-fourth-inch hose with a national standard hose coupling (screw threads) shall be provided. Water sources shall not be more than one hundred feet apart. "No Smoking" signs shall be posted near straw, hay, shavings and other loose combustible materials. 
B.  At least one approved-type fire extinguisher shall be maintained in each building or an alternative extinguishing system approved by the fire marshal. 
(Prior code § 9265.3 (G))  
17.68.120 - Site development standards—Stalls. 
A.  Except when horses are maintained by grazing, there shall be not less than one enclosed stall of one hundred square feet for each horse kept on the site. The stalls shall have a minimum width of seven feet and minimum overhead clearance of seven feet. 
B.  All open stalls must be at least two hundred square feet. 
C.  Stables housing ten or more horses shall be provided with at least two exits, each not less than eight feet wide. The exists shall be located a minimum distance apart equal to not less than one-fifth of the perimeter of the stables. 
D.  No stall or barn shall be kept or maintained within forty feet of any window or door of any building used for human habitation, nor within forty feet of any portion of a required yard space adjoining property if such property is devoted to a use other than agriculture. 
(Prior code § 9265.3 (H))  
17.68.130 - Site development standards—Signs and registers required. 
A.  On each stall, stable, bar, corral or enclosure where horses are kept, there shall be provided and maintained a conspicuous and legible sign giving the name, address and telephone number of the person responsible for the care of all horses on the site. In addition, each horse will have a legible sign giving the name and address of its owner. 
B.  All stallions shall be identified by a sign and warning notice, sufficient to be readily observed from the area surrounding the stall where each stallion is kept. 
C.  A current register shall be kept on the premises, listing the name and description of each horse kept on the premises, the name, address and phone number of the owner of each horse or the person to be contacted in any emergency. 
(Prior code § 9265.3 (I))  
17.68.140 - Site development standards—Size of corrals. 
All corrals shall have not less than three hundred square feet of area for the first horse and an additional one hundred square feet for each additional horse. 
(Prior code § 9265.3 (J))  
17.68.150 - Site development standards—Use of stalls. 
No person shall sleep, prepare meals, or conduct other personal living activities in horse stalls or in attached accessory structures. 
(Prior code § 9265.3 (K))  
17.68.160 - Site maintenance standards—Compliance. 
All sites where horses are kept shall comply with the following site maintenance standards. 
(Prior code § 9265.4 (part))  
17.68.170 - Site maintenance standards—Litter. 
Sites shall be kept free from accumulations of weeds, litter and unused materials. 
(Prior code § 9265.4 (A))  
17.68.180 - Site maintenance standards—Dust. 
All sites where horses are kept, including exercise areas, corrals and paths shall be prepared and maintained with materials such as wood chips, gravel, oil, turf, chemical compounds or other substances designed for the purpose of adequately controlling dust. 
(Prior code § 9265.4 (B))  
17.68.190 - Site maintenance standards—Painting. 
All structures and fences shall be painted and maintained, except that those materials having sufficient weather-resistant quality may be exempted by approval of the city planner. All metal or sheet metal structures shall be maintained in a rust-free condition. 
(Prior code § 9264.4 (C))  
17.68.200 - Site maintenance standards—Manure. 
A.  All manure must be removed from the premises and disinfectant shall be applied as directed within forty-eight hours after instructions signed by the county health officer in the event fly infestation is detected. 
B.  No person shall keep or permit to be kept any manure in any bin or box for a period longer than seven days nor fail, refuse or neglect to clean and disinfect such bin or box when ordered to do so by the health officer. 
C.  No person shall keep any manure within one hundred feet of any church, school, hospital or any place where food products are kept, stored or manufactured, or within thirty-five feet of any window or door of any structure used for human occupancy. 
(Prior code § 9265.4 (D))  
Chapter 17.69 - SIDEWALK DINING 
 
17.69.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to permit and regulate sidewalk dining. The city recognizes that the use of public walkways for limited sidewalk dining areas can improve the business environment and enhance the quality of life for residents so long as such use is consistent with the underlying dedication for public right-of-way, does not impede travel, and does not interfere with the rights of adjoining property owners. Therefore, the city may permit such uses on a temporary or nonpermanent basis and as a special privilege, not as a matter of right. 
(Ord. No. 2357, § 3, 3-26-2014)  
17.69.020 - Definitions. 
The definitions set forth in this section shall have the following meanings for the purposes of this Chapter 17.69. 
"Administrative hearing" means the hearing before the director as set forth under Section 17.69.050. 
"Applicant" means a person, entity, or corporation representing the restaurant business applying for the Permit. The applicant shall be authorized to represent the business in a contract. 
"Director" means the director of community development or such other person that the city manager may designate to administer the provisions of this chapter. 
"Permit" means the permit created by this chapter allowing a business to occupy for outdoor dining a portion of the public sidewalk. 
"Permit area" means an area within the public walkway set up in conjunction with the uses of the abutting property for dining and including both any obstruction and any activity related to dining, including, but not limited to, waiting for tables, waiting on tables, busing tables and entertainment. 
"Permittee" means the person, entity, or corporation representing the business to which the permit is issued. 
"Primary business" means the restaurant or retail sales establishment serving prepared food to which the sidewalk dining is an accessory use pursuant to Montebello Municipal Code Section 17.08.030. 
a.  Primary businesses by definition shall include restaurants and retail business establishments that sell prepared food, including but not limited to bakeries, ice cream parlors and delicatessens. 
b.  Primary businesses shall not include bars or other establishments that do not qualify as a bona fide restaurant pursuant to Montebello Municipal Code Section 17.61.020. 
"Renewal annual permit" means the annual renewal of the sidewalk dining permit as described in Section 17.69.140 of this chapter. 
"Restaurant" as defined in Section 17.08.610 of the Montebello Municipal Code. 
"Restaurant with alcohol sales" for purposes of this chapter shall mean bona fide restaurant as defined in Montebello Municipal Code Section 17.61.020 holding current and valid state and local licenses and permits to allow the sale of alcohol with food. 
"Sidewalk" means that part of the public right-of-way dedicated to pedestrian circulation, including without limitation a public sidewalk or a public pedestrian mall. 
"Sidewalk furnishings" means fixtures used in the use of the sidewalk for outdoor dining including tables, seating, portable lighting, heaters, umbrellas and canopies. 
(Ord. No. 2357, § 3, 3-26-2014)  
17.69.030 - Sidewalk dining permit and fee. 
A.  Permit. 
1.  Permit Required. Any restaurant desiring to erect, construct; place or maintain an encroachment upon any public sidewalk for outdoor sidewalk dining facilities must first obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter. 
2.  Rights Granted. The permit only grants the permittee with a license to use the public sidewalk in the manner set forth herein. The permit does not grant any property right in the sidewalk. 
3.  Non-transferrable. The permit is non-transferable and non-assignable. 
4.  Annual Renewal. The permit shall be renewed annually as described in Section 17.69.140 of this chapter. 
5.  Revocable. The permit is a privilege which is revocable at will and may be revoked by the city, for or without any cause whatsoever, at any time. 
B.  Application Fee. With the application for a sidewalk dining permit, the applicant shall pay the sidewalk dining application fee established by city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2357, § 3, 3-26-2014)  
17.69.040 - Sidewalk dining permit application. 
The applicant shall file an application with the director and shall pay the application fee specified by resolution of the council. The director shall establish a form for applications for a permit, including any application materials deemed necessary to enable complete review of the application. The application shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
A.  Applicant. The name and signature of the applicant; and 
B.  Business. The name and address of the business desiring to extend its operations onto an appurtenant sidewalk; and 
C.  Hours of Operation. The hours that the permit area is proposed to be used for outdoor dining; and 
D.  Plans. A plan, drawn to scale and dimensioned showing: 
1.  The perimeter of the permit area. 
2.  The unencumbered sidewalk area available for pedestrians 
3.  All sidewalk furnishings including but not limited to umbrellas, tables, chairs and other portable appurtenances. 
4.  Proposed permanent modifications including but not limited to fencing, landscaping or utility connections. 
E.  Mailing List. A list of property owners as described in Montebello Municipal Code Section 17.78.010. 
F.  Additional Information. Other information as may be required to establish, to the satisfaction of the director, that the proposed use will not impede or impair the use of the public walkway. 
G.  Declaration. A declaration, under penalty of perjury, that all information provided in the application is true and correct. 
(Ord. No. 2357, § 3, 3-26-2014)  
17.69.050 - Sidewalk dining permit application review process. 
A.  Application Completeness. The director, or designee, shall review the application for completeness. 
B.  Schedule Administrative Hearing. An administrative hearing before the director on the proposed application shall be scheduled no more than thirty days after the application is deemed complete. 
C.  Application Noticing. No less than twelve days prior to the administrative hearing, the application shall be noticed in the following manner: 
1.  Mailed or Delivered Notice. Notice of the permit application shall be mailed to property owners as described in Montebello Municipal Code Section 17.78.040. 
2.  Site Posting. A notice of the permit application shall be posted in a prominent location on the business requesting the permit. 
D.  Notice Contents. The notice shall include the following: 
1.  Applicant Identification. The business name, address and a description of the business requesting the permit. 
2.  Request Description. A description of the proposed request, including but not limited to, the number of tables and seating proposed and whether or not alcohol will be permitted. 
3.  Administrative Hearing Process Explained. An administrative hearing will be held on the date noticed if and only if a statement of concern is received by the community development department twenty-four hours before the tentative hearing date. If no concerns are received, the tentatively scheduled hearing will be cancelled. 
E.  Administrative Hearing Procedures. 
1.  The director, or designee, shall preside over the administrative hearing. 
2.  The director, or designee, shall hear testimony for and against the permit application. 
3.  The administrative hearing may be continued by the director without additional noticing. 
F.  Decision and Notice. Within seven days of the conclusion of the administrative hearing or within seven days of the scheduled date of the administrative hearing, if cancelled, the director shall: 
1.  Make the findings of fact as required by the chapter. 
2.  Approve, approve with conditions or deny the permit application. 
3.  Mail notice of the decision to the applicant and any other person requesting such notice. 
G.  Appeal Process. The director's decision may be appealed to the planning commission as described in Montebello Municipal Code Section 17.78.060. 
(Ord. No. 2357, § 3, 3-26-2014)  
17.69.060 - Required findings for approving a sidewalk dining permit. 
The permit may be approved only if the following findings are made: 
A.  Sidewalk dining as proposed in this location meets the standards of this chapter and will comply with the conditions and restrictions set forth in this part, including obtaining all other permits and entitlements necessary for the intended use; and 
B.  Sidewalk dining in this location is compatible with the use and enjoyment of the surrounding neighborhood uses and does not unduly interfere with the use of adjacent or neighboring properties; and 
C.  Sidewalk dining use in this location does not impede travel on the public walkway, or create a hazard to the safety or health of pedestrian; and 
D.  Sidewalk dining use in this location will not adversely impact traffic and parking safety in the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 2357, § 3, 3-26-2014)  
17.69.070 - Indemnification and insurance for all permits. 
A.  Indemnification. As a condition to issuance, the permittee shall submit to the city's risk manager a signed agreement to defend, indemnify, save, and hold harmless the city and all of its officers, agents, or employees from and against any liability, loss, claims, suits, damages, costs, expenses, and judgments (including attorney's fees and costs of litigation) which in whole or in part result from, or arise out of, or are claimed to result from or to raise out of any acts, negligence, errors or omissions of the permittee resulting from any and all operations under the permit granted pursuant to this chapter. In addition, the agreement to indemnify shall include, but is not limited to, personal injury and property or other damage sustained by any person or persons (including but not limited to, companies, or corporations, permittee and its employees, or agents, and members of the general public.). The agreement to indemnify required herein shall be in a form approved by the city attorney's office. 
B.  Insurance. As a condition to issuance, the permittee shall, at his or her own cost and expense, obtain and maintain in full force and effect all of the necessary insurance coverage for the full term of the sidewalk dining permit or any renewal thereof naming the city, its officials, employees, agents, and volunteers as an additional insured. The level of coverage shall be in the amount to be determined by the city's risk manager or the city manager's designee assigned to perform the functions of the risk manager. 
(Ord. No. 2357, § 3, 3-26-2014)  
17.69.080 - Sidewalk dining permit design standards for all permits. 
In addition to any specific conditions of approval adopted for a permit, all sidewalk dining uses must comply with the following design standards. 
A.  Clear Pedestrian Path. A minimum of five feet clear path of pedestrian travel is required. 
B.  Setbacks. The permit area shall be located shall comply with the following minimum setbacks: 
1.  Intersection. The permit area shall be located at least twenty feet from an intersection. 
2.  Driveways. The permit area shall be located at least five feet from alleys, driveways, disabled person parking ramps, commercial loading zones, and bus zone areas; and 
3.  Parallel Parking. The permit area shall be located at least three feet from any curb adjacent parallel parking space. 
4.  Street Signs. The permit area shall be located at least three feet from traffic signs, utility poles, fire hydrants, parking meters, and other street fixtures; and 
5.  The director may require a larger setback distances to provide for unimpeded pedestrian passage, traffic management, or any other public-use purpose. 
C.  Compatibility. Tables, chairs, and other sidewalk furnishings must be compatible with the building in design, material, and color. 
D.  Sidewalk Furnishings. 
1.  Sidewalk furnishings shall not be placed in public right-of-way where they may interfere with safe line-of-sight distance or may otherwise pose a traffic safety hazard. 
2.  Sidewalk furnishings shall not be placed where they may interfere with the pedestrian path of travel or may create a safety hazard. 
3.  Equipment for the service of customers, including but not limited to trays or carts, eating or drinking utensils, linens, and cooking appliances shall not be placed or maintained on any portion of the sidewalk; and 
4.  Umbrellas and free-standing canopies shall have a minimum height clearance of seven feet over the pedestrian walkway. Umbrella bases shall be completely within the permit area. 
5.  All non-metallic umbrellas and canopies shall be flame proof. 
E.  Outdoor lighting is required where food and drinks are served in the evening. Lighting may not cause glare of visual obstruction to drivers or pedestrians. Electrical cords or strings of lights may not be strung over or placed on public right-of-way. 
F.  All sidewalk dining areas must comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2357, § 3, 3-26-2014)  
17.69.090 - Sidewalk dining permit operating standards for all permits. 
A.  Hours of Operation. 
1.  The hours of operation shall be limited to the hours of operation for the primary business. 
2.  Notwithstanding the hours of operation of the primary business, no permit area shall operate between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
B.  Permit Area Maintenance. The permit area must be maintained in the following manner: 
1.  The permit area must be kept clear of litter and food scraps at all times. 
2.  The sidewalk furnishings must be kept in a clean, safe condition at all times. 
3.  Sidewalk furnishings must be removed from the public right-of-way at close of business and stored out of public view. 
4.  The permit area must be swept and mopped after the sidewalk furnishings are stored in the evening. 
C.  Smoking. Smoking is prohibited in permitted sidewalk dining areas. 
D.  Sit-down Dining. Dining within the permit area shall be limited to sit-down food and beverage service only. No stand-up service is permitted. 
E.  Sound. Acoustic music is permitted in the permit area. However, the installation and/or use of speakers and other amplified sound equipment is not allowed. 
F.  Compliance with Conditions. All conditions of the permit must be complied with at all times. 
G.  No additional parking shall be required for the issuance of a sidewalk dining permit. 
(Ord. No. 2357, § 3, 3-26-2014)  
17.69.100 - Sidewalk dining area permit for alcohol sales. 
A.  Permit Required for Alcohol Sales. The permit must specifically permit the sale of alcohol on the sidewalk. 
B.  Conditional Use Permit for Alcohol. The primary use must be a bona fide restaurant with a conditional use permit allowing on-sale alcohol in the main dining area as well as the permit area. 
C.  Alcohol Sales Permit Review Process. The permit for alcohol sales shall be reviewed in the manner described in Section 17.69.110 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2357, § 3, 3-26-2014)  
17.69.110 - Sidewalk dining design standards for alcohol sales. 
In addition to any specific conditions of approval adopted for a permit and all the standards presented in Section 17.69.080, all sidewalk dining uses that sell alcohol within the permit area shall comply with the following conditions: 
A.  Physical Barrier. The permittee must install a physical barrier to control ingress and egress to the permit area. Barrier design shall be subject to the review and approval of the director. The director shall consider the following in the review: 
1.  The barrier clearly defines the permit area to minimize opportunities for illegal consumption of alcohol. 
2.  The barrier is compatible with the architectural character of the primary use. 
3.  The barrier does not impede pedestrian traffic. 
B.  Signs Advertising Alcohol Prohibited. The permittee shall neither use nor allow any free-standing card or any posted placard or sign of any size or kind promoting alcohol service or beverages within the permit area. 
(Ord. No. 2357, § 3, 3-26-2014)  
17.69.120 - Sidewalk dining operating standards for alcohol sales. 
In addition to any specific conditions of approval adopted for a permit and all the standards presented in Section 17.69.090, all sidewalk dining uses that sell alcohol within the permit area must comply with the following standards. 
A.  The primary use is a bona fide restaurant as defined in Montebello Municipal Code Section 17.61.020. 
B.  The permittee holds a current and valid liquor license issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control allowing its public eating establishment to operate as a bona fide public eating place under state law; and 
C.  The licensee under the liquor license issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control is in full compliance with all conditions and restrictions of the applicable liquor license; and 
D.  The primary use and the site upon which the primary use is located are in full compliance with all provisions of this code and would continue to be in full compliance if and after a permit to allow alcohol sales in the permit area is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2357, § 3, 3-26-2014)  
17.69.130 - Change in permitted use. 
Any permittee desiring to change the permitted use by increasing the size of the permit area, by changing substantially the use of arrangement of the occupancy or by adding previously unpermitted alcohol service to the permit area, shall file a new permit application under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2357, § 3, 3-26-2014)  
17.69.140 - Annual renewal permit and fee. 
A.  Annual Renewal Permit. 
1.  Annual Renewal Permit Request. Thirty days prior to expiration of the permit the permittee shall submit in writing a request for renewal. The request shall include a declaration under penalty of perjury that the permittee is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, with the conditions of the permit. 
2.  Failure to Request a Renewal in a Timely Manner. Failure to submit the renewal request thirty days prior to the expiration date shall cause a lapse in the permit which terminates the privilege to conduct business in the permit area. An application for a new permit must then be filed to restore the privilege to conduct business in the permit area. 
B.  Annual Permit Renewal Fee (if any). 
1.  Annual Renewal Fee Payment. Thirty days prior to expiration of the permit the permittee shall pay the annual permit renewal fee (if any) established by city council resolution. 
2.  Failure to Pay the Fee in a Timely Manner. Failure to pay the renewal fee thirty days prior to the expiration date shall cause a lapse in the permit which terminates the privilege to conduct business in the permit area. An application for a new permit must then be filed to restore the privilege to conduct business in the permit area. 
(Ord. No. 2357, § 3, 3-26-2014)  
Chapter 17.70 - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS 
 
17.70.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the conditional use permit is to allow proper integration of uses into the community which may only be suitable in specific locations, or only if such uses are designed or constructed in a particular manner on the site, and under certain conditions. 
(Prior code § 9271.1)  
17.70.020 - Authority to grant. 
The planning commission shall have the authority, subject to the procedure set forth herein, to grant a conditional use permit. (See Exhibit 17.70.020, Conditional Use Permit Process.) 
(Prior code § 9271) 
EXHIBIT 17.70.020 
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT PROCESS 
City of Montebello 
   
17.70.030 - When required. 
The requirement to obtain a conditional use permit shall include, but not be limited to, private concerns occupying or using city-owned property in any zone, when the occupancy or use would otherwise require a conditional use permit. See Appendix A, Index of Permitted Uses, for specific uses allowed with a conditional use permit. 
(Prior code § 9271.2)  
17.70.040 - Application—Form—Fee. 
Application for a conditional use permit shall be made by the property owner or an authorized agent, to the planning commission, on a form provided for the purpose by the city. The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 9271.3)  
17.70.050 - Application—Accompanying maps and data. 
An application for a conditional use permit shall be accompanied by maps showing the subject property as well as the surrounding areas, plot plans of the subject property showing all existing and proposed buildings and uses, a list of names and addresses of all surrounding property owners as set forth in Chapter 17.78 of this code and such data as may be required by the city planner to adequately present the application to the commission. 
(Prior code § 9271.4)  
17.70.060 - Application—Public hearing. 
The city planner sets the request for conditional use permit for a public hearing before the planning commission in the manner specified in Chapter 17.78 of this code. 
(Prior code § 9271.5)  
17.70.070 - Application—Required findings. 
Before any conditional use permit shall be granted, all of the following findings must be made: 
A.  That the site for the proposed use is adequate in size and shape; 
B.  That the site has sufficient access to streets and highways, and is adequate in width and pavement type to carry the quantity and quality of traffic generated by the proposed use; 
C.  That the proposed use will not have an adverse effect upon adjacent or abutting properties; and 
D.  That the proposed use is consistent with the objectives of the community redevelopment project area in which the site is located. 
(Ord. 2120 § 8, 1995; prior code § 9271.6)  
17.70.080 - Application—Conditions of approval. 
The commission may grant a conditional use permit subject to such conditions as the commission finds are warranted by the circumstances involved. These conditions may include the dedication and development of streets adjoining the property and other improvements. All such conditions shall be binding upon the applicants, their successors and assigns; shall run with the land; shall limit and control the issuance and validity of certificate of occupancy; and shall restrict and limit the construction, location, use and maintenance of all land and structures within the development. 
(Prior code § 9271.8)  
17.70.090 - Acceptance of conditions. 
Before any conditional use permit granted according to the provisions hereof shall become effective, the applicant must file a written statement, in the form to be prescribed by the city planner acknowledging and accepting all of the conditions, if any, imposed upon such conditional use permit. Failure to file such written statement with the city planner within thirty days after notice shall automatically terminate the conditional use permit. 
(Prior code § 9271.13)  
17.70.100 - Yard, height, area and off-street parking requirements. 
The requirements of this title relating to yard, building and structure height, area and off-street parking requirements, for any use for which a conditional use permit is required, shall be observed, except where the commission and/or council finds that specific alterations and/or exemptions are reasonable and are required to be made. 
(Prior code § 9271.14)  
17.70.110 - Application—Determination. 
A.  Within twenty days after completion of the public hearing, the commission shall announce its findings in a formal resolution on a request for a conditional use permit unless an extension of the time has been agreed to by the applicant. The commission may grant, conditionally grant or deny a conditional use permit based on the evidence submitted and its own study and knowledge of the circumstances. 
B.  The planning commission resolution shall contain the facts and reasons which, in the opinion of the planning commission, make the granting of the conditional use permit necessary to carry out the general purpose of this code. The resolution shall set forth those conditions necessary to insure that granting the conditional use permit will not adversely affect the surrounding properties nor the general welfare of the community. 
(Prior code § 9271.7)  
17.70.120 - Application—Notice of decision. 
Not later than seven days following the planning commission's action in granting or denying the conditional use permit, a copy of the resolution shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application form and to any other person requesting a copy. 
(Prior code § 9271.9)  
17.70.130 - Modification. 
Any condition imposed upon the granting of a conditional use permit may be modified or eliminated, or new conditions may be added; provided, that the granting body shall first conduct a public hearing in the same manner as required for the granting of the original permit. No such modification shall be made unless the commission or council finds that such modification is necessary to protect the public interest and/or adjacent or abutting properties; or, in case of deletion of an existing condition, that such action is necessary to permit reasonable operation and use under the conditional use permit. 
(Prior code § 9271.12)  
17.70.140 - Appeal and effective date. 
The provisions of Chapter 17.78 of this code, regarding appeal of the commission's action and the effective date of approval, shall apply. 
(Prior code § 9271.10)  
17.70.150 - Expiration and revocation. 
The provisions of Chapter 17.80 of this code, regarding expiration and revocation of a conditional use permit, shall apply. 
(Prior code § 9271.11)  
17.70.160 - Application—Denial—Refiling. 
Where an application for a zone variance or conditional use permit has been denied by the city council, upon an appeal from a decision of the planning commission, if substantially the same application, relating to the same real property, is refiled, within a period of one year after such denial, the action of the commission, after the conduct of a hearing upon which such application, shall be to recommend to the city council either the approval, denial or conditional approval of such application. The commission's recommendation shall be forwarded to the city council, and the city council, based upon the hearing to be held before it and the commission's recommendations, shall determine whether the application should be approved, disapproved or conditionally approved. 
(Prior code § 9271.15)  
Chapter 17.71 - CANNABIS CULTIVATION, MANUFACTURING, AND TESTING FACILITIES 
 
17.71.005 - Definitions. 
The terms and phrases used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as in Chapter 5.90 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2399A, § 2, 2-28-2018)  
17.71.010 - Permitted zones; distance from sensitive uses. 
A.  Cannabis cultivation sites, manufacturing sites, testing laboratories, distributors, and delivery-only retailers shall be permitted only in light manufacturing (M-l) and heaving manufacturing (M-2) zones, subject to a development agreement and conditional use permit approved by the city, as described in Chapter 5.90. 
B.  No premises operating commercial cannabis activities shall be located within a six-hundred-foot radius of a school providing instruction in kindergarten or any grades one through twelve, a day care center, a youth center, or a property that is zoned R-A (residential-agricultural), R-l (single-family residential), R-2 (two-family residential), R-3 (multiple-family residential), or R-4 (high density residential), as of the time the development agreement is approved by the city. The distance specified in this subsection shall be the horizontal distance measured in a straight line from the property line of the school, day care, youth center, or residentially zoned parcel to the closest property line of the lot on which the premises is to be located, without regard to intervening structures. 
(Ord. No. 2399A, § 2, 2-28-2018; Ord. No. 2404, § 2, 6-13-2018)  
17.71.020 - Minimum development and operating standards. 
A.  Permittees, and the premises upon which commercial cannabis activities are operated, shall strictly comply with this code, the development agreement approved by the city, the conditional use permit approved by the city, the Act, and the Regulations. To the extent of a conflict among any of the foregoing, the more restrictive provision shall control unless a different intent is clear from context. 
B.  All premises where commercial cannabis activities are operated shall comply with the following minimum development and operating standards: 
1.  All cultivation, manufacturing, testing, storage, and other operations of commercial cannabis activities shall occur in a fully enclosed and permanent building, as described in Chapter 5.90. 
2.  Persons under the age of twenty-one shall be prohibited from the premises at all times. 
3.  A premises shall notify patrons of the following through the posting of a sign in a conspicuous location: (a) that loitering on and around the premises is prohibited by California Penal Code § 647(e); (b) that patrons must immediately leave the site upon concluding the reason for their visit, and may not consume cannabis or cannabis products on the premises; (c) that patrons may be subject to prosecution under federal law; and (d) that the use of cannabis or cannabis products may impair a person's ability to drive a motor vehicle or operate machinery. 
4.  Permittees shall provide the name and phone number of an on-site staff person to the Montebello Police Department and City Manager for notification if there are operational problems or emergencies associated with the premises or the operation thereof. 
5.  All commercial cannabis activities shall be operated within the specific part of the premises specified in the development agreement or conditional use permit, and no commercial cannabis activities shall exceed the square footage authorized in the controlling development agreement, conditional use permit, or the licensee's license, whichever is most restrictive. 
6.  All exterior windows, doors, loading and unloading docks or bays, and any points of ingress or ingress into the structure on the premises in which commercial cannabis activities will be operated shall be secured from unauthorized entry by commercial grade, nonresidential locks, and in a manner approved by the Montebello Police Department. The exterior of each of the foregoing areas shall be illuminated during evening and early morning hours. 
7.  The ingress and egress points of any storage areas for cannabis or cannabis products shall be locked and secured at all times, and under the control of and accessible only by permittee's authorized personnel. 
8.  Each permittee shall implement a track-and-trace system, approved by the Montebello Police Department and compliant with the Act and Regulations, to record the chain of supply of cannabis or cannabis products from "seed-to-sale." 
9.  The operation of commercial cannabis activities, cannabis or cannabis products, shall not be visible from any public right-of-way. 
10.  The exterior appearance of the premises, including but not limited to the design, color, landscaping, screening, architectural treatments, signage, and similar aesthetic features of the premises shall comply with the standards applicable to the underlying zoning district, as may be modified or supplemented though the development agreement or conditional use permit. 
11.  Except as modified herein, or in a development agreement or conditional use permit, the premises shall comply with the development standards applicable to the underlying zoning district. 
12.  All exterior signage on the premises shall comply with the standards of this code, or the development agreement or conditional use permit, whichever are more restrictive. 
13.  The exterior of the premises shall comply with the city's generally applicable lighting standards including, without limitation, fixture type, wattage, illumination levels, shielding, and associated approvals and permits. 
14.  All waste generated by or resulting from commercial cannabis activities shall be disposed of as required by law, and pending disposal shall be stored in a locked and secure area that is under the control of and accessible only by permittee's authorized personnel. 
15.  There shall not be on-site sales of alcohol or tobacco products, and no on-site consumption of food, alcohol, tobacco, cannabis, or cannabis products on the premises. 
16.  Except as otherwise set forth in a development agreement, the hours of operation for a premises shall be limited to: Monday [through] Sunday, 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
17.  The premises shall provide an odor absorbing ventilation and exhaust system so that odor generated inside the structure where commercial cannabis activities are operated is not detected outside the structure, anywhere on adjacent property, public rights-of-way, or within any other unit or structure on the premises aside from the structure where commercial cannabis activities are operated. 
18.  If hazardous materials, flammable gas, flammable liquefied gas, flammable and combustible liquids, or other flammable material, as those terms are defined in California Fire Code Section 202, are to be used in the operation of commercial cannabis activities, then the provisions of California Fire Code Section 407 shall be applicable where hazardous materials subject to permits under California Fire Code Section 50 (Hazardous Materials) are located on the premises or where required by the Montebello Fire Department. 
19.  Storage, use and handling of compressed gasses in compressed gas containers, cylinders, tanks, and systems shall comply with California Fire Code Chapter 53. Partially full compressed gas containers, cylinders or tanks containing residual cases shall be considered as full for the purposes of the controls required. Compressed gasses classified as hazardous materials shall also comply with California Fire Code Chapter 50 for general requirements and California Fire Code Chapter 53 addressing specific hazards, including California Fire Code Chapter 58 (Flammable Gases), California Fire Code Chapter 60 (Highly Toxic and Toxic Materials), California Fire Code Chapter 63 (Oxidizers, Oxidizing Gases and Oxidizing Cryogenic Fluids), and California Fire Code Chapter 64 (Pyrophoric Materials), Prevention, control and mitigation of dangerous conditions related to storage, use, dispensing, mixing and handling of flammable and combustible liquids shall be in accordance with California Fire Code Chapters 50 and 57. 
20.  All manufacturing, cultivation, and testing sites are Group F-1 (Factory Industrial Moderate-Hazard) Occupancy under the California Fire Code. All new construction is required to be fire sprinkled pursuant to the Fire Code. For premises sited in an existing structure, an automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings contained in a Group F-1 Occupancy where one of the following conditions exist: (a) Group F-1 fire area exceeds twelve thousand square feet; (b) Group F-1 fire area is located more than three stories above grade plane; or (c) the combined area of all Group F-1 fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds twenty-four thousand square feet. 
21.  All areas where commercial cannabis activities are operated are wet locations, and the electrical system in such areas shall comply with all city and California building codes, fire codes, electrical codes, and other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 2399A, § 2, 2-28-2018)  
17.71.040 - Minimum security standards. 
A.  Permittees shall comply with the security standards and requirements set forth in this code, the development agreement approved by the city, the conditional use permit approved by the city, the Act, and the Regulations. To the extent of a conflict among any of the foregoing, the most restrictive provision shall control unless a different intent is clear from context. 
B.  All permittees and premises where commercial cannabis activities are operated shall comply with the following minimum security standards: 
1.  Security Cameras. 
a.  Security cameras shall be installed and maintained on the premises in a good working condition, and capable of producing digitally recorded documentation in a format approved by the Montebello Police Department. 
b.  All security cameras on the premises shall be in use twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week. Permittees are responsible for ensuring that all surveillance equipment is properly functioning and maintained so that the playback quality is suitable for viewing and the surveillance equipment is capturing the identity of all individuals and activities in the monitored areas. 
c.  All video surveillance equipment shall have sufficient battery backup to support a minimum of four hours of recording in the event of a power outage. 
d.  The areas of the premises to be covered by the security cameras include, but are not limited to: all storage areas for cannabis or cannabis products; all areas where commercial cannabis activities are operated; each location where weighing, packaging, transport, preparation, or tagging activities occur; the interior and exterior of all points of ingress or egress to storage areas; all doors and windows; loading and unloading bays, the interior and exterior of all points of ingress or egress to the structure on the premises where commercial cannabis activities are operated, and all points of ingress or egress to the premises. 
e.  Surveillance recording equipment must be housed in a designated, locked, and secured room or other enclosure with access limited to authorized employees, serving personnel, or local law enforcement agencies for law enforcement purposes. 
f.  All entrances and exits to the facility shall be recorded from both indoor and outdoor vantage points. At least one camera shall be dedicated to recording the access points to the secured surveillance recording area. 
g.  Permittees shall keep a current list of all authorized employees and personnel who have access to the surveillance system and/or room on the premises. Permittees shall keep a surveillance equipment maintenance activity log to record all service activity, including the identity of the individual performing the service, the service date and time, and the reason for service. Such records shall be maintained on the premises and shall be made available to the city upon request. 
h.  The system shall be capable of recording all pre-determined surveillance areas in any lighting conditions. 
i.  Video surveillance equipment shall, at a minimum, consist of digital or network video recorders, cameras capable of meeting the requirements described in this chapter, video monitors, digital archiving devices, a color printer, and the capability to produce still color photograph from any camera image, live or recorded. The date and time shall be embedded on all surveillance recordings without significantly obscuring the picture, and time is to be measured in accordance with the official United States time established by the National Institute of Standards and Technology and the U.S. Naval Observatory. 
j.  Video surveillance systems must be equipped with a failure notification system that provides prompt notification to the permittee of any prolonged surveillance interruption and/or the complete failure of the surveillance system. 
k.  A sign shall be posted in a conspicuous place near each point of public access which shall be not less than twelve inches wide and twelve inches long, composed of letters not less than one inch in height, stating "All Activities Monitored by Video Camera" or "These Premises Are Being Digitally Recorded" or otherwise advising all persons entering the premises that a video surveillance and camera recording system is in operation and recording all activity as provided in this code. 
l.  All surveillance recordings must be kept for a minimum of ninety days and be in a format that can be easily accessed for viewing. Video recordings must be archived in a format that ensures authentication of the recording as legitimately-captured video and guarantees that no alteration of the recorded image has taken place. 
m.  After the ninety-day surveillance video retention period has lapsed, surveillance video recordings must be erased or destroyed prior to being discarded or disposed of for any other purposes. Surveillance video recordings may not be destroyed if the premises knows or should have known of a pending criminal, civil, or administrative investigation or any other proceedings for which the recording may contain relevant information. 
n.  Upon request, permittees shall make available to the Montebello Police Department or local law enforcement agency, for law enforcement purposes, all information related to security alarm systems, recordings, monitoring, and/or system activity. 
o.  Permittees may utilize off-site monitoring and video recording storage, or an independent third-party service, to satisfy the requirements of this section, provided the standards exercised at the remote location meet or exceed all standards for on-site monitoring set forth herein. 
2.  Alarm System. 
a.  The premises shall be alarmed with a reliable, commercial alarm system that is operated and monitored by a security company or alarm business that is operating in full compliance with this code, including but not limited to Chapter 8.24. 
b.  Permittees shall maintain up to date and current records and existing contracts on the premises that describe the location and operation of each security alarm system, a schematic of security zones, the name of the alarm company, and the name of any vendor monitoring the premises. 
c.  At a minimum, the alarm system shall monitor all exterior points of access into the structure on the premises where commercial cannabis activities are operated, including but not limited to windows and doors. 
d.  Security Guard. At all times a premises is open to the public, at least one security guard who is licensed, possesses a valid department of consumer affairs "security guard card," and has a valid Santa Ana Business License. 
3.  Records. All records applicable to the surveillance system, alarm system, and track-and-trace system shall be maintained on the premises, and available for inspection upon request by the Montebello Police Department or other local law enforcement personnel for law enforcement purposes or to ensure compliance with this code, the Act, or the Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2399A, § 2, 2-28-2018)  
Chapter 17.72 - VARIANCES 
 
17.72.010 - Purpose. 
The sole purpose of a variance shall be to insure that no property, because of special circumstances applicable to it, shall be deprived of privileges commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same vicinity and zone. No variance shall be granted which would have the effect of granting a special privilege not shared by other properties in the same vicinity and zone. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9273.1)  
17.72.020 - Authority to grant. 
The planning commission shall have the authority, subject to the procedures set forth herein to grant variances from any provisions of this code relating to the use and development of land when practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships, or results inconsistent with the general intent and purpose of this code, occur by reason of the strict and literal interpretation of any of the provisions of this code. (See Exhibit 17.72.020, Zone Variance Process.) 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9273) 
EXHIBIT 17.72.020 
ZONE VARIANCE PROCESS 
City of Montebello 
   
17.72.030 - Application—Form—Fee. 
Application for a variance shall be made by the property owner, or an authorized agent, to the planning commission on a form provided for that purpose by the city, and shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9273.2)  
17.72.040 - Application—Accompanying maps and data. 
An application for a variance shall be accompanied by maps showing the subject property as well as the surrounding area, plot plans of the subject property showing all existing and proposed buildings and uses, a list of names and addresses of all surrounding property owners as set forth in Chapter 17.78 of this code and any other data required by the city planner to adequately present the application to the commission. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9273.3)  
17.72.050 - Application—Public hearing. 
The city planner shall set the request for a variance for a public hearing before the planning commission in the manner specified in Chapter 17.78 of this code. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9273.4)  
17.72.060 - Application—Required findings. 
Before any variance shall be granted, the planning commission shall satisfy itself that the applicant has demonstrated the following facts: 
A.  That there are special or unusual circumstances applicable to the property involved, such as size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, which do not generally apply to other properties in the vicinity included in the same zone as the subject property; 
B.  That due to such special or unusual circumstances, the strict application of the provisions of the code would result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships, or would deprive such property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification; 
C.  That the variance is necessary for the preservation of a substantial property right of the applicant to facilitate a reasonable use of the subject property which right is possessed by other property in the same vicinity and zoning as the subject property; 
D.  That the granting of the variance will not cause an adverse effect on the public welfare or surrounding properties; and 
E.  That the granting of such variance will be consistent with the general purpose and intent of this code and will not adversely affect the general plan. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9273.5)  
17.72.070 - Application—Conditions of approval. 
The commission may grant a variance subject to such conditions as the commission finds are warranted by the circumstances involved. The conditions may include the dedication and development of streets adjoining the property and other improvements. All such conditions shall be binding upon the applicants, their successors and assigns; shall run with the land; and shall limit and control the issuance and validity of certificates of occupancy; and shall restrict and limit the construction, location, use and maintenance of all land and structures within the development. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9273.7)  
17.72.080 - Acceptance of conditions. 
Before any variance granted pursuant to the provisions of this title shall become effective, the applicant shall file a written statement, in the form to be prescribed by the city planner, acknowledging and accepting all of the conditions, if any, imposed upon such variance. Failure to file such written statement with the city planner within thirty days after notice shall automatically terminate the variance. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9273.12)  
17.72.090 - Application—Determination. 
A.  Within twenty days after completion of the public hearing, the commission shall announce the findings in a formal resolution on a request for a variance, unless an extension of time has been agreed to by the applicant. The commission may grant, conditionally grant or deny a variance based on the evidence submitted and its own study and knowledge of the circumstances. 
B.  The planning commission resolution shall contain the facts and reasons which, in the opinion of the planning commission, make the granting of the variance necessary to carry out the general purpose of this code. The resolution shall set forth those conditions necessary to insure that granting the variance will not adversely affect the surrounding properties or the general welfare of the community. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9273.6)  
17.72.100 - Application—Notice of decision. 
Not later than seven days following the planning commission's action in granting or denying the variance, a copy of the resolution shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application form and to any other person requesting a copy. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9273.8)  
17.72.110 - Modification. 
Any condition imposed upon the granting of a variance may be modified or eliminated, or new conditions may be added; provided, that the granting body shall first conduct a public hearing in the same manner as required for the granting of the same. No such modification shall be made unless the commission or council finds that such modification is necessary to protect the public interest and/or adjacent or abutting properties; or, in case of deletion of an existing condition, that such action is necessary to permit reasonable operation and use under the variance. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9273.11)  
17.72.120 - Appeal and effective date. 
The provisions of Chapter 17.78 of this code regarding appeal of the commission's action and the effective date of approval, shall apply. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9273.9)  
17.72.130 - Expiration and revocation. 
The provisions of Chapter 17.80 of this code, regarding expiration or revocation of a variance, shall apply. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9273.10)  
17.72.140 - Application—Denial—Refiling procedure. 
Where an application for a zone variance or conditional use permit has been denied by the city council, upon an appeal from a decision of the planning commission, if substantially the same application, relating to the same real property, is refiled, within a period of one year after such denial, the action of the commission, after the conduct of a hearing upon such application, shall be to recommend to the city council either the approval, denial or conditional approval of such application. The commission's recommendation shall be forwarded to the city council, and the city council, based upon the hearing to be held before it and the commission's recommendations, shall determine whether the application should be approved, disapproved or conditionally approved. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9273.13)  
Chapter 17.74 - SITE PLAN REVIEW 
 
17.74.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the site plan review is to minimize or preclude potential adverse impacts to the public interest or on abutting properties and adjacent residential, commercial and industrial neighborhoods, resulting from the design or layout of a proposed development. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (b) (part), 1990; prior code § 9272.1)  
17.74.020 - Authority to approve development plan. 
The planning commission shall have the authority, subject to the procedure and limitations set forth herein, to review and approve, approve with conditions or deny approval of a development plan through a site plan review process. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (b) (part), 1990; prior code § 9272)  
17.74.030 - When required. 
A site plan review is required for all residential projects resulting in three or more dwelling units and for all commercial and industrial projects involving the construction of five thousand square feet or more of building area. A separate site plan review is not required for projects which require the approval of a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (b) (part), 1990; prior code § 9272.2)  
17.74.040 - Application—Form—Fee. 
Submittal of corrected construction plans for a building permit plan check shall be considered application for a site plan review. The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (b) (part), 1990; prior code § 9272.3)  
17.74.050 - Application—Accompanying maps and data. 
A.  An application for a site plan review shall include construction plans and a plot plan of the subject property showing proposed buildings, and any adjacent existing buildings or improvements as well as finished grade and floor elevations for a distance of at least twenty feet beyond the boundaries of the proposed development. 
B.  In addition, an application shall include a location map showing the subject property as well as the surrounding areas along with a list of names and addresses of all surrounding property owners as set forth in Chapter 17.78 of this code, and any other data as may be required by the director of planning to adequately present the application to the planning commission. This resubmittal shall be considered application for a site plan review by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (b) (part), 1990; prior code § 9272.4)  
17.74.060 - Application—Hearing. 
The director of planning shall set the request for a site plan review for a public hearing before the planning commission in the manner specified in Chapter 17.78 of this code. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (b) (part), 1990; prior code § 9272.5)  
17.74.070 - Application—Required findings. 
Before any site plan review shall be granted, all of the following findings must be made: 
A.  That the proposed design for improvement complies with all requirements of the Montebello Municipal Code; 
B.  That the proposed design for improvement is consistent with the general plan; 
C.  That the proposed design for improvement will not have any significant adverse impact on the surrounding properties or on the general public welfare. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (b) (part), 1990; prior code § 9272.6)  
17.74.080 - Development plan—Conditions of approval. 
The commission may approve a development plan subject to a site plan review with such conditions as the commission finds are warranted by the circumstances involved. These conditions may include the dedication and development of streets adjoining the property and other improvements. All such conditions shall be binding upon the applicants, their successors and assigns; shall run with the land; shall limit and control the issuance and validity of a building permit and certificate of occupancy; and shall restrict and limit the construction and location of all structures within the development. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (b) (part), 1990; prior code § 9272.8)  
17.74.090 - Application—Determination. 
Within twenty days after completion of the public hearing, the planning commission shall announce its findings on the request unless the review period is extended with the consent of the applicant. The commission may approve, conditionally approve or deny a development plan subject to the site plan review process based on the evidence submitted and its own study and knowledge of the circumstances. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (b) (part), 1990; prior code § 9272.7)  
17.74.100 - Development plan—Notice of decision. 
Not later than seven days following the planning commission's action in approving or denying a development plan subject to the site plan review process, a notice shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application plans and to any other person requesting a copy. Such notice will state the planning commission's decision and all conditions of approval, if any, pursuant to that decision. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (b) (part), 1990; prior code § 9272.9)  
17.74.110 - Development plan—Modification. 
Any condition imposed upon the approval of a development plan subject to a site plan review may be modified or eliminated, or new conditions may be added; provided, that the granting body shall first conduct a public hearing in the same manner as required for the granting of the original application. No such modification shall be made unless the commission or council finds that such modification is necessary to protect the public interest and/or adjacent or abutting properties; or, in case of deletion of an existing condition, that such action is necessary to permit reasonable development of the site. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (b) (part), 1990; prior code § 9272.12)  
17.74.120 - Appeal and effective date. 
The provisions of Chapter 17.78 of this code, regarding appeal of the commission's action and the effective date of approval, shall apply. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (b) (part), 1990; prior code § 9272.10)  
17.74.130 - Expiration of development plan approval. 
The approval of a development plan to the site plan review process shall expire when the building permit application for the development expires, unless otherwise specified by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (b) (part), 1990; prior code § 9272.11)  
17.74.140 - Development plan—Denial—Refiling. 
Where a development plan subject to the site plan review process is denied by the panning commission, or by the city council upon appeal of the decision of the planning commission, the application may be refiled within one year of such decision only if the basis for the denial as contained in the minutes of the planning commission or city council action is addressed by a revised plan. Any application may be refiled in the same form after one year of the planning commission or city council decision. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (b) (part), 1990; prior code § 9272.13)  
Chapter 17.76 - ZONE CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS 
 
17.76.010 - Authority. 
The provisions of this code shall be amended, including, but not limited to, the reclassification of specific properties to different zones (see Exhibit 17.76.010), whenever the public interest, convenience and necessity require. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9274) 
EXHIBIT 17.76.010 
ZONE CHANGE PROCESS 
CITY OF MONTEBELLO 
   
17.76.020 - Initiation. 
Amendments of the provisions of this code, or the reclassification of specific properties from one zone to another, shall be initiated only in one of the following ways: 
A.  By motion of the city council; or 
B.  By motion of the planning commission; or 
C.  With reference to the reclassification of specific real property, by the owner or an authorized agent, or by the plaintiff in an action of eminent domain with regard to such property. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9274.1)  
17.76.030 - Zone change—Application—Form—Fee. 
Application for a zone change shall be made on a form provided by the city and shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9274.2)  
17.76.040 - Zone change—Hearing. 
The city planner shall set the request for a zone change for a public hearing before the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.78 of this code, Public Hearings, Notices and Appeals. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9274.3)  
17.76.050 - Zone change—Conditions. 
The city council may impose conditions of approval upon the reclassification of any property from one zone classification to another, where it finds that such conditions must be imposed so that the reclassification shall not create problems harmful to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9274.8)  
17.76.060 - Hearing—Required. 
The commission shall conduct a noticed public hearing on each proposed amendment and zone change. The city planner shall give notice of the hearing. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9274.4)  
17.76.070 - Amendments—Hearing—Decision. 
A.  After conducting a hearing on any proposed amendment, the commission, based upon its decision as to whether the public interest, convenience and necessity so requires, shall take one of the following courses of action: 
1.  Recommend to the city council that the requested amendment be granted; or 
2.  Recommend to the city council that the requested amendment be granted in part, or as modified by the commission; or 
3.  Deny the requested amendment. 
B.  The commission's action shall be by resolution. Where the commission's action is to deny the requested amendment, such decision shall be final and conclusive in the absence of an appeal. Where the commission's recommendation is made pursuant to subsection A (1) or (2) of this section, the entire matter requested or initiated shall be considered by the council. 
C.  Appeal. The decision of the commission, in the case of a denial of a proposed amendment or classification of zone, shall be final in the absence of an appeal filed within twenty days after the hearing at which the application was desired. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code §§ 9274.5 and 9274.6)  
17.76.080 - Amendments—Decision—Appeal. 
In the case of an appeal from a decision of the commission, or upon receipt by the city clerk of a commission recommendation relating to an amendment, the clerk shall give the same type of notice of hearing before the council, as is required for hearings before the planning commission. The council shall conduct a new hearing upon such matter, and shall determine whether an amendment is required, in whole or in part, by the public interest, convenience and necessity. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9274.7)  
Chapter 17.78 - PUBLIC HEARINGS, NOTICES AND APPEALS 
 
17.78.010 - List of surrounding property owners—Submission required. 
In conjunction with an application for variance, conditional use permit (see Chapters 17.70 and 17.72 of this code) or any other action where a public hearing is to be held, a list of names and addresses of all owners of property surrounding the subject property shall be submitted by the applicant with the application. The list shall include the owners of all property within a radius of three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the subject property and the list shall be accompanied by an affidavit certifying that it is a true and correct list taken from the latest available assessment roll of Los Angeles County. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9275.1)  
17.78.020 - Scheduling of public hearing. 
When an application has been filed for a variance, conditional use permit or any other action requiring a public hearing, and it has been determined that the filing fee and all required maps and other data have been submitted and accepted by the city planner, the matter shall then be scheduled for public hearing. The date for the public hearing shall be set by the city planner and shall be held as soon as possible following receipt of the complete application. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9275.2)  
17.78.030 - Notice of public hearing—Publication. 
Notice (for tentative tracts, zone changes, planned developments, code amendments) of the time and place of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten days prior to the public hearing. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9275.3)  
17.78.040 - Notice of public hearing—Notification of surrounding property owners. 
At least ten days prior to the public hearing, the city planner shall send a notice of the public hearing by first class mail as described in Section 17.78.010. Failure of property owners to receive notice of the hearing shall in no way affect the validity of the action taken, providing the required notification has been duly given in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9275.4)  
17.78.050 - Conduct of hearing. 
A public hearing on any zoning matter before the commission shall be conducted in accordance with the rules and procedures established for such hearings by the commission, and a public hearing on any zoning matter before the council shall be conducted in accordance with the rules and procedures established for such hearings by the council. In the case of a hearing on an order of abatement, the commission and/or council may extend the prima facie periods of abatement, as set forth in Chapter 17.54 of this code in order to establish a reasonable period of abatement, based upon the facts presented. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9275.5)  
17.78.060 - Appeal of decision of director of planning. 
An appeal may be filed, with the secretary of the planning commission, of a decision by the director of planning. The decision shall be, for all purposes, final and conclusive unless within thirty days after a notice of the decision (if a written notice is sent) an appeal if filed. The secretary of the commission, upon receipt of a timely appeal, shall set the matter for public hearing before the planning commission and shall give notice of the time and place of the hearing. In the absence of the timely filing of an appeal, the decision of the commission shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 2167 § 4, 1997: Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9275.6)  
17.78.070 - Appeal of planning commission decision—Filing. 
The decision of the planning commission in granting or denying a variance, conditional use permit or order of abatement shall go into effect twenty days, or upon the day following the first regular city council meeting after its decision, whichever shall occur first, unless within such period of time an appeal in writing is filed by the applicant or an opponent with the city clerk. At the same time as the filing of an appeal, the appealing party shall pay a filing and processing fee in a sum to be set by resolution of the city council. Within this period of time, the city council, on its own motion, may appeal the decision of the planning commission. In the case of an appeal or an order of abatement, upon the adoption by the commission of a decision on a appeal, the secretary of the commission shall give written notice of the same. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9275.7)  
17.78.080 - Appeal of planning commission decision—Council to hear appeal. 
Upon receipt of an appeal resulting from any planning commission determination, the city council shall set the matter for hearing before itself within thirty days from the receipt of the appeal. Notice of the hearing shall be given in accordance with the provisions hereof of all matters which have previously been subject to a public hearing before the planning commission. At such hearing, the city council shall make the same findings and consider the same criteria as required of the planning commission. The secretary of the planning commission, upon notice from the city clerk that an appeal has been timely filed, shall transmit to the city clerk the planning commission's complete record of the case. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9275.8)  
17.78.090 - Appeal of planning commission decision—Announcement of findings and decision. 
The city council shall announce its findings and decision by formal resolution. In the case of an appeal or an order of abatement, upon the adoption by the council of a decision on an appeal, the city clerk shall give written notice of the same. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9275.9)  
17.78.100 - Finality of city council's action. 
Any action by the city council on such matters shall be final. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9275.10)  
17.78.110 - Notice of decision of city council. 
No later than seven days following the adoption of a resolution, a copy of the resolution shall be mailed by the city clerk to the applicant and to any other parties requesting notice of action. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9275.11)  
17.78.120 - Notice of decision of planning commission. 
No later than seven days following the adoption of a resolution, a copy of the resolution shall be mailed by the secretary of the commission to the applicant and to any other parties requesting notice of action. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9275.12)  
17.78.130 - Council decisions contrary to planning commission action—Referral to planning commission. 
If the decision of the city council is in any way contrary to the action taken by the planning commission, the city council shall refer their findings to the planning commission and request a further report of the planning commission on the matter. Failure of the planning commission to report to the city council within forty days after reference may be deemed to be approval by the planning commission of any proposed change. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9275.13)  
Chapter 17.77 - PARKLAND FEE 
Sections: 
 
17.77.010 - Fee required. 
Except as hereinafter provided, no dwelling shall be constructed, nor shall a building permit be issued for such construction, unless an in-lieu parkland fee has been paid to the city in an amount set forth by resolution of the city council. (Resolution 18-98, 2018) 
(Ord. No. 2407, § 2, 10-10-2018)  
17.77.020 - Use of funds. 
The fees collected by the city pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in the parkland fee fund and shall be used for the purchase of, or development of, or repairs, replacements, or renovations to park or recreational facilities. The fees are in addition to any and all other fees paid to the city pursuant to municipal ordinances and regulations. (Ord. 2407, 2018) 
(Ord. No. 2407, § 2, 10-10-2018)  
Chapter 17.80 - REVOCATIONS AND EXPIRATIONS 
 
17.80.010 - Revocation—Authority. 
Any zone variance or conditional use permit granted by the planning commission may be revoked by the commission, and any such approval granted by the city council may be revoked by the council. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9276)  
17.80.020 - Revocation—Grounds. 
Any zone variance or conditional use permit may be revoked and nullified if it is found that any one of the following conditions apply: 
A.  That the approval was obtained by fraud or faulty information; 
B.  That the conditional use permit or zone variance has been or is being used contrary to the terms or conditions of approval, or is in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or regulation; 
C.  That the use is being exercised in such a way as to be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or in such a way as to constitute a public nuisance; 
D.  That the use for which approval was granted has ceased to exist or has been suspended for six months. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9276.1)  
17.80.030 - Revocation—Hearing—Notice. 
If the commission or the council intends to consider revocation of approval granted by the commission or council, written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be sent by mail to the owner or operator of the premises involved and to surrounding property owners as set forth in Chapter 17.78 of this code, at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9276.2)  
17.80.040 - Revocation—Hearing—Determination. 
A.  The planning commission or council shall hold a hearing on the matter of a proposed revocation. The hearing shall be conducted in the time and manner set forth in Chapter 17.78 of this code. 
B.  At the time and place of such hearing, the body conducting the hearing shall determine whether any one of the facts, set forth in Section 17.80.020 are present. If the body conducting the hearing determines that any one of such facts are present, it shall revoke the zone variance or conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9276.3)  
17.80.050 - Revocation—Appeal. 
If the revocation proceeding is conducted before the planning commission, the decision of the commission shall be subject to an appeal to the city council in the time and manner as set forth in Chapter 17.78 of this code. In the absence of such appeal, the decision shall be final. The action of the city council, either upon an appeal, or as the conducting body, shall be final for all purposes. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9276.4)  
17.80.060 - Exercise of rights—Time limit. 
If the use permitted pursuant to the grant of a zone variance or conditional use permit is not exercised within the time permitted by this section, such zone variance or conditional use permit shall be null and void. The exercise of such rights shall be commenced within the time permitted by the resolution granting such a zone variance or conditional use permit. If no time is specified, then, for all purposes, such a time for exercise of right shall be a period of one year from and after the adoption of the resolution granting such zone variance or conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9276.5)  
17.80.070 - Exercise of rights—Initial extension of time limit. 
The granting body, upon good cause shown by the applicant, may extend the time permitted hereby for the exercise of such rights, for a period not to exceed one year: 
A.  Requests for extensions of time within which to exercise the rights under a zone variance or conditional use permit, shall be made prior to the expiration date. 
B.  Such requests shall be in writing and shall be filed with the secretary of the commission or city clerk (if the original permit was granted by the city council). 
C.  Upon the filing of such a written request, the time for the exercise of rights under the zone variance or conditional use permit shall be automatically extended until the granting body determines whether or not the request is to be granted, but no automatic extension will be for a period longer than thirty days, except as provided. 
D.  Where the granting body is the city council, if no action is taken upon such request within a period of thirty days after the filing, the same shall be denied. 
E.  Where the granting body is the planning commission, and the commission either denies the request, or fails, within a period of thirty days, to take action, the same shall be deemed denied, unless within ten days after such request has been denied by the commission, or within ten days after the expiration of the thirty-day period, an appeal is filed, in writing, with the city clerk. 
F.  Where an appeal is taken from the commission's action, the expiration date for the zone variance or conditional use permit shall be automatically extended for a period of thirty days after the filing with the city clerk. If the council fails to act upon the request within the thirty-day period, the same shall be denied. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9276.6)  
17.80.080 - Exercise of rights—Additional extensions of time limit. 
An additional extension of time beyond one year may be granted by the granting body, where the applicant, after a public hearing, in the time and manner set forth in Chapter 17.78 of this code shows to the reasonable satisfaction of the body that the exercise of such rights was prevented by causes outside of the applicant's control. Such time extensions shall be for reasonable periods of time, not exceeding one year for each extension. 
(Ord. 2027 § 6 (a) (part), 1990; prior code § 9276.7)  
Chapter 17.90 - PROHIBITION OF FEEDING OF WILDFOWL, PIGEONS, DUCKS, SQUIRRELS, FERAL CATS, WILD DOGS AND UNLICENSED ANIMALS WHICH ARE NOT PERSONAL PETS 
Sections: 
 
17.90.010 - Purpose. 
The large numbers of wildfowl, pigeons, ducks, squirrels, feral cats, wild dogs and unlicensed animals which are not personal pets of an owner in the city have, at present, become a nuisance, causing defacement, deterioration, litter, and damage to public and private property. The ordinance codified in this chapter seeks to prohibit feeding of wildfowl, pigeons, ducks, squirrels, feral cats, wild dogs and unlicensed animals which are not personal pets of an owner on public streets and public and private property, and thereby discourages the maintenance and breeding of in wildfowl, pigeons, ducks, squirrels, feral cats, wild dogs and unlicensed animals which are not personal pets of an owner in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2408, § 2, 10-10-2018)  
17.90.020 - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
"Feed" means to give, place, expose, deposit, scatter or distribute any edible material, including but not limited to, grain, seed, greens, bread, fruit, pet food or other miscellaneous food scraps with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife. 
"Person" means natural person, firm, corporation or association. 
"Public property" means any real property owned by any state, county or local governmental entity within the city. 
"Public street" means any public thoroughfare, avenue, road, highway, boulevard, parkway, way, drive, lane, alley, court, including the right-of-way for vehicular traffic, gutter, curb, parking, and sidewalk. 
"Wild pigeon" means any bird of the family Columbidae, but shall not apply to any pigeon that is under the care and control of any person. 
(Ord. No. 2408, § 2, 10-10-2018)  
17.90.030 - Nuisance. 
It is a nuisance for any person to feed any wildfowl, pigeons, ducks, squirrels, feral cats, wild dogs and unlicensed animals which are not personal pets of an owner on any public street or any public or private property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2408, § 2, 10-10-2018)  
17.90.040 - Violation and penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter is guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than fifty dollars for the first violation; a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for the second violation of the same section of this chapter within one year; and a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for each additional violation of the same section of this chapter within one year. 
(Ord. No. 2408, § 2, 10-10-2018)  
Appendix A - INDEX OF PRIMARY USES 
(Temporary Use Permits Required—Refer to Chapter 12.16 for Temporary Uses) 
Numbered footnotes appear at the end of this appendix 
USE 	ZONE 

(R = Use by right; C = Conditional use permit) 
	R-A 	R-1 	R-2 	R-3 	R-4 	C-R 	C-1 	C-2 	C-M 	M-1 	M-2 
Access to Property 						C 	C 	C 	C 		
Accessory Dwelling Unit 55 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 						
Acetylene Storage 										R 	R 
Acid Manufacture 											C 
Addressograph Service 									R 	R 	R 
Adult Business (see Chapters 17.60 and 5.76) 										R 	R 
Advertising, Outdoor (Off-premises) 										R 	R 
Agricultural Equipment, Sale or Rent 										R 	R 
Agricultural or Horticultural Growing Grounds 1 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 			C 			
Air Pollution Station 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Airports and Heliports 									C 2 	C 	C 
Alcohol, Manufacture of 											R 
Ambulance Service 								C 	R 	R 	R 
Ammonia, Manufacture of 											R 
Ammunition, Manufacture of 										C 	C 
Amusement Arcades (see Chapter 17.66) 								C 	C 		
Amusement Parks 	C 							C 	C 	C 	
Animal Shelter 										R 	R 
Antique Shops, Retail 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Appliance Sales & Repairs (Household & Small Appliances) 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Aquariums 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Asphalt Refining or Asphalt Mixing Plants 											C 
Assembly Buildings & Uses 	C 				C 			C 	C 	C 	
Athletic Fields 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Auditoriums 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Auto & Motorcycle Repair Garages 									C 	R 	R 
Auto Wrecking/Dismantling Yard 											C 
Autobody Repair 									C 	R 	R 
Automobile Rental Agencies 								C 	R 	R 	R 
Automobile Sales, New & Used 								C 	R 	R 	R 
Bakery, Retail 							R 3 	R 4 	R 	R 	R 
Banks 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Barber, Beauty Shops & Cosmetologists 							R 	R 	R 	R 	R 
Barrels, Storage of 											C 
Bars/Cocktail Lounges 5 								C 	C 		
Beacons, Direction Devices, Stations 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Bird Raising 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 				R 	R 	R 
Blast Furnaces or Coke Ovens 											C 
Body Art Establishments 62 								C 	C 	C 	C 
Book Stores 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Borrow Pits (quarries) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 					C 	C 
Bottling Plants 										R 	R 
Bowling Alley 								C 	C 	C 	C 
Box, Manufacture of 										R 	R 
Breweries 											R 
Brick, Tile, Etc., Manufacture of 											R 
Brushes, Manufacture of 										R 	R 
Building Materials Sales 									R 	R 	R 
Building Materials Storage Yards 									R 	R 	R 
Burial Casket Sales 									R 	R 	R 
Cabinet Shops 									R 	R 	R 
Camps 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		
Cannabis Cultivation Site 63 										C 	C 
Cannabis Manufacturing Site 63 										C 	C 
Cannabis Testing Laboratory 63 										C 	C 
Cannabis Distributor 63, 64 										C 	C 
Cannabis Delivery-Only Retailer 63 										C 	C 
Candles, Manufacture of 										R 	R 
Candy & Confectionary Stores (with incidental manufacturing) 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Candy Manufacture 									R 	R 	R 
Canvas Manufacture 										R 	R 
Carnival, Circus or Fair 6 	C 				C 						
Carpet Cleaning Plant 									R 	R 	R 
Carwashes 								C 	C 	C 	C 
Casein Production (except glue) 										R 	R 
Catering Service 											R 
Catering Truck Service Yard (Heavy Trucking) 56 										R 56 	R 56 
Cellophane Products Manufacture 										R 	R 
Cement, Lime, Gypsum or Plaster of Paris Manufacture 											C 
Cemetery 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Ceramics Manufacture 									R 	R 	R 
Charitable Bins & Depositories 						C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Child Care Centers (see Day Nurseries) 7 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Children's Homes 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		
Churches, Temples, Etc. 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Cigar Manufacture 										R 	R 
Cigarette Manufacture 										R 	R 
Clocks, Manufacture of 										R 	R 
Clothing Rental 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Clubs, Private 								C 	C 	C 	C 
Coffee Roasting 										R 	R 
Coffins, Manufacture of 										R 	R 
Coins, Purchase and Sales 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Cold Storage Plants 										R 	R 
Columbariums, Crematoria, Mausoleums 	C 									C 	C 
Commercial Incinerators 										C 	C 
Communications Equipment 									R 	R 	R 
Concrete Manufacture 											R 
Construction Equipment Storage Yard, Temporary 8 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 
Contractor's Equipment Storage Yard 									R 	R 	R 
Convalescent Hospitals 						C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Convents & Monasteries 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 						
Cork Products 										R 	R 
Corrugated Paper Products Manufacture 										R 	R 
Cosmetic Manufacture 									R 	R 	R 
Costume Design Studios 								C 	R 	R 	R 
Costume Rentals 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Courts, Badminton, Tennis, Etc. 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Cutlery Manufacture 										R 	R 
Dairy Products, Manufacture 										R 	R 
Dairy Stores 							R 	R 	R 	R 	R 
Dairy Stores, Drive-In 9 							R 	R 	R 	R 	R 
Dance Pavilion, Outdoor 									C 	C 	
Dance Studios 								C 	R 	R 	R 
Dancehalls 								C 	C 	C 	C 
Delicatessen 							R 10 	R 	R 	R 	R 
Dental Clinic 								C 	R 	R 	R 
Distillation of Bones 											C 
Distribution Plants 										R 	R 
Drive-In Establishments 11 							R 10 	R 	R 	R 	R 
Drive-In Restaurants 11 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Drive-In Theaters 								C 	C 	C 	C 
Drop-Forge Industry 											C 
Drugs, Manufacture & Wholesale 										R 	R 
Drugstores 							R 	R 	R 	R 	R 
Dry Cleaning & Laundering, Retail & Self-Service 							R 12 	R 	R 	R 	R 
Dry Cleaning Plant 									R 	R 	R 
Dry Goods Manufacture 										R 	R 
Dwellings, Caretaker 									R 13 	R 	R 
Dwellings 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 			R 14 	R 14 		
Dumps 											C 
Educational Institutions 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 15 
Egg Candling 										R 	R 
Electrical Distribution Substations 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 16 	C 16 	C 16 	C 16 	C 	C 
Electronic Instruments 									R 	R 	R 
Electronic or Neon Sign Manufacture 										R 	R 
Emergency Shelters 										R 61 	
Employment Agencies 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Enamel Products, Painted & Baked 										R 	R 
Engines, Manufacture 										R 	R 
Engraving, Machine Metal 										R 	R 
Equestrian Establishments 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 						
Equipment Rentals/Sales 								R 17 	R 	R 	R 
Escort Bureaus 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Explosives, Manufacture & Storage 											C 
Fabrication of Articles From Previously Prepared Materials 									R 18 	R 	R 
Family Care Services for 7 or More Persons (convalescing mental patients) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 						
Fast Food Restaurant 11 , 51 							R 10 , 52 	R 52 	R 52 	R 52 	R 52 
Fat Rendering 											C 
Feather Products, Manufacture of 										R 	R 
Feed & Fuel Yards 										R 	R 
Feed & Grain Sales 									R 	R 	R 
Fertilizer, Manufacture of 											C 
Fiber Products 										R 	R 
Finance Companies & Institutions 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Fire Prevention Equipment Sales & Service 									R 	R 	R 
Fish Hatcheries 									R 	R 	R 
Fishing & Casting Ponds 	C 								C 	C 	C 
Fixtures, Gas & Electric, Manufacture of 										R 	R 
Fleet Services (service vehicles, limousines) 									R 	R 	R 
Floor Covering, Retail 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Florist Shops 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Flour Mills 										R 	R 
Food, Prepared, Sale of 									R 	R 	R 
Food Products, 19 Manufacturing & Processing of 										R 	R 
Fortunetelling 										C 	C 
Frozen Food Lockers 									R 	R 	R 
Fruit & Vegetable Canning 										R 	R 
Fur Products, Manufacture of 										R 	R 
Furniture, Manufacture of 										R 	R 
Furniture Stores 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Furniture, Transfer & Storage 									R 	R 	R 
Furrier Shops 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Garbage, Etc., Reduction 											C 
Garden Supplies 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Garment Manufacturing (see Fabrication) 										R 	R 
Gas Engines, Retail Sales & Service 								R 20 	R 	R 	R 
Gas Manufacture & Storage 											R 
Glass & Mirrors, Retail 								R 21 	R 	R 	R 
Glass, Production of 										R 	R 
Glass Studios 									R 	R 	R 
Gloves, Manufacturing 										R 	R 
Golf Course, Driving Range, & Clubhouse 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Grocery Store 							R 53 	R 53 	R 53 	R 53 	R 53 
Guesthouses/Accessory Buildings 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 						
Gunsmith & Gun Shops 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Gymnasiums 								C 	R 	R 	R 
Gypsum, Manufacture of 											R 
Hair Products, Manufacture of 										R 	R 
Hardware Stores 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Hat Cleaning & Blocking 									R 	R 	R 
Hatcheries, Chicken 										R 	R 
Health Food Stores 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Heating Equipment, Manufacture of 										R 	R 
Hobby Supply Shops 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Home & Business Maintenance Service 									R 22 	R 	R 
Home Appliance Repair Shops 									R 	R 	R 
Home Occupation 	R 60 	R 60 	R 60 	R 60 	R 60 						
Homes for Senior Citizens & Handicapped 23 				C 	C 	C 	C 	C 			
Horn Products, Manufacture of 										R 	R 
Horses, Boarding & Raising 	C 										
Hospitals 								C 	C 	C 	
Hospitals, Convalescent & Nursing 						C 	C 	C 	C 		
Hospitals, Mental 								C 	C 	C 	
Hotels 24 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Ice & Cold Storage Plants 										R 	R 
Ice Cream Manufacturing 									R 	R 	R 
Ice Cream Parlors 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Ice Sales (not plants) 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Ink Manufacturing 										R 	R 
Interior Decorating Shops 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Iron, Etc., Foundry 											C 
Iron, Steel, Etc., Fabrication 											R 
Iron Works (not foundry) 										R 	R 
Jewelry, Manufacture of 									R 	R 	R 
Junk Dealer (junkyard, also auto or truck dismantler) 											C 
Kennel 25 									R 	R 	R 
Knitting Mills 										R 	R 
Labor Hall 									C 	C 	C 
Laboratories (medical or dental) 								C 	R 	R 	R 
Laboratory, Biomedical, Film, Etc. 									R 	R 	R 
Land Reclamation Projects 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Lapidary Shops, Retail 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Laundromats 							R 	R 	R 	R 	R 
Lawnmowers, Retail & Service 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Liquor Stores 								C 	C 	C 	C 
Lithographic Service 								C 	R 	R 	R 
Locksmith 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Lumber Yards 26 									R 	R 	R 
Machinery & Tools, Retail 									R 	R 	R 
Machine Shops 										R 	R 
Machinery Storage 										R 	R 
Mail-Order House 									R 	R 	R 
Manufacturer's Agent or Representative 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Manufacturing Assembly, Etc. 									R 27 	R 	R 
Markets, Food 							R 	R 	R 	R 	R 
Markets, Wholesale & Jobbers 									R 	R 	R 
Massage Parlors (see Part VI, B) 								C 	C 	C 	C 
Mattress Manufacture 										R 	R 
Medical Clinics 								C 	R 	R 	R 
Medical Equipment, Sales 									R 	R 	R 
Medicines, Manufacture of 										R 	R 
Menageries 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Metals, Manufacture, Etc. 									R 28 	R 	R 
Metal Plating 										C 	C 
Microwave Towers 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Mills, Planing, Etc. 										R 	R 
Mini-Mart 9,54 							R 52 	R 52 	R 52 	R 52 	R 52 
Mobile Home Parks 				C 	C 						
Mobile Homes, Offices 29 						C 	C 	C 	C 29 	C 29 	C 29 
Mobile Homes, Sales & Rental 									R 	R 	R 
Mobile/Manufactured Homes (dwellings) 30 		R 	R 	R 	R 						
Mortuaries & Funeral Parlors 								C 	R 	R 	R 
Motel/Hotel 31 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Motion Picture Studios (outdoor sets prohibited) 									R 	R 	R 
Motorcycle Sales 								C 	R 	R 	R 
Motors, Electric, Manufacture of 										R 	R 
Music Schools & Studios 								C 	R 	R 	R 
Music Stores 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Musical Instruments, Manufacture of 										R 	R 
Natural Mineral Resources 32 						C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Newspaper Distribution 										R 	R 
Newspaper Printers 								C 	R 	R 	R 
Novelties, Manufacture of 										R 	R 
Nurseries 								R 33 	R 	R 	R 
Nursery Growing Grounds 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 				R 	R 	R 
Observatories 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 					C 	C 
Office Equipment & Supplies Retail Sales & Rental 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Offices, Business & Professional 						R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 
Oil & Gas Production 35 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 
Oil Cloth or Linoleum Manufacturing 											R 
Oil Extraction Plants 											C 
Optical Manufacturing 									R 	R 	R 
Orthopedic Devices, Sales 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Outdoor Storage Areas 										R 	R 
Packaging Business 									R 	R 	R 
Paint Mixing 36 										R 	R 
Paint, Oil, Shellac, Etc. Manufacture of 											R 37 
Paper Products, Cutting, Embossing and Folding 								C 	R 	R 	R 
Paper Pulp, Manufacture of 											C 
Parcel Delivery Stations 									R 	R 	R 
Parking, Off-Street 	C 38 	C 38 	C 38 	C 38 	C 38 	C 	C 	R 	R 	R 	R 
Pawnshop 									R 	R 	R 
Perfume, Manufacture of 										R 	R 
Pest Control Operators 									R 	R 	R 
Pet Shop/Grooming 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Petroleum Refining 											C 
Petroleum Storage 											R 
Phonograph Records, Manufacture of 										R 	R 
Photocopying Shops 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Photoengraving & Finishing 									R 	R 	R 
Photofinishing, Retail 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Photography Studios 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Physical Fitness Parlors 								C 	R 	R 	R 
Plaster of Paris, Manufacture of 											C 
Plastic, Fabrication & Molding 										C 	R 
Plumbing Shops & Supply Yards 									R 	R 	R 
Plumbing Supplies, Retail 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Pool & Billiard Halls 								C 	C 	C 	C 
Postal Service 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Pottery, Manufacture of 										R 	R 
Pottery Stores 									R 39 	R 	R 
Prefabricated Buildings Manufacture 										R 	R 
Press Forges, Upset & Drop 											C 
Printers 								C 	R 	R 	R 
Public Utilities Business Office 						R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 
Public Utilities, Operated by Mutual Agencies 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Public Utilities, Service Yards 										R 	R 
Racetracks & Rodeos 	C 							C 		C 	C 
Radio & Television Broadcasting Studios 									R 	R 	R 
Radio & Television Stores 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Radio & TV Transmitter & Receivers, Commercial 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Recording Studios 									R 	R 	R 
Recreational Facilities & Playgrounds 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Recycling, Construction & Demolition (C&D) Facility 40 										C 40 	C 40 
Recycling, Public Collection Facility 40 								R 40 	R 40 	R 40 	R 40 
Recycling, Facility 40 										C 40 	C 40 
Reducing Salons 								C 	R 	R 	R 
Restaurants 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Restaurants, Bona Fide 51 								R 52 	R 52 	R 52 	R 52 
Restaurants, Fast Food 11, 51 							R 10, 52 	R 52 	R 52 	R 52 	R 52 
Retail Stores 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Rock Crushing or Distribution 											C 
Roofing & Roofing Tile Manufacture 										R 	R 
Rope Manufacture 										R 	R 
Rubber Fabrication 										R 	R 
Rubber Manufacture/Reclamation 											C 
Rug, Manufacture of 										R 	R 
Sash & Door Manufacture 										R 	R 
Scales, Public 									R 	R 	R 
Schools, (Commercial) & Studios 								C 	R 	R 	R 
Scientific Instruments, Manufacture 									R 	R 	R 
Scientific Instruments (Sales & Retail) 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Secondhand Stores 								C 41 	R 	R 	R 
Service Stations 42 								C 	C 	C 	C 
Sewage Disposal Plants 											C 
Sheet Metal Shops 										R 	R 
Shoe Repair Shops 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Shoe Shine Stands 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Shoes, Manufacturing 										R 	R 
Sign Shops 									R 	R 	R 
Significant Tobacco Retailer 59 							C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Silk Screen Shops 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Slaughterhouse 											C 
Smelting of Tin, Copper, Etc. 											C 
Soap Manufacturing, Cold Mix Only 										R 	R 
Soda & Compound Manufacturing 											R 
Soft Drink Manufacturing & Bottling 										R 	R 
Solid Fill Projects 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Specialty Food Store 							R 53 	R 53 	R 53 	R 53 	R 53 
Springs, Manufacturing 										R 	R 
Stained Glass Assembly 									R 	R 	R 
Stationary Stores 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Stationary Manufacturing 											R 
Steam Electric Generating Stations 											R 
Stone Monuments & Tombstones 										R 	R 
Stones, Precious, Etc., Manufacture 									R 	R 	R 
Storage of Sand, Gravel, Etc. 											C 
Storage of Transit Equipment 											C 
Storage of Vehicles (capacity under 2 tons) 									R 	R 	R 
Storage or Baling of Rags, Etc. 											C 
Store Fixtures, Manufacture 										R 	R 
Stove or Shoe Polish Manufacture 											R 
Substance Abuse Treatment Center, Residential & Nonresidential 								C 	C 	C 	C 
Supermarket 							R 53 	R 53 	R 53 	R 53 	R 53 
Swimming Pool Equipment Sales 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Tailor Shops, Retail 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Takeout Food Stores (No eating on premises) 43 							R 	R 	R 	R 	R 
Tank Farms 											C 
Tanneries 											C 
Taxidermists 										R 	R 
Telephone Answering Service 						R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 
Telephone Repeater Station 						C 	C 	C 	C 	R 	R 
Temporary Storage Fills 44 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 
Terminals & Stations, Taxi, Bus, Limousines, Etc. 									C 	C 	C 
Testing Labs, Medical, Biochemical, Film 									R 	R 	R 
Textiles, Manufacturing 										R 	R 
Theaters 								C 	C 	C 	C 
Tile Manufacturing 										R 	R 
Tile Sales 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Tire Rebuilding 										R 	R 
Tire Sales & Service 									C 	R 	R 
Toiletries, Manufacture of 									R 45 	R 	R 
Tools, Manufacture of 										R 	R 
Toys, Manufacture of 										R 	R 
Trading Stamp Redemption Stores 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Trailers, Sales 									R 	R 	R 
Transfer, Moving & Storage 56 	Prohibited in all zones 11/22/89. 	R 56 
Transmitters, Radio & Television Commercial 						C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Truck Repairing 46 										R 	R 
Truck/RV Storage Yard 56 										R 56 	R 56 
Truck Sales & Rentals 								C 47 	R 	R 	R 
Truck Storage, Washing & Cleaning 48 											C 
Truck Terminals, Draying or Freight 56 										R 56 	R 56 
Truck, Trailer Rental (less than 2 tons) 								C 	R 	R 	R 
Truck Transportation Yard 56 										R 56 	R 56 
Truck Washing & Cleaning (Heavy Trucking) 56 										R 56 	R 56 
Type Printers, Manufacture of 										R 	R 
Typewriters, Sales & Repair 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Upholstery Shop 								R 49 	R 	R 	R 
Vehicle Impound Yards 										C 50 	R 
Vending Machines, Sales & Service 									R 	R 	R 
Venetian Blinds, Manufacture of 										R 	R 
Veterinarian 								R 	R 	R 	R 
Vitamin Tablets, Manufacture of 										R 	R 
Warehouses 									R 	R 	R 
Water Reservoirs 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 				C 	C 	C 
Wedding Chapels 						C 	C 	C 	C 		
Welding Equipment & Supplies 									R 	R 	R 
Welding Shops 										R 	R 
Wholesale Business 									R 	R 	R 
Wine Storage 										R 	R 
Wineries 											C 
Wire Fabrication 									R 	R 	R 
Wood Products Manufacturing 										R 	R 
Wool Pulling or Scouring 											R 
Yarn Products Manufacture 										R 	R 
Zoos 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
 
Footnotes for Appendix A: 
1. Days and hours of operation must be established through the conditional use permit. 
2. Heliports only. 
3. No baking on premises. 
4. Wholesaling in conjunction with retail permitted with conditional use permit. 
5. Over twenty-five percent of gross floor area of the building used by the primary use. 
6. See Temporary Use Permits, Chapter 12.16. 
7. By right if under thirteen children in R-zones. 
8. If not on same lot as construction project to which it relates, requires conditional use permit in R-zones. Also permitted on abutting lots during construction and for thirty days thereafter in C- and M-zones. 
9. Requires a conditional use permit if building is within one hundred feet of a lot line classified as any R-zone. 
10. With no restaurant seating. 
11. Conditional use permit required if building is located within one hundred feet of a lot line of any lot classified in any of the R-zones. 
12. No plant. 
13. See specific zones for more detail (Section 17.30.020 (B) (2)). 
14. See Section 17.28.020 (B) (7). 
15. No preschools, primary, junior or high schools. 
16. Including microwave facilities not to exceed thirty-five feet in height. 
17. Excluding medical, industrial and agricultural equipment. 
18. Materials include bone, canvas, cloth, felt, fur, glass, leather (except machine belting), paper, plastic, shell, textiles, wire and yarn. 
19. Excluding manufacturing and processing of pickles, vinegar, lard and sausage. 
20. Three-horsepower or less. 
21. Excluding auto glass and mirrors. 
22. Accessory outdoor equipment storage must be screened. 
23. Including rest homes. 
24. See Section 17.22.200. 
25. Within an enclosed building. 
26. No planing mills allowed in C-M zone. Burning operations permitted only in M-1 and M-2, subject to conditional use permit. 
27. See fabricating. 
28. Precious or semiprecious metals only. 
29. Temporary use permit permitted if use is for ninety days or less. Conditional use permits are subject to conditions of approval which include, but are not limited to a specified expiration date and physical improvements needed to address public improvements, maintenance and aesthetics. 
30. See Chapter 17.14 of this code. 
31. See Section 17.22.200. 
32. Except petroleum production. 
33. Retail sales only. 
34. Provided that the property has only one previously existing single-family dwelling unit, and subject to the relevant design and development standards. 
35. See Chapters 17.44 and 17.56 of this code. 
36. No boiling or tank farms. Above-surface storage limited to two hundred gallons. 
37. Conditional use permit required if boiling process used. 
38. See Section 17.10.210 (D). 
39. No kilns or manufacturing. 
40. See Chapter 17.64 of this code. 
41. The following criteria shall apply as guidelines to the discretionary review of applications to establish second-hand stores subject to a conditional use permit in the C-2 zone: 
A. Second-hand stores shall be allowed only if they have an appearance and are operated in a manner compatible with a thriving, stable and attractive commercial district conducive to retail shopping; 
B. Second-hand stores shall utilize marketing and merchandise display techniques generally comparable to those used by retail stores selling only new merchandise. To evaluate this criteria, plans including, but not limited to, an interior layout and design plan, building elevations, sign plan, window display plan, and an exterior and an interior lighting plan shall be submitted with the conditional use permit application; 
C. All merchandise, except for items such as furniture and large appliances shall be displayed on standard retail shelves and/or racks, and all merchandise shall be kept in a neat and organized manner; 
D. In order to avoid an over-concentration of second-hand stores in any one area of the C-2 zone, second-hand stores shall generally be separated from one another by a distance of at least one thousand feet. 
E. Six months after a CUP has been issued and a second-hand store has commenced operation, the city staff shall conduct a review of the business to ensure its compliance with the zoning code and the conditions of its use permit. 
42. Or any use within a converted or existing service station. 
43. See Drive-In Establishments. 
44. Requires a grading permit. If over six months, also requires a conditional use permit. 
45. Excluding soap manufacture. 
46. Applies to trucks with a carrying capacity of two tons or more. 
47. Including service and limited to two ton. 
48. Applies to trucks with a carrying capacity of two tons or more. 
49. Excluding automobile upholstery. 
50. All impounded vehicles shall be stored and screened from exterior view within an enclosed building if any portion of the property upon which any impounding occurs is located within five hundred feet of a lot line of any lot classified in any of the R-zones. 
51. If alcoholic beverages are or are proposed to be sold, served or given away for consumption on the premises that is licensed, or proposed to be licensed by the California State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, refer to Chapter 17.61 of this code. 
52. Conditional use permit may be required. Refer to Chapter 17.61 of this code. 
53. If alcoholic beverages are to be sold for off-sale consumption, and the establishment has a floor area of less than ten thousand square feet, and/or more than twenty percent of the establishment's retail floor area is dedicated to the sale of alcoholic beverages, a conditional use permit shall be required. Refer to Chapter 17.61 of this code. 
54. Does not apply to mini-marts in conjunction with a service station. 
55. Accessory dwelling units are subject to the development standards set forth in Section 17.10.280. 
56. See Chapter 17.37 of this code. 
57. Reserved. 
58. Reserved. 
59. See Chapter 17.63. 
60. See Chapter 17.59 of this code. 
61. Creation of an Emergency Shelter Overlay Zone with a specific area of the City where an emergency shelter is permitted by right within the underlying M-1 zone. 
62. Body art establishment shall not be located within one thousand feet of another existing body art establishment, and shall not be located within one thousand feet of the following sensitive uses: a single-family detached dwelling; public or private elementary, intermediate, or high school; places religious assembly; libraries; public parks; or any city-owned facility. 
63. Establishment of a cannabis cultivation site, cannabis manufacturing site, cannabis testing laboratory, cannabis distributor, or cannabis delivery-only retailer, or any combination of the foregoing, is subject to the approval of a development agreement by the city, a conditional use permit, and the provisions of Chapter 5.90 and Title 17. 
64. Cannabis distributors shall only be allowed by operators of a cultivation site, cannabis manufacturing site, cannabis testing laboratory (unless prohibited by state law), or delivery-only retailer that has been approved by the city pursuant to this title and Chapter 5.90. No establishments engaging exclusively in distribution activities shall be permitted. 
(Ord. 2307 §§ 4, 5, 2007; Ord. 2288 § 8, 2005; Ord. 2274 §§ 6 and 7, 2004; Ord. 2234 § 1, 2001; Ord. 2180 § 6, 1998; Ord. 2123, 1995; Ord. 2114, 1995; Ord. 2109, 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2334, § 4, 9-23-2009; Ord. No. 2342, § 7, 6-22-2011; Ord. No. 2352, § 5, 8-14-2013; Ord. No. 2360, § 4, 6-25-2014; Ord. No. 2364, § 2, 12-10-2014; Ord. No. 2391, § 3, 1-25-2017; Ord. No. 2399A, § 2, 2-28-2018; Ord. No. 2404, § 4, 6-13-2018) 

