McFARLAND, CALIFORNIA - MUNICIPAL CODE 
1988 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
the City of McFarland, California 
____________ 
Beginning with Supplementation in 2011, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
  
PREFACE 
The McFarland, California Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1988, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
Beginning with Supplementation in 2011, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of M. Dwain Smith, city attorney, Doris L. Wood, city clerk, and Donnie Campbell, city administrator. 
The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the Title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplementation in 2011, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance No. 006-2018, passed June 28, 2018. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title , then chapter , and ending with section . Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, can be added between Chapter 2.04 and Chapter 2.08. 
Section. 
Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
Beginning with Supplementation in 2011, a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
As of Supplementation in 2011, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Beginning with Supplementation in 2011, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Beginning with Supplementation in 2011, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplementation in 2011, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections: 
 
1.01.010 - Adoption. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1-50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code, there is adopted the "McFarland Municipal Code" as published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington, together with those secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the "McFarland Municipal Code." 
(Ord. 217 §1, 1988)  
1.01.020 - Title—Citation—Reference. 
This code shall be known as the "McFarland Municipal Code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to the code as the "McFarland Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "McFarland Municipal Code." Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the "McFarland Municipal Code" and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. 
(Ord. 217 §2, 1988)  
1.01.030 - Codification authority. 
This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the city of McFarland, California, codified pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1—50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 217 §3, 1988)  
1.01.040 - Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code. 
The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance No. 210, passed on December 17, 1987. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance 210 but prior to adoption of this code, are adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinances 211, 212, 213, 214, 215 and 216. 
(Ord. 217 §4, 1988)  
1.01.050 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "McFarland Municipal Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 217 §5, 1988)  
1.01.060 - Title, chapter and section headings. 
Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. 
(Ord. 217 §6, 1988)  
1.01.070 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 217 §7, 1988)  
1.01.080 - Effect of code on past actions and obligations. 
Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date, hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at the effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or the penal validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 217 §8, 1988)  
1.01.090 - Constitutionality. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council of the city declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 217 §9, 1988)  
1.01.100 - Effective date. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall take effect thirty days after the date of its passage and within fifteen days of its passage shall be posted in at least three places in the city. 
(Ord. 217 §10, 1988)  
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.04.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the city, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases: 
A.  "City" and "town" each mean the city of McFarland, or the area within the territorial limits of the city of McFarland, California, and such territory outside the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
B.  "Council" means the city council of the city. "All its members" or "all councilmen" means the total number of councilmen holding office. 
C.  "County" means the county of Kern in the state of California. 
D.  "Law" denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state of California, the ordinances of the city of McFarland, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
E.  "May" is permissive. 
F.  "Month" means calendar month. 
G.  "Must" and "shall" are each mandatory. 
H.  "Oath" includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
I.  "Owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
J.  "Person," includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
K.  "Personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
L.  "Preceding" and "following" means next before and next after, respectively. 
M.  "Property" includes real and personal property. 
N.  "Real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
O.  "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
P.  "State" means the state of California. 
Q.  "Street" includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs or other public ways in this city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
R.  "Tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
S.  "Written" includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form. 
T.  "Year" means a calendar year. 
(Ord. 208 §1, 1987)  
1.04.020 - Title of office. 
Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city of McFarland. 
(Ord. 208 §2, 1987)  
1.04.030 - Interpretation of language. 
All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to that peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(Ord. 208 §3, 1987)  
1.04.040 - Grammatical interpretation. 
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city of McFarland, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
A.  Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders. 
B.  Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
C.  Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
(Ord. 208 §4, 1987)  
1.04.050 - Acts by agents. 
When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. 
(Ord. 208 §5, 1987)  
1.04.060 - Prohibited acts include causing and permitting. 
Whenever in the ordinances of the city of McFarland, any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Ord. 208 §6, 1987)  
1.04.070 - Computation of time. 
Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. 
(Ord. 208 §7, 1987)  
1.04.080 - Construction. 
The provisions of the ordinances of the city of McFarland, and all proceedings under them, are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. 
(Ord. 208 §8, 1987)  
1.04.090 - Repeal shall not revive any ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(Ord. 208 §9, 1987)  
Chapter 1.08 - PUBLIC NOTICES 
Sections: 
 
1.08.010 - Places designated for posting of notices. 
The following public places in the city are designated as places for the posting of public notices: 
A.  City Hall; 
B.  Post Office; 
C.  285 San Lucas (S.W. corner of Kern Avenue and San Lucas Street). 
(Ord. 77 §2, 1964: Ord. 1 §1, 1957)  
Chapter 1.10 - SPECIAL ELECTIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.10.010 - Limitation of interim appointment. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by Government Code Section 36512.2, any person appointed to fill a vacancy on the city council shall hold office only until the date of a special election to fill the remainder of the term. 
(Ord. 237 §1, 1990)  
1.10.020 - Time for special election. 
Such election shall be held on the date of the next regularly scheduled election to be held throughout the city not less than ninety days from the call of the special election, unless such an election date falls more than two hundred seventy days from the call of the special election, in which case the special election shall be held on the next regularly established election date not less than ninety days from the call of the special election and subject to the provisions of Section 1.10.030. 
(Ord. 237 §2, 1990)  
1.10.030 - Election consolidated with another agency. 
An election to fill a vacancy which is consolidated with an election by another agency shall be called in sufficient time to meet the nomination period deadlines required when conducting a consolidated election. 
(Ord. 237 §3, 1990)  
Chapter 1.12 - CITATIONS FOR ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.12.010 - Persons authorized to issue citations-Notice to appear-Issued when-Contents. 
A.  A city officer or employee occupying the following offices or positions may arrest a person without a warrant whenever he or she has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a misdemeanor in his or her presence which is a violation of a statute or ordinance which the officer or employee has the duty to enforce: 
1.  City planner; 
2.  Code enforcement officer; 
3.  The city manager or his designee. 
B.  In any case in which a person is arrested pursuant to subsection A of this section and the person arrested does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, the public officer or employee making the arrest shall prepare a written notice to appear and release the person on his or her promise to appear, as prescribed by Sections 853.6, et. seq., of the Penal Code of the state as from time to time amended. Such "notice to appear" may also be referred to as a "citation." 
C.  Unless waived by the person arrested, the time specified in the notice to appear shall be at least ten days after arrest if the duplicate notice is to be filed by the officer or employee with the magistrate. 
D.  The place specified in the notice to appear shall be either: 
1.  Before a judge of a justice court or a municipal court judge within the county, and who has jurisdiction of the offense charged, and who is nearest and most accessible with reference to the place where the arrest is made; or 
2.  Before an officer authorized by that court to receive a deposit of bail. 
(Ord. 242 §2(part), 1992)  
1.12.020 - Notice to appear in court-Delivery-Promise to appear. 
The officer shall deliver one copy of the notice to appear to the arrested person and the arrested person, in order to secure release, shall give his or her written promise to appear in court as specified in the notice by signing the duplicate notice which shall be retained by the officer or employee. Upon the signing of the duplicate notice, the arresting officer shall immediately release the person arrested from custody. 
(Ord. 242 §2 (part), 1992)  
1.12.030 - Notice to appear in court-Filing with magistrate and fixing of bail. 
A.  The officer shall, as soon as practicable, file the duplicate notice with the magistrate specified therein. Thereupon the magistrate may fix the amount of bail which in his or her judgment, in accordance with the provisions of Section 1275 of the Penal Code of the state, is reasonable and sufficient for the appearance of the defendant, and shall endorse upon the notice a statement signed by him or her in the form set forth in Section 815a of the Penal Code of the state. 
B.  The defendant may, prior to the date upon which he or she promised to appear in court, deposit with the magistrate the amount of bail set by the magistrate. At the time when the case is called for arraignment before the magistrate, if the defendant does not appear, either in person or by counsel, the magistrate may declare the bail forfeited and may, in his or her discretion, order that no further proceedings shall be had in such case. 
C.  Upon the making of such order that no further proceedings be had, all sums deposited as bail shall immediately be paid into the county treasury for distribution pursuant to Section 1463 of the Penal Code of the state. 
(Ord. 242 §2(part), 1992)  
1.12.040 - Warrant for arrest issued when. 
No warrant shall be issued for the arrest of a person who has given a written promise to appear in court, unless and until he or she has violated that promise or has failed to deposit bail, to appear for arraignment, trial or judgment, or to comply with the terms and provisions of the judgment, as required by law. 
(Ord. 242 §2(part), 1992)  
1.12.050 - Failure to appear-Procedure when no bail posted. 
A.  When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place specified in the written promise to appear and has not posted bail as provided in Section 1.12.030, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his or her arrest within twenty days after his or her failure to appear as promised or within twenty days after his or her failure to appear after a lawfully granted continuance of his or her promise to appear. 
B.  When such person violates his promise to appear before an officer authorized to receive bail other than the magistrate, the officer shall immediately deliver to the magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense charged the written promise to appear and the complaint, if any, filed by the arresting officer. 
(Ord. 242 §2(part), 1992)  
1.12.060 - Failure to appear-Misdemeanor-Penalty. 
Any person who wilfully violates his or her written promise to appear in court or a lawfully granted continuance of his or her promise to appear in court is guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he or she was originally arrested, and shall be punished by fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 242 §2(part), 1992)  
1.12.070 - Other procedures. 
All required procedures for the issuance of a notice to appear not set forth in this chapter shall be those that are set forth in Sections 853.5, et seq., of the Penal Code of the state, as from time to time amended. 
(Ord. 242 §2(part), 1992)  
Chapter 1.14 - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS 
 
1.14.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The enforcement of the city's municipal code is vital to the protection of the public's health, safety and quality of life. Under Government Code Section 53069.4, the city is authorized to adopt an administrative citation and civil fine program, which offers an alternative method of enforcement of violations of the municipal code. The purpose of issuing administrative citations pursuant to this chapter is to encourage compliance with the provisions of this code and to provide a method of holding persons responsible when they fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of this code. The use of this chapter is also intended to minimize the expense and delay associated with pursuing code violations through the civil or criminal justice system. 
(Ord. No. 018-2012, § 1, 2-23-12)  
1.14.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply to these words and phrases: 
"Administrative citation" or "citation" means a written notice to a responsible person that a violation of this code has occurred and an assessment of a civil fine issued by a code enforcement officer. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city of McFarland or the manager's designee. 
"Continuing violation" means either: (1) a particular violation of the code continuing for more than thirty days without correction or abatement, or (2) a repeated, consecutive violation of the same offense without intervening days. 
"Hearing officer" means the city of McFarland chief of police or his or her designee. 
"Notice of violation" means a written notice to a responsible person that a violation of this code has occurred and a warning that an administrative citation assessing fines will be issued unless the violation is ceased and abated. 
"Officer" means any person authorized to enforce certain provisions of this code. The following officers and employees have the authority to issue administrative citations as civil fines: city manager, police chief, public works director and planning director. 
"Responsible party" means any person or persons that an officer determines are responsible for causing or maintaining a violation of this code. The term "responsible person" includes but is not limited to a property owner, tenant, person with a legal interest in real or personal property, or person in possession or control of real or personal property. 
(Ord. No. 018-2012, § 1, 2-23-12; Ord. No. 065-2017, § 1, 2-9-17)  
1.14.030 - General citation authority and applicability. 
A.  This chapter authorizes use of administrative citations that are in addition to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, that the city may pursue to address any violation of this code. 
B.  The use of this chapter is at the sole discretion of the city manager or any other officer authorized to enforce certain provisions of this code. 
C.  Any officer, upon determining that a provision of this code which such officer is charged to enforce has been violated, has the authority to issue an administrative citation to any responsible person. 
D.  Any responsible person violating any provision of this code, or causing, permitting or maintaining a violation of any provision of this code may be issued an administrative citation by a code enforcement officer. 
E.  Each and every thirty days a violation of this code exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense and will be subject to a separate fine. A single citation may charge for the violation of one or more code sections. Continuing violations will automatically accrue fines beginning on the date the citation is issued until verification of abatement pursuant to Section 1.14.070(C). 
F.  The owner of any property, building or structure within the city has the responsibility for keeping such property, building or structure free of violations related to its use or condition. The owner of such property, building or structure is a responsible person and is separately liable for violations committed by tenants or occupants relative to the use or condition of the property. 
(Ord. No. 018-2012, § 1, 2-23-12)  
1.14.040 - Notice of violation. 
A.  Whenever an officer determines that a violation of this code exists, the officer shall issue a notice of violation to a responsible person. The notice of violation serves as a written warning of responsibility and allows twenty days for the responsible person to cease and abate the violation. The notice of violation shall include the information set forth below and a date by which the violation can reasonably be ceased and abated. If the violation is not ceased or abated by the end of the correction period stated in the notice, the officer shall issue a notice to abate to a responsible person prior to issuing an administrative citation. The notice to abate serves as a second written warning of responsibility and requires immediate action by the responsible person to cease and abate the violation within seven days of the date of mailing of the notice to abate. If the violation has not ceased or abated within seven days of final notice, the code enforcement officer may issue an administrative citation. 
1.  Administrative citations will be issued on a form approved by the city attorney, and at a minimum will contain the following information: 
a.  Name of the person who is charged as a responsible person for the violation; 
b.  Date, approximate time, and address or definite description of the location where the violation was observed; 
c.  The code sections or conditions violated and a description of the violation; 
d.  A description of the actions necessary to correct the violation; 
e.  An order to the responsible person to immediately correct the violation and an explanation of the consequences of the failure to correct the violation; 
f.  Whether the offense is a continuing violation which will accrue fines until properly ceased and abated; 
g.  The amount of the fine for the violation, including the amount due for the initial violation and any prospective daily fine for failure to abate the violation (if applicable to a continuing violation); 
h.  An explanation of how the fine must be paid and the time period by which it must be paid; 
i.  Identification of rights of appeal, including the time within which the citation may be contested and the place to obtain a request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation; 
j.  Notice that the violation is a nuisance and that collection of unpaid fines and costs can be enforced as a lien against the property where the violation occurs and that an unpaid lien can result in the property being involuntarily sold; 
k.  Signature of the officer issuing the citation. 
B.  In accordance with Government Code Section 53069.4, no responsible person will be assessed an administrative fine under this chapter for a continuing violation pertaining to a building, plumbing, electrical or similar structural or zoning issue that does not create an immediate danger to the public health or safety without first receiving a notice of violation and a reasonable opportunity to correct or otherwise remedy the violation. In such circumstance, the stated period available to correct the violation prior to the assessment of a fine must be appropriate to the violation as determined by the officer, but in no event less than thirty days. If, after the correction period stated in the notice, the violation is not ceased or abated, the officer may issue an administrative citation. 
C.  Any responsible person receiving notice for a continuing violation may petition the city manager for an extension of time to correct the violation so long as the petition is received before the end of the correction period. The city manager may grant an extension of time to correct the violation if the responsible person has supplied sufficient evidence showing that the correction cannot reasonably be made within the stated period or has demonstrated that substantial progress has been made towards abating the violation. 
D.  The requirement of a reasonable opportunity to cure a violation does not apply in instances where in the discretion of the city manager, a code violation poses an immediate danger to the public health or safety. 
(Ord. No. 018-2012, § 1, 2-23-12; Ord. No. 067-2017, § 1(A), 5-25-17)  
1.14.050 - Service procedures. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, whenever notice is required to be given under this chapter, it must be given in one of the following ways: 
1.  Personal service; 
2.  Certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. Concurrently, the same notice should be sent by regular mail. If a notice that is sent by certified mail is returned unsigned, then service will be deemed effective by regular mail, provided that notice is not returned. Service by mail will be effective on the date of mailing; 
3.  Posting the notice conspicuously on or in front of the affected property or any other real property within the city in which the city has knowledge that the responsible person has a legal interest. 
B.  The failure of any interested person to receive any notice served in accordance with this section will not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter. 
C.  The notice procedures in this section do not apply to an initial notice of violation, which may be sent by regular mail or personally served. Service of a notice of violation by mail is effective on the date of mailing. 
(Ord. No. 018-2012, § 1, 2-23-12)  
1.14.060 - Assessment of administrative citation fine. 
A.  The amount of the fine will be assessed according to a schedule of fines adopted by the city council. The schedule may include escalating fine amounts for repeat violations occurring within specified periods of time, and fines may vary depending on the particular code provision violated. 
B.  Where no amount is specified by resolution of the city council, the following fines will apply: 
1.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars every thirty days for a first violation; 
2.  A fine not exceeding two hundred and fifty dollars every thirty days for a second violation of the same code provision or permit within one year from the date of the first violation; 
3.  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars every thirty days for each additional violation of the same code provision or permit within one year from the date of the first violation. 
C.  A penalty of ten percent will be added on any delinquent fines on the last day of each month after the due date. 
(Ord. No. 018-2012, § 1, 2-23-12)  
1.14.070 - Satisfaction of administrative citation. 
A.  Upon receipt of a citation, the responsible person must do the following: 
1.  Pay the fine within thirty days from the date of the administrative citation. All fines assessed are payable to the city. Payment of a fine does not excuse or discharge the failure to correct the violation nor will it bar further enforcement action by the city. 
2.  Cease and abate the violation. If the offense is a continuing violation and the responsible person fails to properly cease and abate the violation, fines will accrue for each day until the abatement is properly verified. Additionally, subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same violation. The amount of the fine for failure to correct the violation will increase at the rate specified in this chapter or as established by city council resolution. 
B.  At any time following thirty days after the issuance of the citation, the city may deliver a collection bill to the responsible person requiring payment for all outstanding amounts owed for the violation, including the amount due for the initial violation and any accrual of daily fines from the date the citation was issued to the date the abatement of the offense is properly verified (if applicable) plus any appropriate late payment charge, less any amount remitted pursuant to subsection A of this section. 
C.  The abatement of a continuing violation must be verified by an officer. The responsible person must contact the phone number designated on the citation and schedule an inspection by an officer. Fines will accrue until the abatement is verified, less any days delayed by action of the city in scheduling such inspection. 
(Ord. No. 018-2012, § 1, 2-23-12)  
1.14.080 - Collection of unpaid fines and penalties. 
A.  The failure of any person to pay a fine or penalty assessed by administrative citation within the time specified on the citation constitutes a debt to the city. To enforce that debt, the city may file a civil action, lien the subject property as set forth below, or pursue any other legal remedy to collect such debt. A person who fails to pay any fine or other charge owed to the city under this chapter is liable in any action brought by the city for all costs incurred in securing payment of the delinquent amount, including, but not limited to, administrative costs and attorneys' fees. Such collection costs are in addition to any fines, interest, and late charges. 
B.  In addition to any other legal remedy, the city may place a lien on property that is the subject of a citation if the citation has been issued to the property owner. The following procedure will apply: 
1.  The city's finance director may initiate proceedings to record a lien against the subject property. 
2.  Before recording the lien, the finance director shall submit a report to the city clerk stating the amounts due and owing. The report may include a fee, for the administrative costs associated with the preparation and recordation of the lien. 
3.  The city clerk shall fix a time, date, and place for a hearing before the city manager to consider the report and any protests or objections to it. 
4.  The city clerk must serve the property owner with a hearing notice not less than ten days before the hearing date. The notice must set forth the amount of the delinquent administrative fine, and any penalties and interest that is due. Notice must be delivered first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the property owner's address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll or supplemental roll of Kern County, whichever is more current. Service by mail is effective on the date of mailing and failure of property owner to actually receive notice does not affect its validity. 
5.  At the conclusion of the hearing, the city manager may adopt a report confirming, discharging, or modifying the lien amount. 
6.  Following the adoption of the report imposing a lien, the city clerk shall cause the lien to be filed in the county recorder's office. 
7.  After confirmation and recordation, the city shall present a copy of the lien to the county tax collector to add the amount of the lien to the next regular property tax bills levied against the parcel for municipal purposes. This amount will be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary property taxes are collected, and will be subject to the same penalties and procedures under foreclosure and sale as provided for with ordinary municipal taxes. Or, after recording, the lien may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner and means provided by law. 
8.  Once the city receives full payment for outstanding principal, penalties, and costs related to a lien, the city clerk will cause to be recorded a notice of satisfaction or provide the property owner with a notice of satisfaction for recordation at the county recorder's office. This notice of satisfaction will cancel the city's lien. 
(Ord. No. 018-2012, § 1, 2-23-12)  
1.14.090 - Request for administrative hearing. 
A.  Any person receiving an administrative citation may contest the citation by completing a request for hearing form and returning it to the city within ten business days after the issuance date of the administration citation. Any request for hearing must be accompanied by an advance deposit of the fine assessed by the citation for the initial violation, unless waived by subsection C of this section. If it is determined, after a hearing, that there was no violation as charged in the administrative citation, the advance deposit will be refunded. 
B.  A request for hearing will not postpone or avoid the requirement of a responsible person to abate a violation nor toll the daily fines accruing for a continuing violation until the abatement of the offense is properly verified. In the event the hearing officer upholds the citation, the responsible person will be liable for the total fines accrued from the issuance of the citation to the date the abatement is properly verified, and any costs incurred to provide a hearing officer. 
C.  A person seeking an administrative hearing may request a hardship waiver of the fine deposit by filing with the city clerk a completed city form, which must be signed under penalty of perjury. The request must be submitted along with the request for hearing. The person requesting the waiver bears the burden of establishing that such person does not have the financial ability to make the deposit. The request will be decided by the city manager within five business days from date the request is received, and the city manager's decision is final. The applicant will be notified by telephone, facsimile, or in person of the decision on the request. The filing of a request for hardship waiver does not extend the time to file for an administrative hearing or pay the fine when due. If the request for hardship waiver is denied, an administrative hearing will not be scheduled unless the fine deposit is paid within five business days following the city manager's determination on the request for a hardship waiver. 
D.  The failure to submit a timely and complete request for hearing will terminate a person's right to contest the citation and result in a failure to exhaust administrative remedies, and the order of the citation will serve as a final determination and conclusive evidence of the named responsible person's liability for the citation. 
E.  The city clerk shall set a hearing before a city hearing officer on a date that is not less than fifteen and not more than sixty days from the date that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this section. Additional fines shall not accrue from the time the city clerk receives a timely and complete request for hearing until the hearing date. The city shall notify the person requesting the hearing by regular mail of the date, time and place set for the hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing and give that person any additional written reports filed concerning the violation that are provided to the hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 018-2012, § 1, 2-23-12)  
1.14.100 - Administrative hearing procedure. 
A.  A city hearing officer will conduct the administrative citation hearing. 
B.  No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a hearing officer will be held until a request for hearing form has been completed and submitted, and the fine has been deposited in advance, unless a hardship waiver is granted in accordance with Section 1.14.090(C). 
C.  The hearing officer may only consider evidence that is relevant to whether the violation occurred and whether the responsible person has caused or maintained the violation of this code on the date specified in the administrative citation. 
D.  At least ten days prior to the hearing, the city must provide the recipient of an administrative citation with copies of the citation, reports and other documents to be submitted to the hearing officer. No other discovery is permitted. Formal rules of evidence will not apply. 
E.  The person contesting the administrative citation will be given the opportunity to testify and present witnesses and evidence concerning the administrative citation. 
F.  Unless requested in advance by the person contesting the administrative citation, neither the issuing officer nor any other representative of the city is required to attend the hearing, provided that any such appearance may be made at the discretion of the city manager. 
G.  The failure of any recipient of an administrative citation to appear at the administrative citation hearing will constitute a forfeiture of the fine and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies, and the order of the citation will become the final determination. 
H.  The administrative citation and any additional documents submitted by the code enforcement officer to the hearing officer will constitute prima facie evidence of the violation and the respective facts contained in those documents. 
I.  The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the code enforcement officer or the recipient of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision. 
(Ord. No. 018-2012, § 1, 2-23-12)  
1.14.110 - Administrative hearing decision. 
A.  After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision within fourteen calendar days after the hearing to uphold or deny the administrative citation and must list in the decision the reasons for that decision. The hearing officer will use preponderance of evidence as the standard of evidence in deciding issues. The decision of the hearing officer will be final. 
B.  If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, then any applicable fine amount on deposit with the city will be retained by the city. The hearing officer may also impose conditions and deadlines to correct the violation or require payment of any outstanding fines, penalties, and interest. 
C.  If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be canceled or reduced because of an error in calculating the fine, the city will promptly refund the applicable amount of the deposited fine. 
D.  The city shall serve the recipient of the administrative citation with a copy of the hearing officer's written decision by certified mail. 
(Ord. No. 018-2012, § 1, 2-23-12)  
1.14.120 - Right to judicial review. 
Any person aggrieved by an administrative decision of a hearing officer on an administrative citation may obtain review of the administrative decision by filing a petition for review with the Kern County Superior Court in accordance with the timelines and provisions set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4. 
(Ord. No. 018-2012, § 1, 2-23-12)  
1.14.130 - Emergency abatement. 
In the event the violation constitutes a significant and immediate threat to the public health, safety, or welfare so severe that immediate action is required, any officer may enter the property upon which the violation exists, abate the violation, and restore any property affected by it. To the extent reasonably practicable, informal notice shall be provided to the owner or occupant before abatement. If necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare, abatement may proceed without prior notice to or consent from the owner or occupant thereof. An administrative hearing before the city council shall follow the abatement action at the next regular meeting of the city council that the matter can be placed on the agenda wherein the city council shall determine the reasonableness of the action taken by the officer. Subject to the city council's determination, all costs of the abatement shall be borne by the owner of the property and all provisions described in this chapter relating to assessment and collection of same shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 045-2015, § 1(A), 9-10-15)  
Chapter 1.16 - PRISONERS' WORK PROVISIONS 
 
1.16.010 - Prisoners required to labor for city—Authority. 
Pursuant to the authority vested in the city council by California Government Code Section 36904, the city council requires all persons imprisoned for violations of any city ordinance of the city to labor on public property or works within the city for the period of his or her imprisonment. 
(Ord. 56 §1, 1961)  
1.16.020 - Prisoners not to be compensated. 
No prisoner required to labor on public property or works within the city shall be entitled to compensation therefor and shall not come within any of the provisions of the Workmen's Compensation Laws of the state. 
(Ord. 56 §2, 1961)  
1.16.030 - Exceptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to any prisoner considered by the judge having jurisdiction of the matter or the chief of police of the city to be unfit in any way for such work by reason of physical or mental impairment or by reason of the nature of the particular ordinance violated or otherwise. 
(Ord. 56 §3, 1961)  
Chapter 1.20 - GENERAL PENALTY 
 
1.20.010 - Penalties for violations of city ordinances. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of the ordinances of the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor unless the violation is made an infraction by ordinance. 
B.  Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by any ordinance of the city, any person convicted of a misdemeanor for violation of an ordinance of the city is punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
C.  Any person convicted of an infraction for violation of an ordinance of the city is punishable by (i) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation; (ii) a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; (3) a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year. 
D.  Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the ordinances of the city is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and he shall be punishable accordingly. 
(Ord. 209 §1, 1987)  
CHAPTER 1.24 - GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTION 
 
1.24.010 - General purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to change the date for general municipal elections pursuant to the authority of California Elections Code Section 1301(b). 
(Ord. No. 317-2007, § 1, 5-10-07; Ord. No. 320-2007, § 1, 7-12-07; Ord. No. 322-2007, § 1, 9-13-07)  
1.24.020 - Election date. 
The general municipal elections for the city of McFarland shall be held on the same day as the statewide general election in November of each even numbered year. The first general municipal election pursuant to the foregoing shall be the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November, 2008. The first election shall be for those councilman positions currently expiring and subject to election on the first Tuesday after the first Monday of March, 2009. Subsequent elections for such positions shall be held every four years after the November, 2008 election. The election for the remaining councilman positions and mayoral position shall be held in November, 2010 and every four years thereafter. The reduction in terms is in compliance with the state requirement that no such position be lengthened or shortened by more than twelve months as a result of the change in the election date. 
(Ord. No. 317-2007, § 1, 5-10-07; Ord. No. 320-2007, § 1, 7-12-07; Ord. No. 322-2007, § 1, 9-13-07)  
Chapter 1.28 - LOCAL CLAIMS PROCEDURE 
 
1.28.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish local claims procedures as authorized by Government Code Section 935 to govern money or damage claims brought against the city that are exempt from state law claims procedures under the Claims Act (Government Code Sections 900 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 026-2013, § 1, 2-28-13)  
1.28.020 - Local claims procedures established. 
Pursuant to Government Code Section 935, the city hereby establishes the following claims procedures to apply to those claims against the city that are exempt from the Claims Act under Government Code Section 905, and which are not governed by other statutes or regulations which expressly relate thereto. 
A.  All claims for money or damages against the city that are exempt from the claims procedures of the Claims Act under Government Code Section 905 and that are not governed by any other statute or regulation expressly relating to such claim shall be presented to the city within the time limitations and in the manner set forth in Government Code Sections 910 through 915.4. All such claims must be made within the time specified in Government Code Section 911.2. 
B.  When a claim required by this chapter to be presented within a period of less than one year after the accrual of the cause of action is not presented within the required time, an application for leave to file a late claim may be made and processed in accordance with Government Code Sections 911.4(b), 911.6 to 912.2 inclusive, 946.4, and 946.6. A late claim shall also be subject to Government Code Section 946.4. 
C.  The city council shall take action upon a claim within the time specified in Government Code Section 912.4. 
D.  The claim shall be subject to the provisions of Government Code Section 945.4 relating to the prohibition of lawsuits until the presentation of and action on a claim. No lawsuit for money or damages may be brought against the city on a cause of action for which a claim is required to be presented in accordance with this chapter until a written claim therefore has been presented to the city and has been acted upon by the city council, or has been deemed to have been rejected by the city council, in accordance with the procedures at Government Code Sections 910 through 915.4. 
E.  Any lawsuit brought against the city on a claim subject to this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of Government Code Sections 945.6 and 946. Any lawsuit against the city on a claim subject to this chapter must be commenced within the time limitations of Government Code Section 945.6. 
(Ord. No. 026-2013, § 1, 2-28-13)  
Chapter 1.32 - UTILITY TERMINATION PROCEDURE 
 
1.32.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize establishment of procedures whereby customers of city utilities may terminate those services. 
(Ord. No. 027-2013, § 1, 2-28-13)  
1.32.020 - Utility termination procedures. 
The city council may adopt by resolution or ordinance procedures by which customers of city utilities may terminate one or more of those utilities. 
(Ord. No. 027-2013, § 1, 2-28-13)  
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL  
Chapter 2.04 - CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS 
Sections: 
 
2.04.010 - Time set for meetings. 
The second Thursday of each and every month at the hour of seven p.m. is established as the time for the regular meeting of the city council. 
(Ord. 221 §1, 1989: Ord. 169 §1, 1978: Ord. 93 §1, 1966: Ord. 78 §1, 1964: Ord. 2 §1, 1957)  
2.04.020 - Meeting place designated. 
The City Hall Council Chambers at 401 West Kern Avenue, McFarland, California, is established as the meeting place for the city council. 
(Ord. 172 §1, 1978: Ord. 2 §2, 1957)  
2.04.030 - Changes in time or place. 
The city council may temporarily or permanently change the time, hour, or location for regular meetings of the city council by resolution or minute order. 
(Ord. No. 297-2005, § 1, 5-12-05)  
Chapter 2.08 - MAYOR AND CITY COUNCILMEMBERS' COMPENSATION 
Sections: 
 
2.08.010 - Compensation. 
The compensation of the mayor and four council members of the city council is fixed at two hundred dollars per month, commencing on the first day of the month following the effective date of this provision. 
(Ord. 185 §1, 1981) 
(Ord. No. 296-2005, § 1, 5-12-05)  
Chapter 2.10 - EXECUTION OF DOCUMENTS 
Section: 
 
2.10.010 - Execution of documents. 
All documents to be signed by the city shall be signed by the mayor or, in his or her absence, the mayor pro tempore or in the absence of both the mayor and mayor pro tempore, the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 045-2015, § 1(C), 9-10-15)  
Chapter 2.12 - OFFICERS' BONDS 
Sections: 
 
2.12.010 - Bonds required. 
The city clerk and the city treasurer shall execute to the city an official bond for the due and faithful performance of their respective official duties in the penal sums of ten thousand dollars each. 
(Ord. 210 §2, 1987: Ord. 5 §1, 1957)  
Chapter 2.16 - CITY MANAGER 
Sections: 
 
2.16.010 - Office created. 
The office of city manager of the city is created and established. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council wholly on the basis of his administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the city council. This office shall not be subject to, or have the benefits given by, the city personnel ordinance or rules or regulations thereunto applicable. 
(Ord. 73 §1, 1963)  
2.16.020 - Appointment of administrator pro tempore. 
The city manager shall appoint, subject to the approval of the city council, one of the other officers or employees of the city to serve as administrator pro tempore during any temporary absence or disability of the city manager. In case of the absence or disability of the city manager and his failure to appoint an administrator pro tempore, the city council may designate some qualified city employee to perform the duties of the city manager during the period of disability of the city manager, subject, however, to said person furnishing a corporate surety bond conditioned upon faithful performance of the duties required to be performed as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 73 §4, 1963)  
2.16.030 - Bond. 
The city manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the city council in such sum as may be determined by the city council, and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the city manager as prescribed in this chapter. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the city. 
(Ord. 73 §5, 1963)  
2.16.040 - Compensation. 
A.  The city manager shall receive such compensation and expense allowances as the city council shall from time to time determine and fix by resolution, and said compensation and expenses shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the city council shall designate. 
B.  The city manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him in the performance of his duties or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the city under the direction of the city council; reimbursement shall only be made, however, when a verified, itemized claim, setting forth the sums expended for such business for which reimbursement is requested, has been presented to the city council and approved. 
(Ord. 73 §6, 1963)  
2.16.050 - Powers and duties-Generally. 
The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the city council, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. He shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his control. In addition to his general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his duty and he shall have the powers set forth in the following sections. 
(Ord. 73 §7, 1963)  
2.16.060 - Powers and duties—Law enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce all laws and ordinances of the city and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully performed. 
(Ord. 73 §8, 1963)  
2.16.070 - Powers and duties—Authority over employees. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager, and he shall have the authority to control, order and give directions to all officers and employees of the city other than the city attorney or the city treasurer. 
(Ord. 73 §9, 1963)  
2.16.080 - Powers and duties—Appointments, promotions, removals and demotions. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to, and he shall appoint, remove, promote and demote any and all officers and employees of the city, except the city attorney, subject to the rules and regulations of the city personnel ordinance, insofar as the personnel ordinance does not conflict with the ordinance codified in this chapter, it being the intent and purpose of the city council that in case of any conflict between the ordinance codified in this chapter and the city personnel ordinance and rules and regulations thereunder, that the ordinance codified in this chapter shall prevail. 
(Ord. 73 §10, 1963)  
2.16.090 - Powers and duties-Administrative reorganiza tion of offices. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city manager to recommend to the city council such reorganization of offices, positions, departments or units under his direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city's business. 
(Ord. 73 §11, 1963)  
2.16.100 - Powers and duties-Attendance at council meetings. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to attend all meetings of the city council unless excused therefrom, except when his removal is under consideration. 
(Ord. 73 §12, 1963)  
2.16.110 - Powers and duties-Financial reports. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the city. 
(Ord. 73 §13, 1963)  
2.16.120 - Powers and duties-Budget preparation. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the city council for its approval. 
(Ord. 73 §14, 1963)  
2.16.130 - Powers and duties-Purchasing officer. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to act as city purchasing officer. 
(Ord. 73 §15, 1963)  
2.16.140 - Powers and duties-Investigations. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof and contract for the proper performance of any obligations of the city. 
(Ord. 73 §16, 1963)  
2.16.150 - Powers and duties-Franchises and permits. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to see that all franchises and permits granted by the city are faithfully performed and observed. 
(Ord. 73 §17, 1963)  
2.16.160 - Powers and duties-Public buildings. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager and he shall exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and all other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the city council. 
(Ord. 73 §18, 1963)  
2.16.170 - Powers and duties-Hours of employment. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to devote his entire time to the duties of his office in the interests of the city. 
(Ord. 73 §19, 1963)  
2.16.180 - Additional duties. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other action of the city council. The city manager may hold any other office or position in the city other than an elective office: during the time he holds such other office or position he shall receive as compensation only the compensation payable under the provisions of this chapter to the city manager. 
(Ord. 73 §20, 1963)  
2.16.190 - Internal relations-Council/administrator relations. 
The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinate of the city manager. The city manager shall take his orders and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly held meeting of the city council and no individual councilman shall give any orders or instructions to the city manager. 
(Ord. 73 §21, 1963)  
2.16.200 - Internal relations-Departmental cooperation. 
It shall be the duty of all officers and employees of the city to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by law and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. 73 §22, 1963)  
2.16.210 - Internal relations-Attendance at commission meetings. 
The city manager may attend any and all meetings of the planning commission, or any other commission, board or committee hereafter created by the city council or which presently exist, upon his own volition or upon direction of the city council. At such meetings which the city manager attends, he shall be heard by such commissions, boards or committees as to all matters upon which he wishes to address the members thereof, and he shall inform the members as to the status of any matter being considered by the city council, and he shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, boards or committees appointed by the city council. 
(Ord. 73 §23, 1963)  
2.16.220 - Removal. 
The removal of the city manager shall be only upon a three-member vote of the whole city council, in regular council meeting, subject, however, to the provisions of the next succeeding sections of this chapter. In case of his intended removal by the city council, the city manager shall be furnished with a written notice stating the council's intention to remove him, and the reason therefor, at least ten days before the effective date of his removal. 
(Ord. 73 §24, 1963)  
2.16.230 - Removal-Hearing. 
Within three days after the delivery to the city manager of the written notice described in Section 2.16.220, he may by written notification to the mayor, request a hearing before the city council. Thereafter, the city council shall fix a time for hearing which shall be held at the usual meeting place before the effective date of his removal, at which hearing the city manager may appear and be heard, with or without counsel. 
(Ord. 73 §25, 1963) 
(Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
2.16.240 - Removal—Suspension pending hearing. 
After furnishing the city manager with written notice of intended removal, the city council may suspend him from duty, but his compensation shall continue until his removal by resolution of the council passed subsequent to the aforesaid hearing, or in case no hearing is requested then on the effective date of the removal. 
(Ord. 73 §26, 1963) 
(Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
2.16.250 - Removal—Council discretion. 
In removing the city manager, the city council shall use its uncontrolled discretion and its action shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearing, the purpose of which is to allow the city manager to present to the city council his grounds of opposition to his removal prior to its action. 
(Ord. 73 §27, 1963) 
(Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
2.16.260 - Removal—Limitation on removal. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the city manager shall not be removed from office during or within a period of ninety days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the city at which election a member of the city council is elected; the purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected member of the city council or a reorganized city council to observe the actions and ability of the city manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his office. After the expiration of the ninety-day period aforementioned, the provisions of this chapter as to the removal of the city manager shall apply and be effective. 
(Ord. 73 §29, 1963) 
(Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
Chapter 2.20 - CITY PERSONNEL SYSTEM 
 
2.20.010 - Personnel system adopted. 
In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters, to attract to municipal service the best and most competent persons available, to assure that appointments and promotions of employees will be based on merit and fitness, and to provide a reasonable degree of security for qualified employees, the personnel system in this chapter is adopted. 
(Ord. 203 §1, 1987)  
2.20.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined as indicated in this section: 
A.  "Appointing power" means the officers of the city who, in their individual capacities, or as a board, commission, or city council, have the final authority to make the appointment to the position to be filled. 
B.  "Class" means all positions sufficiently similar in duties, authority and responsibility, to permit grouping under a common title in the application with equity of common standards of selection, transfer, demotion and salary. 
C.  "Classified service" means all positions of employment in the service of the city except those specifically excluded by this chapter. 
D.  "Days" means calendar days unless otherwise stated. 
E.  "Demotion" means the movement of an employee from one class to another class having a lower maximum rate of pay. 
F.  "Examination" means the selection techniques used to measure the relative capacities of the persons applying for positions within the city service. 
G.  "Employment list" means a list of names of persons who may be considered for employment with the city under specified conditions. 
H.  "Lay-off" means the separation of employees from the active work force due to lack of work or funds, or to the abolition of positions by the city council for the above reasons or due to organizational changes. 
I.  "Position" means a group of duties and responsibilities in the city service requiring the full-time or part-time employment of one person. 
J.  "Probationary period" means a working test period during which the employee is required to demonstrate his fitness for the position to which he is appointed by actual performance of the duties of the position. 
K.  "Promotion" means the movement of an employee from one class to another class having a higher maximum rate of pay. 
L.  "Provisional appointment" means an appointment of a person who possesses the minimum qualifications established for a particular class and who has been appointed to a position in that class in the absence of available eligibles. 
M.  "Reinstatement" means the reemployment without examination of a former regular employee or probationary employee. 
N.  "Suspension" means the temporary separation from service of an employee without pay, for disciplinary purposes. 
O.  "Transfer" means a change of an employee from one position to another position in the same class or in a comparable class. 
(Ord. 203 §2, 1987)  
2.20.030 - Personnel officer. 
The city manager shall be the personnel officer. The city manager may delegate any of the powers and duties conferred upon him as personnel officer under this chapter to any other officer or employee of the city or may recommend that such powers and duties be performed under contract as provided in Section 2.20.150. The personnel officer shall: 
A.  Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules not specifically reserved to the council. 
B.  Prepare and recommend to the city council personnel rules and revisions and amendments to such rules. 
C.  Prepare or cause to be prepared a position classification plan, including class specifications, and revisions of the plan. The plan, and any revisions thereof, shall become effective upon approval by the city council. 
D.  Provide for the publishing or posting of notices of tests for positions in the city service; the receiving of applications therefor; the conducting and grading of tests; the certification to the appointing power of a list of all persons eligible for appointment to the appropriate position in the city service. 
(Ord. 203 §3, 1987) 
(Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
2.20.040 - Classified employees. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all employees in the service of the city, except the following: 
1.  City manager; 
2.  Chief of police; 
3.  City attorney; 
4.  City engineer; 
5.  Elective officers; 
6.  Members of elective and appointive boards, commissions and committees; 
7.  Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional, technical or any other service; 
8.  Part-time employees paid on an hourly basis, including custodians; 
9.  Emergency or temporary employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of an emergency condition, such as extraordinary fire, flood or earthquake which threatens life or property; 
10.  Volunteer personnel such as volunteer firemen; 
11.  Employees, other than those listed elsewhere in this section, who are not regularly employed in permanent positions. 
B.  Those employees not excepted by the foregoing and to which this chapter shall apply, may be referred to as "classified employees" and their position(s) may be referred to as "classified service." 
C.  The city manager, chief of police, city attorney, city engineer, members of appointive boards, commissions and committees, persons engaged under contract, part-time employees, emergency or temporary employees and voluntary personnel shall all serve at the will of the city council and may, without cause, be demoted, dismissed, discharged or reduced in pay without the right of any appeal or to any hearing. 
D.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, any part of the personnel rules and regulations adopted by resolution pursuant to the ordinance codified in this chapter and any amendment thereto, may provide for and apply to the city manager and chief of police. 
(Ord. 203 §4, 1987) 
(Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
2.20.050 - Adoption and amendment of rules. 
Personnel rules shall be adopted by resolution of the city council after notice of such action has been posted in the City Hall at least five days prior to city council consideration. The personnel officer shall give reasonable written notice to each recognized employee organization affected by the ordinance, rule, resolution or regulation or amendment thereof proposed to be adopted by the city council (optional if not within the scope of representation). Amendments and revisions may be suggested by any interested party and shall be processed as provided in the personnel rules. The rules shall establish regulations governing the personnel system including, but not limited to, the following: 
A.  Preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions in the classified service, including employment standards and qualifications for each class. 
B.  Public announcement of all tests and acceptance of applications for employment. 
C.  Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use of resulting employment lists containing the names of persons eligible for employment. 
D.  Certification and employment of persons from employment lists, and the making of provisional appointments. 
E.  Establishment of probationary periods. 
F.  Evaluation of employees during the probationary period. 
G.  Transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action and layoff of employees in the city service. 
H.  Separation of employees from the city service. 
I.  The establishment of adequate personnel records. 
J.  The establishment of appeal procedures concerning the interpretation or application of this chapter and any rules adopted hereunder. 
(Ord. 203 §5, 1987)  
2.20.060 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 012-2011, § 1, adopted July 14, 2011, repealed § 2.20.060, which pertained to appointments and derived from Ord. No. 203, 1987.  
2.20.070 - Probationary period. 
A.  All regular appointments, including promotional appointments, shall be for a probationary period as hereafter established by a resolution of the city council. During the probationary period, the employee may be rejected at any time without the right of appeal or hearing. 
B.  An employee rejected during the probationary period from a position to which he has been promoted shall be reinstated to a position in the class from which he was promoted unless he is discharged from the city service as provided in this chapter and the rules. 
C.  An employee in the classified service promoted or transferred to a position not included in the city service shall be reinstated to a position in the class from which he was promoted or transferred if action is taken to reject him unless he is discharge in the manner provided in this chapter and the personnel rules for positions in the classified service. 
(Ord. 203 §7, 1987)  
2.20.080 - Status of present employees. 
A.  Any person holding a position in the classified service who, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall have served continuously in such position, or in some other position in the city service, for a period equal to the probationary period prescribed in the rules for his class, shall assume regular status in the classified service in the position held on such effective date without a qualifying test, and shall thereafter be subject to the provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules. 
B.  Any other persons holding positions in the classified service shall be regarded as probationers who are serving out the balance of their probationary periods as prescribed in the rules before obtaining regular status. The probationary period shall be computed from the date of appointment or employment. 
(Ord. 203 §8, 1987)  
2.20.090 - Applicability of rules to certain exempt positions. 
The provisions of the personnel rules relating to attendance and leaves shall apply to the incumbents of full-time exempt positions, unless otherwise specified. 
(Ord. 203 §9, 1987)  
2.20.100 - Appointment, promotion, demotion, dismissal, discharge, reduction in pay, and suspension. 
The city manager shall have the right to appoint, promote, demote, dismiss, discharge, reduce in pay or suspend without pay for thirty calendar days any regular or probationary employee in a manner consistent with the personnel rules. 
(Ord. No. 012-2011, § 1, 7-14-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 012-2011, § 1, adopted July 14, 2011, in effect repealed the former § 2.20.100, and enacted a new § 2.20.100 as set out herein. The former § 2.20.100 pertained to demotion, dismissal, reduction in pay and suspension and derived from Ord. No. 203, 1987 and Ord. No. 002-2010, adopted February 11, 2010.  
2.20.110 - Right of appeal. 
Any employee in the city service shall have the right to appeal to the city council any disciplinary action, or alleged violation of this chapter or the rules adopted thereunder, except in those instances where the right of appeal is specifically prohibited by this chapter or the rules adopted thereunder. All appeals shall be concluded as expeditiously as possible and in accordance with the requirements and procedures set forth in the personnel rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 203 §11, 1987)  
2.20.120 - Layoff and reemployment. 
A.  Whenever in the judgment of the city council it becomes necessary in the interest of economy, or because the necessity for a position no longer exists, the city council may abolish any position or employment in the city service; and the employee holding such position or employment may be laid off without taking disciplinary action and without the right of appeal. 
B.  The order of layoff of employees shall be established by the personnel officer on the recommendation of the department head involved. The department head shall take into consideration the job performance and length of service of employees in preparing a recommended layoff list, provided, however, that no regular or probationary employee shall be laid off from his position in any department while any emergency, temporary or provisional employee is serving in the same class in that department. 
C.  Employees to be laid off shall be given at least seven days' prior notice. 
D.  The names of regular and probationary employees laid off or demoted in lieu of layoff shall be placed on reemployment lists for one year for those classes requiring basically the same qualifications, duties and responsibilities of the class from which layoff or demotion in lieu of layoff was made. 
E.  Persons whose names are placed on reemployment lists in accordance with this section and who are reemployed within the prescribed period, shall be regarded as having been on leave of absence during this period of absence. 
(Ord. 203 §12, 1987)  
2.20.130 - Improper political activity. 
The political activities of city employees shall conform to the pertinent provisions of state law. 
(Ord. 203 §13, 1987)  
2.20.140 - Discrimination. 
No person in the city service, or seeking admission thereto, shall be employed, promoted or discharged, or in any way favored or discriminated against because of political opinions or affiliations, race, color, ancestry, national origin, religious creed, sex, age or because of the exercise of his rights under Section 3502 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 203 §14, 1987)  
2.20.150 - Right to contract for special service. 
The city manager shall consider and make recommendations to the city council regarding the extent to which the city should contract for performance of technical services in connection with the establishment or operation of the personnel system. The city council may contract with any qualified person or public or private agency for the performance of all or any of the following responsibilities and duties imposed by this chapter: 
A.  The preparation of personnel rules and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof. 
B.  The preparation of a position classification plan, and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof. 
C.  The preparation of a plan of compensation, and subsequent revisions and amendments thereto. 
D.  The preparation, conduct and grading of competitive tests. 
E.  The conduct of employee training programs. 
F.  Special and technical services of advisory or informational character on matters relating to personnel administration. 
G.  To conduct any appeal hearing or procedure set forth in the personnel rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 203 §15, 1987) 
(Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
Chapter 2.24 - PURCHASING SYSTEM[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 021-2012, § 1, adopted August 23, 2012, in effect repealed Chapter 2.24, §§ 2.24.010—2.24.130, and enacted a new Chapter 2.24 as set out herein. The former Chapter 2.24 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 285-2003, adopted October 9, 2003 and Ord. No. 002-2010, adopted February 11, 2010. 
 
2.24.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this policy is to provide the city a means of assuring continuity and uniformity in its purchasing operation and to define the responsibilities for purchasing supplies, materials and equipment for the city. These guidelines are not intended to address every issue, exception, or contingency that may arise in the course of purchasing activities. The basic standard that should always prevail is to exercise good judgment in the use and stewardship of city resources, including keeping within the budget authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 021-2012, § 1, 8-23-12; Ord. No. 024-2012, § 1(a), 11-11-12)  
2.24.020 - Policy statement. 
The city manager is designated as the purchasing officer for the city and may delegate the administration of the program. The purchasing officer is charged with the responsibility and authority for coordinating and managing the procurement of the city's supplies, materials and equipment according to this policy. The policy outlined herein is to be adhered to by the purchasing officer and all departments when procuring supplies, materials and equipment. This policy strives to define decision-making with prudent review and internal control procedures and to maintain departmental responsibility and flexibility in evaluating, selecting and purchasing supplies, materials and equipment. 
A.  Excluded from this policy is the purchase of supplies, materials and equipment which is included within a "public works" project as defined in the California Public Contract Code. 
(Ord. No. 021-2012, § 1, 8-23-12; Ord. No. 024-2012, § 1(a), 11-11-12)  
2.24.030 - Unauthorized purchases. 
Except for authorized exemptions stated herein, no purchase of supplies or equipment shall be made without an authorized purchase order. Otherwise such purchases are void and not considered an obligation of the city. Invoices without an authorized purchase order may be returned to the vendor unpaid. The person ordering the unauthorized purchase may be held personally liable for the costs of the purchase or contract. Purchase orders shall be issued prior to ordering supplies, materials and equipment and not for work already done or materials already ordered. 
(Ord. No. 021-2012, § 1, 8-23-12; Ord. No. 024-2012, § 1(a), 11-11-12)  
2.24.040 - Responsibilities of the purchasing officer. 
The purchasing officer is responsible for the procurement of supplies, materials and equipment; the administration of the purchasing policies; and the management of surplus city property. To perform these functions efficiently and assist departments, the purchasing officer shall: 
A.  Be charged with the responsibility and authority for coordinating and managing the procurement of the city's supplies, materials and equipment from the lowest responsive and responsible bidder when required by this policy; 
B.  Ensure full and open competition of all purchases as required by this policy; 
C.  Identify evaluate and utilize purchasing methods which best meet the needs of the city (such as cooperative purchases, blanket purchase orders and contractual agreements); 
D.  Assist all departments with research and recommendations in developing specifications and review specifications for completeness of information to ensure specifications are not unnecessarily restrictive; 
E.  Coordinate vendor relations, locate sources of supply and evaluate vendor performance; 
F.  Recommend revisions to purchasing procedures when necessary and keep informed of current development in the field of public purchasing; 
G.  Prescribe and maintain all forms and records necessary for the efficient operation of the purchasing function; 
H.  Act as the city's agent in the transfer and disposal of surplus equipment and materials; 
I.  Investigate the cost of recycled and non-recycled products to determine if the purchase of recycle products is practical and economical. To be considered economical the added costs should not exceed ten percent of the lowest non-recycled product price; and 
J.  Make purchase award recommendations to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 021-2012, § 1, 8-23-12; Ord. No. 024-2012, § 1(a), 11-11-12)  
2.24.050 - Responsibilities of departments. 
Departments are charged with the following responsibilities in the purchasing process: 
A.  To provide to the purchasing officer at the beginning of each fiscal year, an updated authorized signature list designating those individuals who are delegated the authority to make purchase pursuant to the policies and procedures described herein; 
B.  To anticipate requirements sufficiently in advance to allow adequate time to obtain goods in accordance with the best purchasing practices; 
C.  To communicate and coordinate purchases with the purchasing officer as necessary; 
D.  To provide detailed accurate specifications to ensure goods obtained are consistent with requirements and expectations: 
E.  To prepare requisitions in accordance with instructions so as to minimize the processing effort; 
F.  To inform the purchasing division of any vendor relations problems, shipping problems and situations which could affect the purchasing function; 
G.  To minimize urgent and sole source purchases and to provide written documentation when such purchases may be necessary; 
H.  To assist the purchasing division with the review of all bids received for compliance with specifications and provide the purchasing division with written documentation regarding their findings; 
I.  To notify vendors of purchase awards when authorized by the purchasing officer; 
J.  To not split orders for the purpose of avoiding procurement requirements; and 
K.  To consider the use of recycled products when practical and economically feasible. To be considered economical the added costs should not exceed ten percent of the lowest non-recycled product price. 
(Ord. No. 021-2012, § 1, 8-23-12)  
2.24.060 - Vendor relations. 
It is to the city's advantage to promote and maintain good relations with vendors. The purchasing division and operating department staff shall conduct their dealings with vendors in a professional manner and shall promote equal opportunity and demonstrate fairness, integrity and courtesy in all vendor relations. When feasible to do so vendors within the city should be utilized for supplies, materials and equipment. 
(Ord. No. 021-2012, § 1, 8-23-12; Ord. No. 024-2012, § 1(a), 11-11-12)  
2.24.070 - Purchasing methods. 
All supplies purchased by the city shall be purchased in one of the following ways: 
A.  Purchases of fifteen thousand dollars or less may be made by the employees of the city by force account, by negotiated contract or by blank or open purchase order upon the authority of the purchasing officer. Prudent judgment shall be used at all times. 
B.  For purchase of between fifteen thousand dollars and one cent to thirty-four thousand nine hundred ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents the purchasing officer shall attempt to obtain three competitive quotations whenever reasonably possible for purchase. The purchasing officer shall submit a requisition which includes the recommended vendor with all supporting documentation to the city council. The city council may award purchase to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder whose quote fulfills the intended purpose, quality, and delivery needs of the solicitation provided that an unencumbered appropriation for that item exists. In lieu of awarding the purchase the city council may reject bids, or authorize the purchasing officer to negotiate further to obtain terms more acceptable to the city. 
C.  Another method of purchasing items is by contract purchase orders. Contract purchase orders are the preferred method of purchasing repetitive-use items which may be common to several departments or within one department. Establishing contract purchase orders provides a means of obtaining volume pricing based upon the combined needs of all departments reduces the administrative costs associated with seeking redundant competitive bids and processing a purchase order each time an order is placed, and allows departments to order as needed, reducing the requirement to maintain large to inventories of stock. All contract purchase orders shall be approved by the city council. If a contract purchase order exists departments shall order all of their requirements from the successful vendor. No other source shall be used without prior approval of the purchasing officer, and where required hereunder, the city council. Departments shall submit in writing to the purchasing division any performance problem encountered immediately following the occurrence so that corrective action may be taken. Contract purchase orders are annual and may include options for renewal for specific products, product type, or services at agreed upon prices or pricing structure and for a specified period of time. All renewals of contract purchase orders shall be approved by the city council. 
D.  The city may participate in purchases and contracts established by other political jurisdictions provided the cooperative agreement is established following a competitive bid process. The city council shall authorize the award of any such cooperative purchase agreements. 
E.  Commodities which can be obtained from only one vendor as determined by city are exempt from competitive bidding. Sole source purchases may include proprietary items sold directly from the manufacturer items that have only one distributor authorized to sell in this area or where a certain product has been proven to be the only product that has proven to be acceptable. All sole source purchases shall be supported by written documentation signed by the appropriate department head and forwarded to the purchasing officer. Final determination that an item as a valid sole source purchase will be made by the purchasing officer or designee. 
F.  Urgency purchases are defined herein as purchases for any of the following reasons: to preserve or protect life, health or property, or in the event of a natural disaster, or to forestall a shutdown of essential public services. Urgency purchases do not require competitive quotes or properly encumbered funds be committed. The city manager may approve urgency purchases without city council action or approval. The city manager shall use sound judgment in keeping such orders to an absolute minimum. The following requirements shall apply to urgency purchases: 
1.  The purchasing officer shall be contacted as soon as possible for an advance purchase order number which may be given verbally to cover the urgent transaction. 
2.  A completed purchase requisition shall be submitted to the purchasing officer within two working days or as soon as the information is available. All purchase requisitions for urgent purchases shall be signed by the appropriate department head. 
3.  Documentation explaining the circumstances and nature of the urgency purchase shall be submitted as follows: For purchases of the competitive bid amount hereinafter described or more the city manager shall report the purchase to the city council at its next scheduled meeting for ratification. 
4.  If the urgency purchase causes any budget line item to exceed the approved budget the city manager shall obtain subsequent city council approval for an additional appropriation or to make a transfer to cover the purchase. 
G.  With regard to purchases at or exceeding thirty-five thousand dollars (the "competitive bid amount") the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  Bids shall be awarded to the "responsive" and "qualified" bidder who submits the lowest bid. 
2.  In determining the lowest "responsive" bid the following elements shall be considered in addition to price. 
a.  A responsive bid is one which is in substantial conformance with the requirements of the invitation to bid, including specification and city's contractual terms and conditions. Bidders who substitute terms and conditions or who qualify their bids in such a manner as to nullify or limit their liability shall be considered non-responsive bidders. 
b.  Conformance with the requirements of the invitation to bid may also include providing proof of insurance, completing all forms, including references and providing all other information as requested in the bid document. 
c.  The successful bidder must demonstrate the ability to fulfill a contract successfully including rendering of subsequent and continuing service. Staff may request proof of a prospective bidder's reliability. Prospective bidders may be requested to furnish proof of financial resources, a list of current or previous customers and other pertinent data. Such action may also be taken after receipt of bids. 
d.  A bidder may be determined to be non-responsive if a prospective bidder fails to furnish proof of qualifications when required. 
3.  In determining the lowest "qualified" bidder the following elements shall be considered in addition to price: 
a.  That the products offered provide the quality, fitness, and capacity for the required usage. 
b.  That the bidder has the ability, capacity and skill to perform the contract satisfactorily and within the time required. 
c.  That the bidder's experience(s) regarding past purchases by the city or other public agencies demonstrates the reliability of the bidder to perform the contract. 
4.  That city council may reject any or all bids if it is determined to be in the best interests of the city. Reasons for rejection may include but are not limited to the following: a bid is determined to be non-responsive, the number of bids received is inadequate and bids received are not reasonably uniform in price, or the lowest bid received is deemed to be too high. The city council may in any given case reject all bids with or without cause and submit the supplies, equipment or service involved to a new bidding process. If all bids are rejected the purchasing officer may be authorized to re-solicit bids negotiate a contract for the purchase or abandon the purchase. 
5.  If two or more bids are received which are in all respects equal, the city council may accept the one deemed to be in the best interest of the city. 
H.  Certain purchases are not readily adaptable to the open market and bidding process. These purchases are generally for items where the competitive bid process is not applicable or where a check is required to accompany the order. The following purchases are exempt from the provisions set forth in this Section 2.24.070: Debt payments, services, advertisements and notices, attorney services, consultant services, courier/delivery/messenger services, fuel, insurance claims and premiums, medical payments, membership dues, payments to other governmental units, petty cash replenishment, property rentals, real property/easement acquisition, subscriptions trade circulars or books, travel expense/advances, utility payments and credit card purchases. Exemptions are limited to the foregoing except as otherwise described in this Chapter 2.24. 
I.  Purchase orders represent a contract between the city and the vendor. Any substantial change to a purchase order shall be documented as a change order. Change orders shall be reviewed and approved by the city administrator. A purchase order may not be increased by more than ten percent or one thousand five hundred dollars whichever is less without a change order, except for taxes, shipping and handling. Taxes, shipping and handling may cause the purchase order to exceed the authorized purchase order amount. These items do not require a change order even if they exceed the lesser of ten percent or one thousand five hundred dollars of the original purchase order amount. The requisition form shall be used to change a quantity, description, size, color, vendor name or address, unit price, delivery location, or terms and conditions and to delete or add to the order. It shall also be used to terminate a purchase order and to correct in the original purchase order. 
J.  The city council may adjust the amounts described in subsections A and B of this Section 2.24.070 and the competitive bid amount by either resolution or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 021-2012, § 1, 8-23-12; Ord. No. 024-2012, § 1(a)—(c), 11-11-12)  
2.24.080 - Informal and formal bid process. 
Except as otherwise exempted in this chapter, supplies or equipment with an estimated value equal to or greater than the competitive bid amount shall be made by following formal bid process: 
A.  To initiate the each bid process the department making the request shall provide specifications for the item to be purchased and documentation showing the existence of an unencumbered appropriation for the item in the current approved budget. The purchasing officer or requesting department shall solicit bids as prescribed below. 
B.  Informal bids may be posted at city hall, mailed to prospective bidders a minimum of ten calendar days before the due date, or solicited over the phone, or by electronic means. Formal bids shall be posted at city hall and shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, and if applicable in appropriate trade publications. The date of publication shall be at least ten days before the due date of the bids. All formal bids shall be sealed and shall be publicly opened and read at the date, time, and place indicated in the published notice. 
C.  Bids shall be reviewed for compliance with specifications by the requesting department. All deviations from the specifications shall be fully documented by the requesting department and the impact of the deviations on the performance or suitability of the bid item shall be detailed. Staff will prepare and forward as recommendation for approval of purchase. Acceptance of informal and formal bids shall be by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 021-2012, § 1, 8-23-12)  
2.24.090 - Specifications. 
It is the responsibility of each department to provide detailed accurate specifications when requisitioning supplies, equipment, and services. Accurate specifications are essential for effective bidding and shall include the following: 
A.  Sole source specifications shall be avoided whenever possible as they minimize or eliminate competition. Whether or not a purchase is a sole source purchase shall be determined by the purchasing officer. An example of sole source is where equipment or supplies are required to be compatible with existing equipment or to perform a complex or unique function. Written documentation signed by the appropriate department head shall accompany the requisition for any sole source request. 
B.  Standardization of specifications for items common to several divisions and or departments can facilitate the purchasing process. The purchasing officer and departments shall work together to establish standard specifications for such items. 
C.  In purchasing equipment or supplies needed to be compatible with existing equipment, or to perform complex or unique functions the appropriate authority may limit bidding to a specific product type or a brand name product. Use of brand names in specifications shall be for the purpose of describing the standard of quality, performance, and characteristics the city desires and not be intended to limit or restrict competition. If a brand name is incorporated into a specification a minimum of two acceptable brands shall be listed whenever possible and shall be followed by the statement "or approved equal" unless the sole source rule applies. Using specifications provided by specific manufacturer should be avoided; however, if used the name of the manufacturer, model number and other pertinent information should be indicated. The bid document shall clearly state that the use of the manufacturer's specifications are for the sole purpose of establishing the level of quality desired. The city council shall determine and approve any product submitted as an "approved equal" as to such purchases. 
D.  There may be occasions when vendor assistance is required to develop a specification. Such specifications shall be written in general terms and the vendor shall be informed that the information they provide may be used to develop specifications for a competitive bid process. The vendor shall be allowed to submit a bid, but will not be given any preference over the other bids. 
(Ord. No. 021-2012, § 1, 8-23-12)  
2.24.095 - Purchases of recycled products. 
If the city council adopts by ordinance or resolution a policy of preference for recycled products, the purchasing agent may accept other than the lowest bid or quotation for a single item of personal property which has a higher content of post-consumer recycled materials than a similar item with a lower bid or quotation without prior approval of the city council and without having to report such fact to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 056-2016, § 3, 8-1-16)  
2.24.100 - Surplus property. 
Each department shall periodically review its equipment, material, and inventory and shall promptly notify the city administrator of any surplus property. A surplus property form shall be completed and submitted for each surplus property item. Surplus property forms are to be made available from the finance division. The purchasing officer or designee shall determine or approve the method of disposition that is most appropriate and in the best interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. 021-2012, § 1, 8-23-12)  
2.24.110 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter: 
"Agreement" means an understanding or arrangement between two or more parties. 
"Appropriation" means city council authorization to expend public funds for a specific purpose. 
"As is" means that goods are offered for sale in existing condition without warranty or guaranty. 
"Award" means the acceptance of a bid or proposal. 
"Bid" means the executed documents submitted by a bidder in response to a notice inviting bids (NIB), proposals, or requests for quotations. 
"Bidder" means a person or legal entity who submits a bid in response to a solicitation. 
"Blanket purchase order" means an agreement of no more than one year between the city and a vendor allowing authorized city employees to charge repetitive purchases of supplies, equipment or services at pre-arranged prices, dollar limits and/or other terms and conditions. 
"Brand name" means a trade name which serves to identify a product or particular manufacturer. 
"Change order" means written modification or addition to a purchase order or contract agreement authorized by the appropriate authority. 
"City" means the city of McFarland as governed by the members of the city of McFarland city council. 
"City attorney" means and include the city attorney of the city of McFarland. 
"City council" means and include the city council of the city of McFarland. It shall also mean the governing boards of such other districts, authorities, or agencies as may be governed by the city council of the city of McFarland. 
"City administrator" means and include the city administrator of the city of McFarland. 
"Competitive bid amount" means purchases in the amount of thirty-five thousand dollars. 
"Contract" means a verbal or written legally binding mutual promise between two parties. e.g. an accepted purchase order. 
"Contract purchase order" means a purchase order (usually issued for one year) which outlines unit prices to be charged by the vendor for the term of the purchase order. This type of purchase order is generally used for such things as electrical, plumbing and other goods and services which are anticipated to be needed periodically throughout the year. The bids are usually expressed at hourly rates plus parts expressed at a specific discount below list price. 
"Contract tracking form" a form used to communicate to the purchasing officer that a contract has been awarded and that certain dollar values, representing the amount expected to be spent during the current and future fiscal years are to be encumbered. The form precedes the issuance of an encumbrance order. 
"Designee" means a duly authorized and appointed representative of an employee that holds a superior position to the person appointed to represent him or her. 
"Dispose of" means to transfer or part with, to sell; to get rid; to throw out. 
"Discount" means an allowance or deduction from a normal or list price extended by a seller to a buyer to make the unit price more competitive. 
"Emergency purchase" means see urgency purchase. 
"Encumbrance" means committing budgeted funds prior to receiving supplies, equipment or services. Funds are shown as an encumbrance until supplies, equipment or services are received at which time funds are actually expended. 
"Encumbrance order" means direction provided to the purchasing division using a contract tracking form to encumber contracts without the issuance of a purchase order. 
"Equipment" or "material" means personal property necessary to conduct the city's business, including but not limited to machinery, vehicles, rolling stock, supplies, and other property used to conduct the city's business. 
"Formal bid" means a bid which must be submitted in a sealed envelope and in conformance with a prescribed format, to be opened and announced at a specified time at a public opening. 
"General services" means services such as janitorial, uniform cleaning, maintenance and other services for which the performance of such activities do not require any unique skill, special background or training. 
"Guarantee" means a pledge or assurance that something is as represented and will be replaced or repaired if it fails to meet the stated specifications. 
"Informal bid" means written or verbal quotations for supplies, equipment and services which pursuant to this policy are not required to meet the formal bidding requirements. Informal bids include unsealed written quotes, verbal quotes and quotes received via fax. 
"Lowest (responsive and) responsible bidder" means the bidder submitting the lowest price and capable of performing the proposed contract. See also "responsive bidder" and "responsible bidder." 
"Non-responsive bid" means a bid that does not conform to the essential requirements of the notice inviting bids. 
"Notice of inviting bids (NIB)" means a formal notice published in the newspaper or elsewhere or sent directly to potential bidders, notifying them that the city is accepting bids for a specific purpose. 
"Professional services" means any work performed by an auditor, attorney, doctor, architect, engineer, land surveyor, construction project manager, appraiser, expert, or consultant for example. 
"Proposal" means the executed document submitted by an offer or in response to a request for proposals (and the basis for subsequent negotiation). 
"Public Contract Code" means the Public Contract Code of the state of California. 
"Public project" (definitions is from state of California Public Contract Code). 
"Public owned, leased or operated facility" means any plant, building, structure, ground facility, utility system, real property, streets and highways or other capital improvement which project is to be undertaken by the city. 
"Purchase" means renting, leasing, purchasing, licensing or a trade of equipment or supplies. 
"Purchase officer" means the city administrator or his/her designated representative. 
"Qualified bidder" means a bidder that demonstrates the following characteristics, can provide product quality, fitness and capacity for the required usage, has the ability, capacity and skill to perform the contract or provide the service required, has demonstrated character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency, particularly with reference to past purchases by the city or other public agencies; has the ability to perform within the time required; has shown quality of performance and/or of products provided in previous contracts or services with the city or other public agencies; and has no previous documented incidents of unsatisfactory performance and/or unsatisfactory delivery, materials, or services that may result in determination of unqualified. 
"Quotation" means a bid. A statement of price, terms of sale, and description of goods or services offered by a prospective seller to a prospective purchaser, usually for purchases below the amount requiring formal bidding. 
"Request for proposal (RFP)" means all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting competitive proposals. The RFP procedure permits negotiation of proposal and prices as distinguished from competitive bidding and a notice inviting bids. The procedure allows changes to be made after proposals are opened and contemplates that the nature of the proposals and/or prices offered will be negotiated prior to award. 
"Request for quotation (RFQ)" means the document generally used for seeking competition on small purchases or on any purchase that does not require competitive sealed bidding, can be used for obtaining price and delivery information for sale source and emergencies. Also, see quotation. 
"Responsible bidder" means a person who has the capability in all respects to perform in full the contract requirements, and the integrity and reliability which will assure good faith performance. 
"Responsive bidder" means: (1) a person who has submitted a bid which conforms in all material respects to the notice inviting bids (NIB), or (2) one whose bid conforms in all material respects to the term and conditions. Specifications and other requirements of the NIB. 
"Sealed bid" means a bid which has been submitted in a sealed enveloped to prevent its contents from being revealed or known before the deadline for the submission of all bids required on formal bids. 
"Sole source" means an award for a commodity or service to the only reasonably known capable supplier due to the unique nature of the requirement, the supplier, or market conditions. 
"Specifications" means a description of what the purchaser seeks to buy or accomplish and consequently, what a bidder must be responsive to in order to be considered for award of a contract. A specification may be a description of the physical or functional characteristics, or the nature of a supply or service. It may include a description of any requirements for inspecting, testing, or preparing a supply or service item for delivery. 
"Split" means to divide a purchase into two or more parts in order to void the requirements of the purchasing policy. 
"Supplies" means office supplies, janitorial supplies, materials, goods, tools or other commodities used in the general conduct of the city's business, excepting supplies or materials for a public work which is regulated under the Public Contract Code section 20160, et seq. 
"Surplus property" means any city personal property that is no longer needed or useable by the holding department. 
"Vendor" means a supplier of goods or services. 
"Warranty" means the representation that something is true. Not to be confused with "guarantee." A representation of utility, condition and durability made by a bidder or offeror for product offered. 
(Ord. No. 021-2012, § 1, 8-23-12; Ord. No. 024-2012, § 1(d), 11-11-12)  
2.24.120 - Violation. 
A violation of this Chapter 2.24 punishable under Chapter 1.20 of the McFarland Municipal Code shall occur only if the violation is a knowing and willful violation, and any such violation shall constitute an infraction punishable as described in Section 1.20.010(C) and Section 1.20.010(D). 
(Ord. No. 021-2012, § 1, 8-23-12)  
Chapter 2.28 - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
 
2.28.010 - Qualification for state aid. 
The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state under the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4, of the California Penal Code. 
(Ord. 63 §1, 1961)  
2.28.020 - Recruitment and training standards. 
Pursuant to Sections 13510(c) and 13525 of said Chapter 1, the McFarland police department will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the commission of peace officer standards and training. 
(Ord. 63 §2, 1961) 
(Ord. No. 003-2010, § 1, 4-8-10)  
2.28.030 - Training of public safety dispatchers. 
The commission on peace officer standards and training and its representatives may make such inquiries as deemed necessary to ascertain that the public safety dispatcher personnel of the McFarland police department adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 003-2010, § 1, 4-8-10)  
Chapter 2.30 - POLICE PROTECTIVE SERVICES 
 
2.30.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the funding of police protective services pursuant to Chapter 2.5, Part 1, Division 2, Title 5 of the Government Code, commencing with Section 53311 and otherwise known as the Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982 and Article 16, Chapter 4, Part 1, Division 2, Title 5 of the Government Code commencing with Section 53970 for establishing police and fire protection funds. 
(Ord. No. 015-2011, § 1, 11-10-11)  
2.30.020 - Special tax. 
A special tax shall be established as hereinafter described to provide for police protective services to the extent authorized in the statutes described in Section 2.30.010. The special tax shall be imposed on all development for which any fee described in Government Code Sections 66000—66007 or 66013 is payable and as approved by two-thirds of the voters or landowners, as the case may be. The amount of the special tax shall be determined by the cost imposed on police protective services by each development subject to payment of the special tax and such other criteria reasonably related thereto and as approved by resolution or ordinance of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 015-2011, § 1, 11-10-11)  
2.30.030 - Community facilities district. 
The special tax may be levied in a community facilities district formed by city council. Formation of the district shall proceed as follows: 
A.  If there are no properties yet to be taxed, the city council may adopt a resolution of formation establishing the district which shall be called "Community Facilities District No. 1 (Police Services)." 
B.  The facilities to be constructed and services to be provided shall be set forth by amendment to the resolution by adoption of a resolution of intention by the city council at such time as a property or properties are to be annexed into the district. The resolution of intention shall comply in all ways with Government Code sections 53321 et seq. describing notice to the voters and property owners, a public hearing, and the manner of protest. 
C.  The district may include areas of territory that are not contiguous. 
(Ord. No. 015-2011, § 1, 11-10-11)  
2.30.040 - Parcel tax. 
As an alternative to the district described in Section 2.30.030, the special tax may be levied on those properties elsewhere described herein as each such property becomes eligible to be taxed. Each such property shall be included by an ordinance adopted by the city council and amended this ordinance and following the procedures described in Government Code Section 53978. 
(Ord. No. 015-2011, § 1, 11-10-11)  
Chapter 2.32 - DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 
 
2.32.010 - Storage of unclaimed property. 
When lost, abandoned or otherwise unclaimed property, except vehicles subject to registration under the California Vehicle Code, comes into possession of the city police department, the police department may hold or store the same until it is claimed and all just and reasonable charges for saving and storage thereof have been paid. 
(Ord. 70 §1, 1963)  
2.32.020 - Sale of unclaimed property. 
The police department shall hold all unclaimed property in its possession under Section 2.32.010 for a period of six months. If the owner or other person entitled to the possession thereof fails to claim the property within six months after the same comes into the possession of the city police department, the chief of police may sell it to the highest bidder at public auction at the place where the same may be held or stored, first having caused notice of sale to be given at least five days before the time fixed for sale, by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county where the sale is to be held. Any excess in the proceeds of the sale after paying such charges and expenses of sale, including but not limited to the costs of advertising, shall be deposited in the city treasury in the general fund. On payment of the price bid for the property to the highest bidder with a bill of sale stating that the sale is made without warranty and in accordance with this chapter and the provisions of Section 1873 of the California Civil Code. In any case where there is no bid offered for the property, or if the highest bid offered does not exceed the charges for saving, holding and storage and expenses of sale, the same shall become the property of the city as compensation for expenses incurred. 
(Ord. 70 §2, 1963)  
Chapter 2.36 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES 
 
2.36.010 - Existence of state of emergency. 
Whenever riots, general civil disobedience or the threat of the same occur in the city, and it is deemed necessary in order to suppress the riot or act of civil disobedience, or whenever the mayor, or the person designated to act in his behalf as set out in Section 2.36.050, determines that a local emergency exists as a result of mob action or other civil disobedience, or the threat of the same, causing danger of injury to or damages to persons or property, he shall forthwith proclaim in writing the existence of a state of local emergency, and such proclamation or order shall be given widespread publicity and a copy thereof shall posted in at least three public places in the city immediately after the issuance thereof. 
(Ord. 210 §10(part), 1987: Ord. 116 §1, 1970)  
2.36.020 - Proclamation of emergency. 
A.  The proclamation of local emergency provided in this chapter shall become effective immediately upon its issuance and dissemination to the public by appropriate news media. 
B.  The state of local emergency exists from the time the proclamation of emergency is issued until it is duly terminated. 
(Ord. 116 §2, 1970)  
2.36.030 - Rules and regulations. 
After the issuance of a proclamation of local emergency the mayor or his alternate shall have the power to make, issue and enforce rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council. Specifically, he shall have the power to: 
A.  Curfew. 
1.  Order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the city, to the city as a whole, as he deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare. 
2.  "Curfew" is defined as a prohibition against any person or persons walking, running, loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises within the city, excepting persons officially designated to duty with reference to the civil emergency and representatives of news media, physicians, nurses and ambulance operators performing medical services, utility personnel maintaining essential public services and law enforcement officers and personnel, and those specifically authorized by duly designated authority. 
B.  Business Closing. Order the closing of any business establishments anywhere within the city for the period of the emergency, such business to include, but not be limited to, those selling intoxicating liquors, cereal malt beverages, gasoline and firearms. 
C.  Alcoholic Beverages. Order that no persons shall consume any alcoholic beverages in a public street or place which is publicly owned or in any motor vehicle driven or parked thereon which is within a duly restricted area. 
D.  Weapons. Order that no person shall carry or possess any gun, firebomb, knife, rock, bottle, club, brick or weapon, who uses or intends to use the same unlawfully against the person or property of another. 
E.  Traffic Control. Designate any public street, thoroughfare or vehicle parking areas closed to motor vehicles and pedestrian traffic. 
F.  General Authority. Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection of life and property. 
(Ord. 116 §3, 1970)  
2.36.040 - Powers and duties of mayor. 
Once a proclamation of emergency is issued and throughout the state of local emergency the mayor is empowered to: 
A.  Request the governor for all necessary assistance; 
B.  Requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency; 
C.  Control and direct all city personnel and equipment; 
D.  Obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of the life and property of the people, and bind the city for the fair value thereof, and if required, immediately to commandeer the same for public use; 
E.  To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he thinks necessary in the execution of his duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered civil defense and disaster volunteers. 
(Ord. 116 §4, 1970)  
2.36.050 - Order of succession. 
In the event the mayor is absent form the city or otherwise unable to act, the authority hereinafter designated shall devolve as follows: 
A.  Mayor pro tem; 
B.  City manager; 
C.  Anyone authorized to act on his behalf. 
(Ord. 116 §5, 1970) 
(Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
2.36.060 - Termination of emergency. 
Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by an official designated by this chapter, the local emergency shall not remain in effect for a period in excess of seven days unless it has been ratified by the city council. The city council shall review, at least every fourteen days until such local emergency is terminated, the need for continuing the local emergency and shall proclaim the termination of such local emergency at the earliest possible date that conditions warrant. 
(Ord. 210 §10(part), 1987: Ord. 116 §6, 1970)  
2.36.070 - Penalties. 
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or executive order issued pursuant thereto shall be guilty of an offense against the city, and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding one hundred eighty days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 116 §7, 1987)  
Chapter 2.40 - PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
2.40.010 - Established. 
A planning commission for the city is established, with membership, terms of office, powers and duties as provided in this chapter and by the statutes, rules and regulations of the state. 
(Ord. No. 052-2016, § 1, 8-25-16)  
2.40.020 - Appointment of members—Organization. 
The planning commission shall consist of five members, who shall be appointed by the city council. In addition thereto, the city manager shall be ex officio or advisory member, who shall not have the power to vote. 
(Ord. No. 052-2016, § 1, 8-25-16)  
2.40.030 - Residence requirements. 
The members of the planning commission shall be residents and registered voters of the city. 
(Ord. No. 052-2016, § 1, 8-25-16)  
2.40.040 - City council members not eligible. 
No member of the city council shall be eligible for membership on the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 052-2016, § 1, 8-25-16)  
2.40.050 - Term of office. 
The terms of office of all members of the planning commission shall be for four years, with staggered terms to be established by minute order of the city council. The terms of office shall commence on July 1st and shall terminate on June 30th. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the reappointment of any planning commissioner upon the expiration of his or her term of office. All members of the planning commission shall serve at the will of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 052-2016, § 1, 8-25-16)  
2.40.060 - Removal from office. 
Any member of the planning commission may be removed as follows: 
A.  By a majority vote of the city council; or 
B.  By his or her absence from three consecutive regular meetings of the planning commission without cause which shall be deemed to constitute the resignation of the commissioner, and the position shall be declared vacant, and the secretary of the planning commission shall immediately inform the city council of such termination. An absence due to illness or an unavoidable absence from the city, with notice thereof conveyed to the secretary of the planning commission on or before the day of any regular meeting of the commission shall be deemed an absence for cause. 
(Ord. No. 052-2016, § 1, 8-25-16)  
2.40.070 - Vacancy filling. 
If a vacancy occurs otherwise than by expiration of the term, it shall be filled by appointment by the city council for the unexpired portion of the term. The term of the ex officio or advisory members shall correspond to their respective terms of office. 
(Ord. No. 052-2016, § 1, 8-25-16)  
2.40.080 - Meetings. 
The planning commission shall establish the times, places and dates of its meetings, and establish rules and regulations for the conduct thereof. 
(Ord. No. 052-2016, § 1, 8-25-16)  
2.40.090 - Powers and duties. 
The powers and functions of the city planning commission shall be as follows: 
A.  To hold hearings and hear all matters as prescribed in the zoning ordinance; 
B.  To conduct such other hearings as are provided by law, such as, but not limited to, the California Environmental Quality Act and in accordance with its own rules and regulations; 
C.  To report its decisions, findings and recommendations in writing to the city council; 
D.  To consider, formulate and propose surveys, maps and plans designed to provide for, regulate and direct the future growth, development and beautification of the city in order to secure to the city and its inhabitants better sanitation, adequate and suitable parks and open spaces, better transportation facilities, improved public service of all kinds, proper location of public buildings, and to secure a permanent and comprehensive plan for the most economic, healthful and harmonious growth of the city; 
E.  To have prepared and recommend the adoption of a comprehensive long-term general master plan for the physical development of the city; 
F.  To make in its advisory capacity, any and all recommendations to the city council relating to the above matters, including changes or amendments to the master plan or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 052-2016, § 1, 8-25-16)  
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 3.04 - FUND MANAGEMENT 
Sections: 
 
3.04.010 - Treasurer authorized to invest city funds. 
Pursuant to Sections 53607 and 53608 of the Government Code, the authority to invest and reinvest money of the city, to sell or exchange securities so purchased, and to deposit such securities for safekeeping is delegated to the city treasurer. 
(Ord. 128 §1, 1972)  
3.04.020 - Authority to sell, purchase and reinvest. 
The city treasurer is authorized to purchase, at their original sale or after they have been issued, securities which are permissible investments under Sections 53601 and 53635 of the Government Code, as they now read or may hereafter be amended, from money in his custody which is not required for the immediate necessities of the city and as he may deem wise and expedient, and to sell or exchange for other eligible securities and reinvest the proceeds of the securities so purchased. 
(Ord. 128 §2, 1972)  
3.04.030 - Redemptions. 
From time to time the city treasurer shall redeem the securities in which city money has been invested pursuant to Section 3.04.020 so that the proceeds may be applied to the purposes for which the original purchase money was designated or placed in the city treasury. 
(Ord. 128 §3, 1972)  
3.04.040 - City bonds. 
Bonds issued by the city and purchased pursuant to Section 3.04.020 may be canceled either in satisfaction of sinking fund obligations or otherwise; provided, however, that the bonds may be held uncanceled and while so held may be resold. 
(Ord. 128 §4, 1972)  
3.04.050 - Reports to city council. 
The city treasurer shall make a monthly report of all such investments to the city council. 
(Ord. 128 §5, 1972)  
3.04.060 - Deposit of securities. 
The city treasurer is authorized to deposit for safekeeping with a federal or state association (as defined by Section 5102 of the California Financial Code), a trust company or a state or national bank located within the state or with the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco or any branch thereof within the state, or with any Federal Reserve bank or with any state or national bank located in any city designated as a reserve city by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the securities in which the money of the city has been invested pursuant to Section 3.04.020; provided, however, that the city treasurer shall take from such financial institution a receipt for securities so deposited and shall not be responsible for such securities delivered to and receipted by such financial institution until they are withdrawn therefrom by the city treasurer. 
(Ord. 210 §11, 1987: Ord. 128 §6, 1972)  
3.04.070 - Deposit of funds. 
All funds or money belonging to the city shall be deposited to the credit of the city within any bank, savings and loan association or trust company located in the state, and authorized to receive for deposit such money and funds pursuant to state law, determined from time to time by order of the city council. 
(Ord. 196 §1, 1984)  
3.04.080 - Withdrawal of funds. 
All withdrawals upon funds and money deposited as required by Section 3.04.070 shall be made upon warrants drawn upon the city treasury and signed by any two of the following persons: the mayor, the city clerk, or any other member of the city council. The city council may establish by minute order or resolution any preference or order of priority of the foregoing persons in the signing of such warrants. 
(Ord. 196 §2, 1984)  
Chapter 3.08 - SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND 
Sections: 
 
3.08.010 - Fund created-Expenditures. 
In order to comply with the provisions of Article 5 of Chapter 1 of Division 1 of the Streets and Highways Code of the state, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the "special gas tax street improvement fund." All moneys received by the city from the state of California under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code shall be placed in said fund for expenditure therefrom exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to all of the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division 1 of the Streets and Highways Code. 
(Ord. 6 §1, 1957)  
Chapter 3.12 - ASSESSMENT AND TAX COLLECTION 
Sections: 
 
3.12.010 - Transfer of duties to county. 
Pursuant to the authority given by Section 51500 et seq. of the Government Code of the state, the duties of city assessor and tax collector are transferred to the assessor and tax collector of the county. The duties of the city treasurer of the city shall continue to be performed by the city treasurer and are not transferred to the county treasurer by the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 8 §1, 1957)  
Chapter 3.16 - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.16.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance" of the city. It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. 
(Ord. 101 §1, 1967)  
3.16.020 - Tax imposed. 
Except for the exemptions set forth in Chapter 3 of Part 6.7 of Division 2 (commencing with Section 11921 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state) there is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing in which any lands, tenements or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of fifty-five cents for each five hundred dollars or fractional part thereof. 
(Ord. 210 §7(part), 1987: Ord. 101 §2, 1967)  
3.16.030 - Tax liability. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.16.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. 
(Ord. 101 §3, 1967)  
3.16.040 - Exemption-Governmental entities. 
Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof is a party, shall be exempt from any tax imposed by this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title. 
(Ord. 210 §7(part), 1987: Ord. 101 §5, 1967)  
3.16.050 - Exemption-Conveyances. 
A.  Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment: 
1.  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended; 
2.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in sub- division (m) of Section 205 of Title II of the United States Code, as amended; 
3.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title II of the United States Code, as amended; or 
4.  Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected. 
B.  Subdivisions 1 through 4 inclusive of subsection A of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyance occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. 
(Ord. 101 §6, 1967)  
3.16.060 - Exemption-Compliance with SEC orders. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in Subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, but only if: 
A.  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935; 
B.  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; 
C.  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. 
(Ord. 101 §7, 1967)  
3.16.070 - Exemption-Realty held by partnerships. 
A.  In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if: 
1.  Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and 
2.  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
B.  If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
C.  Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(Ord. 101 §8, 1967)  
3.16.080 - Administration. 
The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. 101 §9, 1967)  
3.16.090 - Refunds. 
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 101 §10, 1967)  
Chapter 3.20 - SALES AND USE TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.20.010 - Short title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "uniform local sales and use tax ordinance." 
(Ord. 134 §1, 1973)  
3.20.020 - Rate. 
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter is one percent. 
(Ord. 134 §2, 1973)  
3.20.030 - Operative date. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1974. 
(Ord. 134 §3, 1973)  
3.20.040 - Purpose. 
The city council declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions of this chapter be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
B.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
C.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the state sales and use taxes; 
D.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 134 §4, 1973)  
3.20.050 - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax ordinance; provided, that if this city has not contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 134 §5, 1973)  
3.20.060 - Sales tax. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.20.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. 
(Ord. 134 §6, 1973)  
3.20.070 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places of business at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. 134 §7, 1973)  
3.20.080 - Use tax. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in Section 3.20.020 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. 134 §8, 1973)  
3.20.090 - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. 134 §9, 1973)  
3.20.100 - Limitations on adoption of state law. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "State" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of that code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. 134 §10, 1973)  
3.20.110 - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 134 §11, 1973)  
3.20.120 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
There shall be excluded from the measure of tax: 
A.  The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state. 
C.  The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
D.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
(Ord. 210 §12, 1987: Ord. 134 §12, 1973)  
3.20.130 - Amendments. 
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 134 §15, 1973)  
3.20.140 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. 134 §16, 1973)  
3.20.150 - Violation-Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 134 §17, 1973)  
Chapter 3.24 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.24.010 - Title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance" of the city. 
(Ord. 85 §1, 1965)  
3.24.020 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter. 
A.  "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
B.  "Hotel" means any structure, or any portion of a structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof. 
C.  "Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
D.  "Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior to and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered. 
E.  "Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
F.  "Operator" means the person who is the proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
G.  "Tax administrator" means the city clerk. 
(Ord. 210 §6, 1987; Ord. 85 §2, 1965)  
3.24.030 - Tax imposed. 
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of six percent of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax be paid directly to the tax administrator. 
(Ord. 133 §1, 1973: Ord. 85 §3, 1965)  
3.24.040 - Operator's duties. 
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 85 §5, 1965)  
3.24.050 - Registration. 
Within thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or within thirty days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register the hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from him a "Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate" to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. The certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
A.  The name of the operator; 
B.  The address of the hotel; 
C.  The date upon which the certificate was issued; 
D.  "This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this City. This certificate does not constitute a permit." 
(Ord. 85 §6, 1965)  
3.24.060 - Reporting and remitting. 
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. 
(Ord. 85 §7, 1965)  
3.24.070 - Penalties and interest. 
A.  Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
B.  Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty days following the date on which the tax first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed. 
C.  Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section. 
D.  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
E.  Penalties Merged With Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax in this chapter required to be paid. 
(Ord. 85 §8, 1965)  
3.24.080 - Failure to collect and report tax-Deter- mination by tax administrator. 
If any person fails or refuses to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last-known place of address. Such operator may within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days' written notice in the manner prescribed in this section to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in this section of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.24.090. 
(Ord. 85 §9, 1965)  
3.24.090 - Appeal. 
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of address. The findings of the city council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. 
(Ord. 85 §10, 1965)  
3.24.100 - Records. 
It is the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. 85 §11, 1965)  
3.24.110 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided under subsections B and C of this section provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator. 
B.  An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
C.  A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
D.  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Ord. 85 §12, 1965)  
3.24.120 - Actions to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. 
(Ord. 85 §13, 1965)  
3.24.130 - Violation declared misdemeanor-Penalty. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefor by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.  Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required in this chapter, or to furnish any return to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as stated in subsection A of this section. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as stated in subsection A of this section. 
(Ord. 85 §14, 1965)  
Chapter 3.26 - MCFARLAND MUTUAL WATER COMPANY FRANCHISE 
Sections: 
 
3.26.010 - Grant of franchise. 
The McFarland Mutual Water Company is granted a franchise to use, or to lay and use pipes, ditches, flumes, conduits, and appurtenances for transmitting and distributing water for all purposes, under, along, across, or upon the streets, ways, alleys, and places within the city for a period of one year. 
(Ord. 272 §1(part), 1995)  
3.26.020 - Franchise fee and payment of fee. 
A.  Within three months after the expiration of the calendar year, or fractional calendar year, following the date of the granting of the franchise, and within three months after the expiration of each calendar year thereafter, the McFarland Mutual Water Company (hereinafter "the grantee") shall file with the clerk of the city a verified statement showing in detail the total gross receipts of grantee, its successors, or assigns during the preceding calendar year or fractional calendar year from the sale of the utility service for which the franchise was granted. 
B.  Grantee shall pay to the city within fifteen days after the time for filing its statement of gross receipts as described in subsection A of this section, in lawful money of the United States, a sum equal to two percent of grantee's gross annual receipts arising from its use, operation, or possession of the franchise or one percent of grantee's gross annual receipts derived from the sale within the city limits of the city of the utility service for which the franchise was granted, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. 272 §1(part), 1995)  
3.26.030 - Statutory terms and conditions. 
All of the terms, covenants, and conditions described at Chapter 2 of Division 3 of the California Public Utilities Code commencing with Section 6201 are incorporated in this chapter by this reference as if fully set forth herein verbatim except for Section 6231(c) and grantee is required to comply therewith. Failure of grantee to comply will subject grantee to the damages described in California Public Utilities Code Section 6302. 
(Ord. 272 §1(part), 1995)  
Title 5 - BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 5.04 - BUSINESS LICENSES 
Sections: 
 
5.04.010 - Revenue measure. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes and is not intended for regulation. 
(Ord. 7 §2, 1957)  
5.04.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
A.  "Amusement machine" means any mechanical, electrical, electronic or other machine, apparatus, contrivance or device, which may be operated or played by the placing or deposit therein of a coin, check, slug, ball, token, card or other article, or by paying for the use thereof in advance or after use, involving in its operation or play either skill or chance, including but not limited to pinball machines, bowling game machines, shuffleboard machines, marble game machines, video game machines, or any other similar machine or device. The term "amusement machine" does not include phonographs, jukeboxes or other music machines. 
B.  "Arcade" means any business with a fixed place of business which maintains on the premises four or more amusement machines available for use and play by the public generally or by patrons of such business, whether the business of arcade is conducted as a single business or in conjunction with another business. 
C.  "Business" includes professions, trades and occupations and all and every kind of calling whether or not carried on for profit. 
D.  "Distributor" means any person engaged in the business of selling, renting or placing on consignment or on commission basis or otherwise with any person any amusement machine in or at any place of business in the city. 
E.  "Gross receipts" includes the total of amounts actually received or receivable from sales and the total amounts actually received or receivable for the performance of any act or service, of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise. Included in "gross receipts" shall be all receipts, cash, credits, and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever. Excluded from "gross receipts" shall be the following: 
1.  Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales; 
2.  Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and which property may later be sold; 
3.  Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser; 
4.  Such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers upon rescission of the contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit; 
5.  Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected, provided the agent or trustee has furnish the collector with the names and addresses of the others and the amounts paid to them; 
6.  As to a prime contractor or subcontractor to which Section 7108.5 of the California Business and Professions Code applies, the amounts received on account of the work performed by subcontractors, to the extent of each subcontractor's interest within. 
7.  As to a real estate agent or broker, the sales price of real estate sold for the account of others except that portion which represents commission or other income to the agent or broker; 
8.  As to a retail gasoline dealer, a portion of his receipts from the sale of motor vehicle fuels equal to the motor vehicle fuel license tax imposed by and previously paid under the provisions Part 2 of the Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California; 
9.  As to a retail gasoline dealer, the special motor fuel tax imposed by Section 4041 of Title 26 of the United States Code if paid by the dealer or collected by him from the consumer or purchaser; 
10.  Receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable deposits forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded; 
11.  As to a public utility operating in the city under a franchise or franchises from the city and which makes franchise payments to the city, that portion of gross receipts used in calculating the franchise fees. 
F.  "Person" includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts, business or common law trusts, societies and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city other than as an employee. 
G.  "Residential property rental" means the business of managing, operating or renting any apartment house, duplex, hotel, motel, mobile home park, rooming or boardinghouse with two or more residential units. For purpose hereof, the number of residential units aforesaid shall exclude that unit, if any, occupied by the applicant; provide, however, that the management, operation or rental of three or less residential units shall not be deemed a residential property rental for the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 190 §1, 1982; Ord. 7 §1, 1957) 
(Ord. No. 063-2017, § 2(A), 1-27-17; Ord. No. 064-2017, § 2(A), 2-9-17; Ord. No. 075-2017, § 3, 11-9-17; Ord. No. 005-2018, § 1(A), 6-14-18)  
5.04.030 - Other ordinances not affected. 
Persons required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any business under this chapter shall not be relieved from the payment of any license tax for the privilege of doing such business required under any other ordinance of the city, and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of other ordinances. 
(Ord. 7 §3, 1957)  
5.04.040 - License required. 
There are imposed upon the businesses, trades, professions, callings and occupations specified in this chapter license taxes in the amounts hereinafter prescribed. It shall be unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business, profession, trade, calling or occupation in the city without first having procured a license from the city so to do or without complying with any of the applicable provisions of this chapter. This section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city if such requirement conflicts with applicable statutes of the United States or the state. Persons not required to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city because of conflict with applicable statutes of the United States or the state shall not be liable for payment of the tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. 210 §3, 1987: Ord. 7 §4, 1957)  
5.04.045 - Commercial cannabis. 
A.  Commercial cannabis activity, whether or not for profit, is prohibited in the city. No person shall establish, operate, maintain, conduct, allow, or engage in commercial cannabis activity anywhere within the city. 
B.  No license shall be issued for any commercial cannabis activity in the city. The city shall also not issue any business license for any activity for which a state license is required under the MAUCRSA. The city shall also not issue any local license to a non-profit entity pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 26070.5. 
C.  To the extent not already prohibited by subsection A above, all deliveries of cannabis or cannabis products to or from any location are expressly prohibited. No person shall conduct or perform any delivery of any cannabis or cannabis products, which delivery either originates or terminates within the city. Nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from transporting cannabis through the jurisdictional limits of the city for delivery or distribution to a person located outside the city, where such transport does not involve delivery or distribution within the jurisdictional limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 063-2017, § 2(A), 1-27-17; Ord. No. 064-2017, § 2(A), 2-9-17; Ord. No. 075-2017, § 4, 11-9-17)  
5.04.050 - Branch establishments. 
A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on. Each license shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on any business or businesses at said location. 
(Ord. 20 §1, 1958: Ord. 7 §5, 1957)  
5.04.060 - Exemptions. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the state from the payment of such taxes as are prescribed in this chapter. 
B.  None of the license taxes provided for by this chapter shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden on interstate commerce. In any case where a license tax is believed by a licensee or applicant for a license to place an undue burden upon such commerce, he may apply to the city clerk for an adjustment of the tax so that it will not be discriminatory or unreasonable as to such commerce. Such application may be made before, at, or within six months after payment of the prescribed license tax. The applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting testimony, show his method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the city clerk may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden on such commerce. The city clerk shall then conduct an investigation, and, after having first obtained the written approval of the city attorney, shall fix as the license tax for the applicant, an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory, or if the license tax has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the license tax so fixed. In fixing the license tax to be charged, the city clerk shall have the power to base the license tax upon any measure which will assure that the license tax assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the license tax as prescribed by this chapter. Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this section shall file a verified statement with the city clerk stating the facts upon which the exemption is claimed. The city clerk shall, upon a proper showing contained in the verified statement, issue a license to such person claiming exemption under this section without payment to the city of the license tax required by this chapter. The city clerk, after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for hearing to a licensee, may revoke any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this section upon information that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided in this section. 
(Ord. 7 §6, 1957)  
5.04.070 - Application, approval and contents of license. 
A.  Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this chapter shall make application for the same to the city clerk of the city. Such application shall be made upon a form provided by the city clerk and shall set forth such information as may be required by the city clerk as necessary to determine properly the amount of the license to paid. 
B.  All applications shall be reviewed by the city of McFarland community development director or his/her designee. All required planning entitlements and permits must be obtained by the applicant prior to approval of a business license application. 
C.  Each business license issued hereunder shall be conditioned upon the following and each licensee shall comply with same: 
1.  All written conditions or limitations imposed upon the permit; 
2.  Payment of all fees required by this chapter; 
3.  Cooperating with the police department and all other departments of the city in connection with the investigation of any criminal activity in or around the business premises and to assist in the investigation thereof; 
4.  The business and premises on which it is conducted shall not be in violation of any local, state, or federal laws or regulations including, without limitation, all laws, rules and regulations within the McFarland Municipal Code. 
D.  A business license shall not be issued or renewed if the property owner or business owner has any outstanding zoning, code enforcement and/or building violations on the subject property. 
E.  Upon approval of the business license application and upon the payment of the prescribed license tax the city clerk shall issue to such person a license which shall contain (i) the name of the person to whom the license is issued, (ii) the business licensed, (iii) the place where such business is to be transacted and carried on, (iv) the date of the expiration of the license, and (v) such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 7 §7, 1957) 
(Ord. No. 073-2017, § 1(A), 12-14-17)  
5.04.080 - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city clerk with respect to the issuance, refusal, to issue such license may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place of hearing such appeal. The city clerk shall give notice to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the U.S. Post Office at McFarland, California, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his last known address. The council shall have authority to determine all questions raised on such appeal. No such determination shall conflict with any substantive provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. 7 §8, 1957) 
(Ord. No. 073-2017, § 1(B), 12-14-17)  
5.04.090 - Licenses not transferable—Change of location. 
No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable; provided, that where a license is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, such license may upon application therefor and paying a fee of fifteen dollars have the license amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such business at some other location to which the business is or is to be moved. 
(Ord. 7 §9, 1957) 
(Ord. No. 005-2018, § 1(B), 6-14-18)  
5.04.100 - Duplicate license. 
A duplicate license may be issued by the city clerk to replace any license previously issued under this chapter which has been lost or destroyed upon the licensee filing statement of such fact, and at the time of filing such statement paying to the city clerk a duplicate license fee of fifteen dollars. 
(Ord. 7 §10, 1957) 
(Ord. No. 005-2018, § 1(C), 6-14-18)  
5.04.110 - Posting and keeping license. 
All licenses must be kept and posted in the following manner: 
A.  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on. 
B.  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license upon his person at all times while transacting and carrying on such business. 
(Ord. 7 §11, 1957)  
5.04.115 - Suspension or revocation. 
A business license may be suspended or revoked, temporarily or permanently, upon the permittee's failure to comply with all written conditions or limitations of the permit or the requirements of Section 5.04.070(C). Upon suspension or revocation of any permit, no other application by the same permittee or his or her agent to carry on a similar business or activity shall be filed for a period of one year from the date of such suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 073-2017, § 1(C), 12-14-17)  
5.04.116 - Appeal of suspension or revocation of permit. 
A suspension or revocation shall be final unless appealed to the city manager by the permittee within ten days after service of written notice of the suspension or revocation on the permittee. The filing of any appeal shall not stay any action to correct any violation of the permittee which may be pending. Any appeal shall be in writing and shall set forth fully the grounds upon which the appeal is based. The city manager shall determine the appeal based on the writings. The city manager shall send notice of his or her decision to the permittee within thirty days of receipt of all of the written materials required by the city manager. The city manager's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 073-2017, § 1(D), 12-14-17)  
5.04.120 - License tax—How and when payable. 
All license fees payable under this chapter shall be due and payable in full as follows: 
A.  Annual licenses: In advance on the first day of July. 
B.  Quarterly license taxes: In advance on the first day of January, April, July and October of each year. 
C.  Monthly licenses: On the first day of each and every month in advance. 
D.  Daily licenses: In advance each day. 
(Ord. 7 §12, 1957)  
5.04.130 - Penalty for failure to pay tax when due. 
For failure to pay a license tax when due, the city clerk shall add a penalty of twenty-five percent of the license tax on the last day of the month after the due date thereof and the penalty and license tax shall bear interest from and after the due date until paid at the rate of twenty-five percent for each month delinquent thereafter providing that the amount of any penalty shall in no event exceed one hundred percent of the amount of the license tax due. 
(Ord. 7 §13, 1957) 
(Ord. No. 005-2018, § 1(D), 6-14-18)  
5.04.140 - License taxes—Rates. 
A.  Every person who commences, conducts, engages in or carries on any business listed hereinafter in this subsection shall pay a business license tax comprised of the base, annually, per event, daily, and/or tax plus the unit tax amount times the number of units calculated, respectively, for each such classification of business as hereinafter specified. 
Business Type 	Annually/Daily/Per Event/ 
Unit Tax Amount 
Administrative office 	$100.00 annually. 
Apartments/rental property 	$65.00 plus $5.00 for each after 4 units. 
Arts and/or crafts fair 	$10.00 per booth/stall. 
Barber shop/beauty salon 	$65.00 per owner and non-employee operator. 
Billboard Structures within the city 	$150.00 annually per structure. 
Christmas tree lot sales operations 	$40.00 per day 
All structures and electrical permit requirements are inspected and approval by the building department and all fire code requirements approved by the fire department. Planning department approval requirement. 
Circus/carnival 	$450.00 for 5 days or less. 
Commercial solicitors/peddlers 	$60.00 per person, per day, $90.00 for background check and live scan required. All solicitors/peddlers must comply with the conditions described in municipal code Chapter 5.32. 
Curb Painters 	$30.00 per day. Requirements: Obtain insurance in the amount of $100,000.00 for public liability from an insurance company. Obtain a Surety Bond from a bonding company or insurance company in the amount of $500.00, or cash deposit in that amount can be made to the city of McFarland. The permit must be in possession of the person performing the work and available for inspection on demand. 
Exhibitions (i.e. car show) 	$10.00 per vehicle, per day. 
Family child care over 8 children 	$100.00 annually plus home occupation permit required and approved by the planning department and permit from the state of California to operate. See Res. No. 2014-0201 for fee. 
Family child care of 8 or less children 	Health and Safety Code Section 1597.45: No local jurisdiction shall impose any business license, fee or tax for the privilege of operating a small daycare home. 
Farmers market 	$10.00 per booth/stall. 
Food vending vehicles — Municipal code Chapter 5.44 	$200.00 Annually, $90.00 for background check required on owner/operator, $25.00 for each vehicle inspection, and live scan required on each owner/operator. Must present a valid Kern County Environmental Health Permit. Liability insurance required, see municipal code Section 5.44.060. Must comply with the additional conditions described in municipal code Chapter 5.32. 
Fortunetelling, palmist, clairvoyant 	$500.00 annually, plus investigation filing fee of $500.00, plus the fee charged by Department of Justice for fingerprint processing. Must comply with additional requirements in municipal code Chapter 5.28. 
Hotel, motel, lodging houses 	$65.00 annually, plus $5.00 per room after 4. 
Ice cream vending vehicle 	$200.00 Annually, $90.00 for background check required on owner/operator, $25.00 for each vehicle inspection, and live scan required on each owner/operator. Must present a valid Kern County Environmental Health Permit. Liability insurance required see municipal code Section 5.44.060. Must comply with additional conditions described in municipal code Chapter 5.32. 
Itinerant vendor 	$60.00 per person, per day, $90.00 for background check and live scan required. All solicitors/peddlers/itinerant vendors must comply with the conditions described in Municipal Code Chapter 5.32. 
Interpreter 	$65.00 annually. 
Laundromats 	$30.00 for the first machine, $10.00 for each additional machine per year. Maximum $200.00 annually. 
Spas-medi/pedi 	$65.00 per owner and non-employee operator. 
Taxi-cab 	$65.00 per vehicle. $90.00 for background check required on each owner/driver, $25.00 for each vehicle inspection, and live scan required on each owner/driver. Must also comply with all requirements stated in municipal code Chapter 5.52. 
Duplicate (lost or damaged business license) — Municipal code Section 5.04.100 	$15.00 
Change location of business—Municipal code Section 5.04.090 	$15.00 
 
B.  Every person who engages in any business within the city except those businesses set forth in subsection A of this Section 5.04.140 shall pay an annual business tax based upon gross receipts at the rates to be calculated to the nearest cent as set forth below: 
City of McFarland 
License Fee Schedule 
Annual Gross Receipts 
1.  Base fee on all business license: Fifteen dollars. 
2.  California state fee on all business license: Four dollars. May be revised by state of California. 
For the sales and service or the rendering of any service whatsoever. 
FROM 	TO 	FEE DUE 
ZERO 	$30,000 	$65.00 
$30,001.00 	$50,000.00 	$75.00 
$50,001.00 	$75,000.00 	$100.00 
$75,001.00 	$100,000.00 	$125.00 
$100,001.00 	$175,000.00 	$150.00 
$175.001.00 	$250,000.00 	$175.00 
$250,001.00 	$500,000.00 	$225.00 
$500,001.00 	$750,000.00 	$300.00 
$750,001.00 	$1,000,000.00 	$450.00 
$1,000,001.00 	$1,500,000.00 	$500.00 
$1,500,001.00 	$2,000,000.00 	$600.00 
$2,000,001.00 	$3,000,000.00 	$700.00 
$3,000,001.00 	$4,000,000.00 	$800.00 
$4,000,001.00 	$5,000,000.00 	$900.00 
$5,000,001.00 	$10,000,000.00 	$1,000.00 
$10,000,001.00 	and up 	$2,000.00 
 
Note: You may report your gross receipts on a calendar or fiscal basis as long as it is for a full year. Please report by the same method each year. If you have been doing business in the city of McFarland for less than twelve months, enter an estimate of your gross receipts for twelve months. 
C.  The business license tax and gross receipts may be modified from time to time by city council resolution. 
(Ord. 276 §1(part), 1996; Ord. 210 §1(b), 1987; Ord. 190 §2, 1982; Ord. 89 §1, 1965: Ord. 60 §1, 1961: Ord. 50 §1, 1961; Ord. 29 §1, 1958; Ord. 7 §14, 1957) 
(Ord. No. 005-2018, § 1(E), 6-14-18)  
5.04.150 - Vehicle deliveries. 
Every person not having a fixed place of business within the city who is not subject to the provisions of Section 5.04.140, who delivers goods, wares or merchandise of any kind by vehicles in the city or who provides any service by the use of vehicles in the city shall pay a license tax of one hundred fifty dollars per year. 
(Ord. 276 §1(part), 1996; Ord. 89 §2, 1965: Ord. 7 §15, 1957) 
(Ord. No. 005-2018, § 1(F), 6-14-18)  
5.04.160 - Other outside businesses—No fixed location. 
Every person not having a fixed place of business within the city who engages in business within the city and is not subject to the provisions of Sections 5.04.140 or 5.04.150, shall pay a license tax of one hundred fifty dollars per year. 
(Ord. 89 §3, 1965: Ord. 7 §16, 1957) 
(Ord. No. 005-2018, § 1(G), 6-14-18)  
5.04.170 - Other outside businesses—Fixed location. 
Every person who engages in business at a fixed place of business within the city and is not subject to the provisions of Section 5.04.140 shall pay an annual license tax of fifty dollars. 
(Ord. 276 §1(part), 1996; Ord. 7 §17, 1957)  
5.04.180 - Proration. 
Whenever a business shall be first commenced during the year or any quarter thereof, the license tax shall be prorated for the months remaining in the license period after the first day of the month in which the business is commenced. Provided, however, that there shall be no proration of daily licenses and there shall be no proration of licenses for any person who does not have an established place of business in the city and provided further, that the minimum license fee under any proration shall be fifteen dollars. 
(Ord. 66 §1, 1962: Ord. 60 §2, 1961: Ord. 7 §19, 1957) 
(Ord. No. 005-2018, § 1(H), 6-14-18)  
5.04.190 - Waiver. 
The licensing of any business, occupation or activity carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes from which profit is not derived either directly or indirectly by any person, or to the conducting of any entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture on scientific, historical, literary, religious or moral subjects whenever the receipts from such entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture go to any church, school, or to any religious or benevolent purpose within the city, or to any federal, military, fraternal or local chamber of commerce within the city, may be waived by the city council provided an application is made therefor with the city clerk of the city at least ten days prior to a regular city council meeting. 
(Ord. 117 §1, 1970: Ord. 7 §20, 1957) 
(Ord. No. 005-2018, § 1(I), 6-14-18)  
5.04.200 - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the city clerk of the city and he is by the ordinance codified in this section directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter, and the chief of police shall render such assistance in the enforcement of this chapter as may from time to time be required by the city clerk or the city council. The city clerk in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him under this chapter shall examine or cause to be examined all places of business in the city to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter have been complied with. The city clerk and each and all of his assistants and any police officer shall have the power and authority to enter, free of charge, and at any reasonable time, any place of business required to be licensed in this chapter, and demand an exhibition of its license. Any person having such license theretofore issued, in his possession or under his control, who wilfully fails to exhibit the same on demand shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties provided by this chapter. It shall be the duty of the city clerk to cause a complaint to be filed against any and all persons found to be violating any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 7 §21, 1957)  
5.04.210 - Revocation. 
The city manager or his designee may revoke a business license if the business should be registered with the board of equalization and collecting and forwarding the sales tax accordingly but fails to do so. 
(Ord. No. 005-2018, § 1(J), 6-14-18)  
5.04.220 - Error by city not to prevent collection of due and payable tax. 
In no case shall any mistake made by the director in stating the amount of a license tax prevent or prejudice the collection by the city of what shall be actually due from any carrying on a business subject to a license tax under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 005-2018, § 1(J), 6-14-18)  
5.04.230 - Statements and records—Auditing—Examination. 
A.  No statements shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder. Such statement and each of the several items therein contained shall be subject to audit and verification by the collector, his deputies, or authorized employees of the city, who are hereby authorized to examine, audit, and inspect such books and records of any certificate holder or applicant for business tax certificate, as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or ascertain the amount of business tax due. 
B.  All persons subject to the provisions of this chapter shall keep complete records of business transactions, including sales, receipts, purchases, and other expenditures, and shall retain all such records for examination by the collector. Such records shall be maintained for a period of at least five years. No person required to keep records under this section shall refuse to allow authorized representatives of the collector to examine the records at reasonable times and places. 
(Ord. No. 005-2018, § 1(J), 6-14-18)  
5.04.240 - Information confidential. 
A.  It is unlawful for the collector or any person having an administrative duty under the provisions of this chapter to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain a business tax certificate, or pay a business tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof set forth in any statement or application, or to permit any statement or application, or copy of either, or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person. Provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent: 
B.  The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by, another city official, employee, or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this chapter, or collecting taxes imposed hereunder; 
C.  The disclosure of information to, or the examination of records by, federal or state officials, or the tax officials of another city or county, or city and county, if a reciprocal arrangement exists, or to a grand jury or court of law, upon subpoena; 
D.  The disclosure of information and results of examination of records of particular taxpayers, or relating to particular taxpayers, to a court of law in a proceeding brought to determine the existence or amount of any business tax liability of the particular taxpayers of the city; 
E.  The disclosure after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer himself, or to his successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to the items included in the measure of any paid tax, any unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties; further provided, however, that the city attorney approves each such disclosure and that the collector may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this paragraph when in his opinion the public interest would suffer thereby; 
F.  The disclosure of the names and addresses of persons to whom business tax certificates have been issued, and the general type or nature of their business; 
G.  The disclosure by way of public meeting or otherwise of such information as may be necessary to the city council in order to permit it to be fully advised as to the facts when a taxpayer files a claim for refund of business taxes, or submits an offer of compromise with regard to a claim asserted against him by the city for business taxes, or when acting upon any other matter; 
H.  The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the city; 
I.  The disclosure of information and examination of records of any business tax certificate holder who is a litigant in any lawsuit involving the city and such information is relevant to the issues in such lawsuit. 
(Ord. No. 005-2018, § 1(J), 6-14-18)  
5.04.250 - Failure to file statement or corrected statement. 
If any person fails to file any required statement within the time prescribed, or if after demand therefor made by the collector he fails to file a corrected statement, or if any person subject to the tax imposed by this chapter fails to apply for a business tax certificate, the collector may determine the amount of business tax due from such person by means of such information as he may be able to obtain. In case of failure to apply for a business tax certificate, a twenty-five percent penalty shall be added to the tax due. If the collector is not satisfied with the information supplied in statements or applications filed, he may determine the amount of any business tax due by means of any information he may be able to obtain. If such a determination is made the collector shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at McFarland, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at his last known address. Such person may, within fifteen days after the mailing or serving of such notice, make application in writing to the collector for a hearing on the amount of the business tax. If such application is made, the collector shall cause the matter to be set for hearing within thirty days before the city council. The collector shall give at least ten days' notice to such person of the time and place of hearing in the manner prescribed above for serving notices of assessment. The council shall consider all evidence produced, and shall make findings thereon, which shall be final. Notice of such findings shall be served upon the applicant in the manner prescribed above for serving notices of assessment. 
(Ord. No. 005-2018, § 1(J), 6-14-18)  
5.04.260 - Amount to be paid fixed by chapter. 
The amount of licenses taxes to be paid to the city by any person engaged in or carrying on any profession, trade, calling, occupation or business hereinafter designated is hereby fixed and established by separate resolution from time to time by the city council. Such license tax shall be paid by every person engaged in carrying on or maintaining any such profession, trade, occupation, calling or business in the city. 
(Ord. No. 005-2018, § 1(J), 6-14-18)  
5.04.270 - License tax a debt. 
The amount of any license tax and penalty and interest imposed by this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent license tax and penalties and interest. 
(Ord. 7 §22, 1957) 
(Ord. No. 005-2018, § 1(L), 6-14-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 005-2018, § 1(L), adopted June 14, 2018, renumbered § 5.04.210 as § 5.04.270.  
5.04.280 - Remedies cumulative. 
All remedies prescribed under this chapter shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 7 §23, 1957) 
(Ord. No. 005-2018, § 1(L), 6-14-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 005-2018, § 1(L), adopted June 14, 2018, renumbered § 5.04.220 as § 5.04.280.  
5.04.290 - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of the city any material fact in procuring the license or permit provided for in this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 7 §24, 1957) 
(Ord. No. 005-2018, § 1(L), 6-14-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 005-2018, § 1(L), adopted June 14, 2018, renumbered § 5.04.230 as § 5.04.290.  
Chapter 5.08 - ARCADES 
Sections: 
 
5.08.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
A.  "Amusement machine" means any mechanical, electrical, electronic or other machine, apparatus, contrivance or device, which may be operated or played by the placing or deposit therein of a coin, check, slug, ball, token, card or other article, or by paying for the use thereof in advance or after use, involving in its operation or play either skill or chance, including but not limited to pinball machines, bowling game machines, shuffleboard machines, marble game machines, video game machines, or any other similar machine or device. The term "amusement machine" does not include phonographs, jukeboxes or other music machines. 
B.  "Arcade" means any business with a fixed place of business which maintains on the premises four or more amusement machines for use and play by the public generally or by patrons of such business, whether the business of arcade is conducted as a single business or in conjunction with another business. 
(Ord. 189 §1, 1982)  
5.08.020 - Alcoholic beverages prohibited—Exception. 
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or consumed on the business premises of an arcade unless the arcade business is conducted in conjunction with a restaurant licensed to serve alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. 189 §2, 1982)  
5.08.030 - Location of amusement machines. 
All amusement machines available for use and play in an arcade shall be located together in one area, readily visible and accessible to the public and all patrons of the business. 
(Ord. 189 §3, 1982)  
5.08.040 - Adult attendant supervision. 
At all times during the operation of any amusement machine at the business premises of an arcade, an adult attendant (eighteen years of age or older) shall be present to supervise the conduct of all persons present, to maintain proper order and good behavior, and to guard against any conduct which is, or is reasonably likely to be, detrimental to public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. 189 §4, 1982)  
5.08.050 - School hours. 
No person less than eighteen years of age shall be permitted to use or operate, either alone or with other persons, an amusement machine at an arcade between the hours of seven a.m. and four p.m. on any day during which school is in session for and during the academic year of public schools in the city. It shall be the responsibility of the adult attendant and of the person to whom the city license for such arcade business is issued to enforce this regulation. 
(Ord. 189 §5, 1982)  
5.08.060 - Bicycle parking. 
The person to whom a license is issued by the city for an arcade business shall provide adequate parking space for bicycles, either inside or outside the business premises, and shall not permit the parking of bicycles or other obstruction on any portion of the public right-of-way for pedestrians adjoining the business premises. 
(Ord. 189 §6 1982)  
5.08.070 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not exceeding six months, or by both fine and imprisonment. Every day upon which violation of this chapter exists, or continues, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 189 §7, 1982)  
Chapter 5.12 - BINGO 
Sections: 
 
5.12.010 - Authority to provide for bingo for charitable purposes only. 
The city is authorized pursuant to Section 19, Article IV of the California Constitution and Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the state to provide for, and does by the ordinance codified in this chapter, provide for bingo games, but only for charitable purposes in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 162 §1, 1977)  
5.12.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Bingo" means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random; 
B.  "City" means the city of McFarland; 
C.  "City clerk" means the city clerk of the city; D. "City council" means the city council of the city; 
E.  "Chief" means the police chief of the city. 
(Ord. 162 §2, 1977)  
5.12.030 - License required. 
No person, firm, corporation, organization or association shall engage in, carry on, maintain, conduct or cause to be engaged in, carried on, maintained or conducted a bingo game in the city without having first secured a license from the city clerk in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, nor without complying with the regulations contained in this chapter pertaining to the operation of bingo games. 
(Ord. 162 §3, 1977)  
5.12.040 - Organizations eligible to conduct bingo games. 
Organizations exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, and 23701/1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and by mobile home park associations and senior citizens' organizations, provided that the proceeds of such games are used only for charitable purposes, are eligible to apply to the city for a license to conduct bingo games in the city under the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 162 §4, 1977)  
5.12.050 - Application for license. 
Applications for a license to conduct bingo games pursuant to this chapter shall be executed under penalty of perjury and submitted to the city clerk on forms to be obtained from the city clerk upon payment, to the city clerk, of the license fee prescribed in subsection E of Section 5.12.070. The license issued shall be for a term of one year from the date of issuance, subject to renewal and annual fee. 
(Ord. 162 §5, 1977)  
5.12.060 - Applicant must be qualified. 
No license shall be issued to any organization unless such applicant is an eligible organization under Section 5.12.040 and its application conforms to the requirements, terms and conditions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 162 §6, 1977)  
5.12.070 - Contents of application. 
An application for a license shall contain the following: 
A.  The name of the applicant organization and a statement that the applicant is an eligible organization under Section 5.12.040; 
B.  The names and signatures of at least two officers of the applicant organization; 
C.  The particular property within the city, including the street number, owned or leased by the applicant, used by such applicant for an office or for the performance of the purpose for which the applicant is organized, on which property bingo games will be conducted, together with the occupancy of such place; 
D.  Proposed days of week and hours of day for conduct of bingo games; 
E.  The annual license fee fixed by the city council by resolution shall accompany the application; 
F.  The applicant shall also submit, with its application, evidence that it is an organization described in Section 5.12.040; 
G.  A statement that the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the state and this chapter, as they may be amended from time to time, and agrees that the license to conduct bingo games may be revoked by the city upon violation of any such provisions; 
F.  The application shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury. 
(Ord. 162 §7, 1977)  
5.12.080 - Investigation of applicant. 
Upon receipt of the completed application, the city clerk shall make an investigation to determine if all of the statements in the application are true and may refer the application to other interested departments of the city, including but not limited to, the planning department, the director of building inspection, the city's health officer and the Kern County fire department to determine if the appropriate zoning ordinances and regulations, building code ordinances, health ordinances and regulations, and the provisions of the Uniform Fire Code have been or will be complied with. 
(Ord. 162 §8, 1977)  
5.12.090 - Contents of license. 
Upon being satisfied that the applicant is fully qualified under the law to conduct bingo games in the city, the city clerk shall issue a license to the applicant which shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name and nature of the organization to whom the license is issued. 
B.  The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted. 
C.  The occupancy capacity of the room in which the bingo games are to be conducted. 
D.  The date of the expiration of the license. 
E.  Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 162 §9, 1977)  
5.12.100 - Posting of license. 
An organization licensed pursuant to this chapter shall not conduct or permit to be conducted a bingo game unless the license is posted in a conspicuous place during the conduct of any bingo game. The licensee shall produce and exhibit the same, when applying for renewal thereof, and whenever requested to do so by any peace officer or officer authorized to issue, inspect or collect licenses. 
(Ord. 162 §10, 1977)  
5.12.110 - Suspension pending hearing—Misdemeanor to continue after suspension—Revocation. 
A.  Whenever it appears to the chief that the licensee is conducting a bingo game in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the chief shall have the authority to temporarily suspend the conduct of the bingo game until such violations cease and/or summarily suspend the license and order the licensee to immediately cease and desist any further operation of any bingo game. 
B.  The order issued under subsection A of this section shall also notify the licensee that it shall have thirty days from the date of such order to request a hearing to determine whether such license shall be revoked. Failure to request, in writing, such hearing before the city council within the thirty-day period, shall result in revocation of the license. 
C.  Any organization whose license is suspended under this section shall not conduct any bingo games in the city until such time as the city council, on appeal, determines to overrule the decision of the chief. 
D.  Any person who continues to conduct a bingo game after any summary suspension thereof under subsection A of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 162 §11, 1977)  
5.12.120 - Revocation of license—Alternative procedure. 
A.  Whenever it appears to the city council that the licensee is conducting bingo games in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or that the license was obtained by fraudulent representation and no summary suspension is ordered under Section 5.12.110, the license may be revoked. 
B.  Any organization whose license is revoked under this section shall not conduct any bingo games in the city until such time as the city council, on appeal, determines to reinstate the license. 
(Ord. 162 §12, 1977)  
5.12.130 - Appeal of suspension or revocation to city council. 
A.  Any holder of a license whose license is suspended or revoked under this chapter shall have the right, within thirty days after receiving notice in writing of the suspension or revocation, to file a written appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall set forth the specific ground or grounds on which it is based. The city council shall hold a hearing on the appeal within thirty days after its receipt by the city, or at a time thereafter agreed upon and shall cause the appellant to be given at least ten days' written notice of such hearing. At the hearing the appellant or its authorized representative shall have the right to present evidence and a written or oral argument, or both, in support of its appeal. The determination of the city council on the appeal shall be final. 
B.  Any organization whose license is finally revoked may not apply for a license to conduct bingo games in the city for a period of one year from the date of such revocation; provided, however, if the ground for revocation is cancellation of the organization's tax exempt status pursuant to the laws of the state, such organization may again apply for a license upon proof of reinstatement of the exemption. 
(Ord. 162 §13, 1977)  
5.12.140 - Maximum prize amount. 
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. 
(Ord. 162 §14, 1977)  
5.12.150 - Profits to be kept separately. 
A.  With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes. With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this chapter all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows: 
1.  Such proceeds may be used for prizes. 
2.  A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed twenty percent of the proceeds before the deduction for prizes, or one thousand dollars per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property, overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment, administrative expenses, security equipment and security personnel. 
3.  Such proceeds may be used to pay the license fees. 
B.  The licensee shall keep a full and accurate record of the income and expenses received and disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct, promotion, supervision and any other phase of bingo games which are authorized by this chapter. The city, by and through its authorized officers, shall have the right to examine and audit such record at any reasonable time and the licensee shall fully cooperate with the city by making such record available. 
(Ord. 210 §16(part), 1987: Ord. 162 §15, 1977)  
5.12.160 - Financial interest in licensee only. 
No individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity except the licensee shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of a bingo game. 
(Ord. 162 §16, 1977)  
5.12.170 - Exclusive operation by licensee. 
A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the licensee organization, except for the security personnel employed by the organization. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game; however, the security personnel employed by the organization may be paid from the revenues of the bingo game. Only the licensee shall operate such game or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. 
(Ord. 210 §16(part), 1987: Ord. 162 §17, 1977)  
5.12.180 - Games to be open to public. 
All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to members of the licensee organization. 
(Ord. 162 §18, 1977)  
5.12.190 - Attendance limited to occupancy capacity. 
Notwithstanding that bingo games are open to the public, attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which such game is conducted as determined by the Kern County fire department and city building inspection department in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. The licensee shall not reserve seats or space for any person. 
(Ord. 162 §19, 1977)  
5.12.200 - Games to be conducted only on property of licensee. 
A licensee shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, or property whose use is donated to the organization, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. The license issued under this chapter shall authorize the holder thereof to conduct bingo games only on such property, the address of which is stated in the application. In the event the described property ceases to be used as an office and as a place for the performance of the purposes for which the licensee is organized, the license shall have no further force or effect. A new license may be obtained by an eligible organization, upon application under this chapter, when it again owns, leases or has donated property used by it for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. 
(Ord. 210 §16(part), 1987: Ord. 162 §20, 1977)  
5.12.210 - Participation by minors prohibited. 
No person under the age of eighteen years shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. 
(Ord. 162 §21, 1977)  
5.12.220 - Use of credit prohibited. 
No licensee shall issue chips or money to a patron on credit or loan (including but not limited to IOU's and checks to be held) or allow any patron to play on credit. 
(Ord. 162 §22, 1977)  
5.12.230 - Intoxicated persons not to participate. 
No person who is in a state of intoxication shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game. 
(Ord. 162 §23, 1977)  
5.12.240 - Hours of operation. 
No licensee shall conduct any bingo game more than six hours out of any twenty-four-hour period. No bingo game shall be conducted between the hours of two a.m. and nine a.m. of any day. 
(Ord. 162 §24, 1977)  
5.12.250 - Participant must be present. 
No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. 
(Ord. 162 §25, 1977)  
5.12.260 - Violation—City may enjoin. 
The city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a violation of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code or this chapter. 
(Ord. 162 §26, 1977)  
5.12.270 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Every day upon which violation of this chapter exists, or continues, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 162 §29, 1977)  
Chapter 5.16 - CABLE TELEVISION 
Sections: 
 
5.16.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. 
A.  "CATV" means a community antenna television system as defined in this section. 
B.  "City" means the city of McFarland, a municipal corporation of the state of California, in its present incorporated form, or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. 
C.  "Community antenna television system" means a system of antennnas, coaxial cables, wires, wave guides or other conductors, equipment or facilities designed, constructed or used for the purpose of providing television or FM radio service by cable or through its facilities as herein contemplated. "CATV" does not mean or include the transmission of any special program or event for which a separate and distinct charge is made to the subscriber in the manner commonly known and referred to as "pay television." 
D.  "Council" means the present governing body of the city or any future board constituting the legislative body of the city. 
E.  "Franchise" means and includes any authorization granted under this chapter in terms of a franchise, privilege, permit, license or otherwise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system in the city. Any such authorization, in whatever term granted, does not mean or include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city in accordance with Chapter 5.04 of this code. 
F.  "Grantee" means the person, firm or corporation to whom or which a franchise, as defined in this section, is granted by the council under this chapter, and the lawful successor, transferee or assignee of that person, firm or corporation. 
G.  "Gross annual receipts" means any and all compensation and other consideration in any form whatever and any contributing grant or subsidy received directly or indirectly by a grantee from subscribers or users in payment for television or FM radio signals or service received within the city. "Gross annual receipts" does not include any taxes on services furnished by the grantee imposed directly on any subscriber or user by any city, state or other governmental unit and collected by the grantee for such governmental unit. 
H.  "Property of grantee" means all property owned, installed or used by a grantee in the conduct of a CATV business in the city under the authority of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter. 
I.  "Street" means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway or drive, now or hereafter existing as such within the city. 
J.  "Subscriber" means any person or entity receiving for any purpose the CATV service of a grantee. 
(Ord. 97 §1, 1967)  
5.16.020 - Exclusive use of telephone facilities. 
When and in the event that the grantee of any franchise granted under this chapter constructs, operates and maintains a CATV system exclusively through telephone facilities constructed, operated and maintained pursuant to a state-granted telephone franchise and offers satisfactory proof that in no event during the life of such franchise shall the grantee make any use of the streets independently of such telephone company facilities, the grantee shall be required to comply with all of the provisions of this chapter as a "licensee" and in such event whenever the term "grantee" is used in this chapter it shall be deemed to mean and include "licensee." 
(Ord. 97 §2, 1967)  
5.16.030 - Franchise to operate. 
A.  A nonexclusive franchise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system within all or any portion of the city may be granted by the council to any person, firm or corporation, whether operating under an existing franchise or not, who or which offers to furnish and provide such system under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
B.  No provision of this chapter may be deemed or construed as to require the granting of a franchise when in the opinion of the council it is in the public interest to restrict the number of grantees to one or more. 
(Ord. 97 §3, 1967)  
5.16.040 - Uses permitted by grantee. 
A.  Any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall authorize and permit the grantee to engage in the business of operating and providing a CATV system in the city, and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along any public street, such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the CATV system; and in addition, so to use, operate and provide similar facilities or properties rented or leased from other persons, firms or corporations, including but not limited to any public utility or other grantee franchised or permitted to do business in the city. 
B.  No franchise granted under this chapter shall be construed as a franchise, permit or license to transmit any special program or event for which a separate and distinct charge is made to the subscriber in the manner commonly known and referred to as "pay television," and no grantee shall directly or indirectly install, maintain or operate on any television set a coin box or any other device or means for collection of money for individual programs. 
C.  The grantee may make a charge to subscribers for installation or connection to its CATV system and a fixed monthly charge as filed and approved as provided in this chapter. No increase in the rates and charges to subscribers, as set forth in the schedule filed and approved with the grantee's application, may be made without the prior approval of the council expressed by resolution. 
(Ord. 97 §4, 1967)  
5.16.050 - Duration of franchise. 
A.  No franchise granted by the council under this chapter shall be for a term longer than twenty years following the date of acceptance of the franchise by the grantee or the renewal thereof. 
B.  Any franchise granted under this chapter may be terminated prior to its date of expiration by the council in the event that the council finds, after thirty days' notice of any proposed termination and public hearing, that: 
1.  The grantee has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter or has, by act or omission, violated any term or condition of any franchise or permit issued under this chapter; or 
2.  Any provision of this chapter has become invalid or unenforceable and the council further finds that such provision constitutes a consideration material to the grant of the franchise; or 
3.  The city acquires the CATV system property of the grantee. 
(Ord. 97 §5, 1967)  
5.16.060 - Franchise payments. 
A.  Any grantee granted a franchise under this chapter shall pay to the city, during the life of the franchise, a sum equal to five percent or more of the gross annual receipts of the grantee. Such payment by the grantee to the city shall be made annually, or as otherwise provided in the grantee's franchise, by delivery of the same to the city clerk. All franchise payments required in this chapter shall be in lieu of any business license, occupation tax or similar levy. 
B.  The grantee shall file with the city, within ninety days after the expiration of any calendar year or portion thereof during which the franchise is in force, a financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant, or person otherwise satisfactory to the council, showing in detail the gross annual receipts, as defined in this chapter, of the grantee during the preceding calendar year or portion thereof. It shall be the duty of the grantee to pay to the city, within fifteen days after the time for filing such statements, the sum hereinabove prescribed or any unpaid balance thereof for the calendar year or portion thereof covered by such statements. 
C.  In any year, or portion thereof, following the first full year service has been provided and during which payments under this section amount to less than four hundred dollars per year, the grantee shall pay to the city as a minimum an amount equal to four hundred dollars per year. 
D.  The city shall have the right to inspect the grantee's records showing the gross receipts from which its franchise payments are computed and the right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid under this chapter. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for further and additional sums payable under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation under this chapter. 
E.  In the event of any holding over after the expiration or other termination of any franchise granted under this chapter without the consent of the city, the grantee shall pay to the city reasonable compensation and damages of not less than one hundred percent of its total gross profits during said period. 
(Ord. 97 §6, 1967)  
5.16.070 - Limitations of franchise. 
A.  Any franchise granted under this chapter shall be nonexclusive. 
B.  No privilege or exemption shall be granted or conferred by any franchise granted under this chapter except those specifically prescribed in this chapter. 
C.  Any privilege claimed under any franchise by the grantee in any street or other public property shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the streets or other public property. 
D.  Any franchise shall be a privilege to be held in personal trust by the original grantee. It cannot in any event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, without the prior consent of the council expressed by resolution, and then only under such conditions as may therein be prescribed. Any such transfer or assignment shall be made only in an instrument in writing, a duly executed copy of which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk within thirty days after any such transfer or assignment. The consent of the council may not be arbitrarily refused; provided, however, the proposed assignee must show financial responsibility and must agree to comply with all provisions of this chapter; and provided further, that no such consent shall be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage or other hypothecation as a whole, to secure an indebtedness. 
E.  Time shall be of the essence of any such franchise granted under this chapter. The grantee shall not be relieved of his obligation to comply promptly with any of the provisions of this chapter or by any failure of the city to enforce prompt compliance. 
F.  Any right or power in, or duty impressed upon, any officer, employee, department or board of the city shall be subject to transfer by the city to any other officer, employee, department or board of the city. 
G.  The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this chapter or of any franchise issued under this chapter or because of its enforcement. 
H.  The grantee shall be subject to all requirements of city ordinances, rules, regulations and specifications heretofore or hereafter enacted or established. 
I.  Any such franchise granted shall not relieve the grantee of any obligation involved in obtaining pole space from any department of the city, a utility company, or from others maintaining poles in the streets. 
J.  Any franchise granted under this chapter shall be in lieu of any and all other rights, privileges, powers, immunities, and authorities owned, possessed, controlled or exercisable by the grantee, or any successor to any interest of grantee, of or pertaining to the construction, operation or maintenance of any CATV system in the city; and the acceptance of any franchise under this chapter shall operate, as between the grantee and the city, as an abandonment of any and all such rights, privileges, powers, immunities and authorities within the city, to the effect that, as between the grantee and the city, any and all construction, operation and maintenance by any grantee of any CATV system in the city shall be, and shall be deemed and construed in all instances and respects to be, under and pursuant to said franchise, and not under or pursuant to any other right, privilege, power, immunity or authority whatsoever. 
(Ord. 97 §7, 1967)  
5.16.080 - Rights reserved to the city. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect, in any way, to any extent, the right of the city to acquire the property of the grantee, either by purchase or through the exercise of the right of eminent domain, at a fair and just value, which shall not include any amount for the franchise itself or for any of the rights or privileges granted, and nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to contract away or to modify or abridge, either for a term or in perpetuity, the city's right of eminent domain. 
B.  There is reserved to the city every right and power which is required to be in this chapter reserved or provided by any ordinance of the city, and the grantee, by its acceptance of any franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the city in its exercise of such rights or power, heretofore or hereafter enacted or established. 
C.  Neither the granting of any franchise under this chapter nor any of the provisions of this chapter shall be construed to prevent the city from granting any identical, or similar, franchise to any other person, firm or corporation, within all or any portion of the city. 
D.  There is reserved to the city the power to amend any section or part of this chapter so as to require additional or greater standards of construction, operation, maintenance or otherwise, on the part of the grantee. 
E.  Neither the granting of any franchise nor any provision of this chapter shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the city. 
F.  The council may do all things which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this chapter and may determine any question of fact which may arise during the existence of any franchise granted under this chapter. The city manager is authorized and empowered to adjust, settle, or compromise any controversy or charge arising from the operations of any grantee under this chapter, either on behalf of the city, the grantee, or any subscriber, in the best interest of the public. Either the grantee or any member of the public who may be dissatisfied with the decision of the city manager may appeal the matter to the council for hearing and determination. The council may accept, reject or modify the decision of the city manager, and the city council may adjust, settle or compromise any controversy or cancel any charge arising from the operations of any grantee or from any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. 97 §8, 1967)  
5.16.090 - Permits, installation and service. 
A.  Within ninety days after acceptance of any franchise the grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including, but not limited to, any utility joint use attachment agreement, microwave carrier licenses, and any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of CATV systems, or their associated microwave transmission facilities. 
B.  Within ninety days after obtaining all necessary permits, licenses and authorizations, the grantee shall commence construction and installation of the CATV system. 
C.  Within ninety days after the commencement of the construction and installation of the system, the grantee shall proceed to render service to subscribers, and the completion of the construction and installation shall be pursued with reasonable diligence thereafter, so that service to all areas designated on the map accompanying the application for franchise, as provided in Section 5.16.200, shall be provided within one year from the date that service was first provided. 
D.  Failure on the part of the grantee to commence and diligently pursue each of the foregoing requirements and to complete each of the matters set forth in this section, shall be grounds for termination of the franchise, under and pursuant to the terms of Section 5.16.050; provided, however, that the council in its discretion may extend the time for the commencement and completion of construction and installation for additional periods in the event the grantee, acting in good faith, experiences delays by reason of circumstances beyond his control. 
(Ord. 97 §9, 1967)  
5.16.100 - Location of property of grantee. 
A.  Any poles, wires, cable lines, conduits or other properties of the grantee to be constructed or installed in streets, shall be so constructed or installed only at such locations and in such manner as shall be approved by the city manager acting in the exercise of his reasonable discretion. 
B.  The grantee shall not install or erect any facilities or apparatus, in or on other public property, places or rights-of-way, or within any privately owned area within the city which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the city, except those installed or erected upon public utility facilities now existing, without obtaining the prior written approval of the city manager. 
C.  In those areas and portions of the city where the transmission or distribution facilities of both the public utility providing telephone service and those of the utility providing electric service are underground or hereafter may be placed underground, then the grantee shall likewise construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground. For the purposes of this subsection, "underground" shall include a partial underground system, e.g., streamlining. Amplifiers in the grantee's transmission and distribution lines may be in appropriate housings upon the surface of the ground as approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. 97 §10, 1967)  
5.16.110 - Removal and abandonment of property of grant ee. 
A.  In the event that the use of any part of the CATV system is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of twelve months, or in the event such system or property has been installed in any street or public place without complying with the requirements of the grantee's franchise or this chapter, or the franchise has been terminated, cancelled or has expired, the grantee shall promptly, upon being given ten days' notice, remove from the streets or public places all such property and poles of such system other than any which the city manager may permit to be abandoned in place. In the event of such removal, the grantee shall promptly restore the street or other area from which such property has been removed to a condition satisfactory to the city manager. 
B.  Any property of the grantee remaining in place thirty days after the termination or expiration of the franchise shall be considered permanently abandoned. The city manager may extend such time not to exceed an additional thirty days. 
C.  Any property of the grantee to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such a manner as the city manager shall prescribe. Upon permanent abandonment of the property of the grantee in place, the property shall become that of the city, and the grantee shall submit to the city manager an instrument in writing, to be approved by the city attorney, transferring to the city the ownership of such property. 
(Ord. 97 §11, 1967)  
5.16.120 - Changes required by public improvements. 
The grantee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public place, or remove from the street or other public place any property of the grantee when required by the city manager by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, and tracts or any other type of structures or improvements by public agencies; provided, however, that the grantee shall in all such cases have the privileges and be subject to the obligations to abandon any property of the grantee in place, as provided in Section 5.16.110. 
(Ord. 97 §12, 1967)  
5.16.130 - Failure to perform street work. 
Upon failure of the grantee to commence, pursue, or complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this chapter or by its franchise to be done in any street or other public place, within the time prescribed, and to the satisfaction of the city manager, the city manager may at his option, cause such work to be done and the grantee shall pay to the city the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the city manager to the grantee within thirty days after receipt of such itemized report. 
(Ord. 97 §13, 1967)  
5.16.140 - Faithful performance bond. 
A.  The grantee shall, concurrently with the filing of and acceptance of award of any franchise granted under this chapter, file with the city clerk, and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect for the term of the franchise or any renewal thereof, at the grantee's sole expense, a corporate surety bond in a company and in a form approved by the city attorney, in the amount of ten thousand dollars, renewable annually, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of the grantee, and upon the further condition that in the event the grantee shall fail to comply with any one or more of the provisions of this chapter, or of any franchise issued to the grantee hereunder, there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety of such bond any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result thereof, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the grantee as prescribed in this chapter which may be default, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney's fees and costs, up to the full amount of the bond; said condition to be a continuing obligation for the duration of the franchise and any renewal thereof and thereafter until the grantee has liquidated all of its obligations with the city that may have arisen from the acceptance of the franchise or renewal by the grantee or from its exercise of any privileges granted in this chapter. The bond shall provide that thirty days' written notice of intention not to renew, cancellation or material change, be given to the city. 
B.  Neither the provisions of this section, nor any bond accepted by the city pursuant to this section, nor any damages recovered by the city thereunder, shall be construed to exercise faithful performance by the grantee or limit the liability of the grantee under any franchise issued under this chapter or for damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise. 
(Ord. 97 §14, 1967)  
5.16.150 - Indemnification of city. 
A.  The grantee shall, concurrently with the filing of an acceptance of award of any franchise granted under this chapter, furnish to the city and file with the city clerk, and at all times during the existence of any franchise granted under this chapter, maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, a liability insurance policy in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars, in a company approved by the city manager and in a form satisfactory to the city attorney, indemnifying and saving harmless the city, its officers and employees from and against any and all claims, demands, actions, suits and proceedings by others, including but not limited to any liability for damages by reason of or arising out of any failure by the grantee to secure consents from owners, authorized distributors or licensees of programs to be delivered by the grantee's CATV system and against any loss, cost, expense and damages resulting therefrom, including reasonable attorney's fees, arising out of the exercise or enjoyment of its franchise, irrespective of the amount of the comprehensive liability insurance policy required under this chapter. 
B.  The grantee shall, concurrently with the filing of an acceptance of award of any franchise granted under this chapter, furnish to the city and file with the city clerk, and at all times during the existence of any franchise granted under this chapter, maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, a general comprehensive liability insurance policy, in protection of the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, in a company approved by the city manager and a form satisfactory to the city attorney, protecting the city and all persons against liability for loss or damage for personal injury, death and property damage, occasioned by the operations of the grantee under such franchise, with minimum liability limits of two hundred fifty thousand dollars for personal injury or death of any one person and five hundred thousand dollars for personal injury or death of two or more persons in any one occurrence, and fifty thousand dollars for damage to property resulting from any one occurrence. 
C.  The policies mentioned in subsection B of this section shall name the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees as additional insureds and shall contain a provision that a written notice of cancellation or reduction in coverage of the policy shall be delivered to the city ten days in advance of the effective date thereof; if such insurance is provided by a policy which also covers the grantee or any other entity or person other than those named above, then such policy shall contain the standard cross-liability endorsement. 
(Ord. 97 §15, 1967)  
5.16.160 - Inspection of property and records. 
A.  At all reasonable times, the grantee shall permit any duly authorized representative of the city to examine all property of the grantee, together with any appurtenant property of the grantee situated within or without the city, and to examine and transcribe any and all maps and other records kept or maintained by the grantee or under its control which deal with the operations, affairs, transactions or property of the grantee with respect to its franchise. If any such maps or records are not kept in the city, or upon reasonable request made available in the city, and if the council shall determine that an examination thereof is necessary or appropriate, then all travel and maintenance expenses necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be paid by the grantee. 
B.  The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the city manager at the times and in the form prescribed by said officer, such reports with respect to its operations, affairs, transactions or property as may be reasonably necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of the rights, functions or duties of the city or any of its officers in connection with the franchise. 
C.  The grantee shall at all times make and keep in the city full and complete plans and records showing the exact location of all CATV system equipment installed or in use in the streets and other public places in the city. 
D.  The grantee shall file with the city manager, on or before the last day of June of each year, a current map or set of maps drawn to scale, showing all CATV system equipment installed and in place in streets and other public places in the city. 
(Ord. 97 §16, 1967)  
5.16.170 - Operational standards. 
The CATV system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the highest and best accepted standards of the industry to the effect that subscribers shall receive the highest possible service. In determining the satisfactory extent of such standards the following among others shall be considered: 
A.  That the system be installed using all-band equipment capable of passing the entire VHF and FM spectrum, and that it have the further capability of converting UHF for distribution to subscribers on the VHF band. 
B.  That the signals be distributed to individual subscriber's television receivers without noticeable degradation of color fidelity, picture intelligence, audio distortion or cross-channel interference. 
C.  That the system and all equipment be designed and rated for twenty-four-hour-per-day continuous operation. 
D.  That the system provide nominal signal level of two thousand microvolts at the input terminals of each television receiver. 
E.  That the system signal-to-noise ratio is not less than forty decibels. 
F.  That hum modulation of the picture signal is less than 5%. 
G.  That the system use components having a VSWR of 1.4 or less. 
(Ord. 97 §17, 1967)  
5.16.180 - Miscellaneous provisions. 
A.  When not otherwise prescribed, all matters in this section required to be filed with the city shall be filed with the city manager. 
B.  The grantee shall pay to the city a sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for all publication expenses incurred by it in connection with the granting of a franchise pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Such payment shall be made within thirty days after the city furnishes the grantee with a written statement of such expenses by delivery of the same to the city clerk. 
C.  The grantee shall maintain an office within the city limits, or at a location which subscribers may call without incurring added message or toll charges to that CATV maintenance service shall be promptly available to subscribers. 
D.  No person, firm or corporation in the existing service area of the grantee shall be arbitrarily refused service; provided, however, that the grantee shall not be required to provide service to any subscriber who does not pay the applicable connection fee or monthly service charge. 
E.  The grantee, without charge, shall provide all subscribers service of its system, including multiple connection services, to all public and nonprofit private schools, city police and fire stations, city recreation centers and such other buildings owned or controlled by the city which shall from time to time be designated by the city manager. 
(Ord. 97 §18, 1967)  
5.16.190 - Use of utility poles and facilities-Agree ment. 
When any portion of the CATV system is to be installed on public utility poles and facilities, certified copies of the agreements for such joint use of poles and facilities shall be filed with the city manager. 
(Ord. 97 §19, 1967)  
5.16.200 - Application for franchise. 
A.  Application for a franchise under this chapter shall be writing, shall be filed with the city manager, and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of each partner shall also be set forth. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall also state the names and addresses of its directors, main offices, major stockholders and associates, and the names and addresses of parent and subsidiary companies. 
2.  A statement and description of the CATV system proposed to be constructed, installed, maintained or operated by the applicant; the proposed location of such system and its various components; the manner in which the applicant proposes to construct, install, maintain and operate the same; and, particularly, the extent and manner in which existing or future poles or other facilities of other public utilities will be used for such system. 
3.  A description, in detail, of the public streets, public places and proposed public streets within which the applicant proposes or seeks authority to construct, install or maintain any CATV equipment or facilities proposed to be constructed, installed or maintained therein; and the proposed specific location thereof. 
4.  A map specifically showing and delineating the proposed service area or areas within which the applicant proposes to provide CATV service and for which a franchise is requested. 
5.  A statement or schedule in a form approved by the city manager of proposed rates and charges to subscribers for installation and services, and a copy of the proposed service agreement between the grantee and its subscribers shall accompany the application. For unusual circumstances, such as underground cable required, or more than one hundred fifty feet of distance from cable to connection of service to subscribers, an additional installation charge over that normally charged for installation as specified in the applicant's proposal may be charged, with easements to be supplied by subscribers. For remote, relatively inaccessible subscribers within the city, service may be made available on the basis of cost of materials, labor, and easements if required by the grantee. 
6.  A copy of any contract, if existing, between the applicant and any public utility providing for the use of facilities of such public utility, such as poles, lines or conduits. 
7.  A statement setting forth all agreements and understandings, whether written, oral or implied, existing between the applicant and any person, firm or corporation with respect to the proposed franchise or the proposed CATV operation. If a franchise is granted to a person, firm or corporation posing as a front or as the representative of another person, firm or corporation, and such information is not disclosed in the original application, such franchise shall be deemed void and of no force and effect whatsoever. 
8.  A financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant, or person otherwise satisfactory to the council, showing the applicant's financial status and his financial ability to complete the construction and installation of the proposed CATV system. 
9.  The council may at any time demand, and the applicant shall provide, such supplementary, additional or other information as the council may deem reasonably necessary to determine whether the requested franchise should be granted. 
B.  Upon consideration of the application, the council may refuse to grant the requested franchise or the council may by ordinance or resolution grant a franchise for a CATV system to any such applicant as may appear from the application to be in its opinion best qualified to render proper and efficient CATV service to television viewers and subscribers in the city. The council's decision in the matter shall be final. If favorably considered, the application submitted shall constitute and form part of the franchise as granted. 
C.  Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall include the following condition: 
The CATV system herein franchised shall be used and operated solely and exclusively for the purpose expressly authorized by Ordinance of the City of McFarland and no other purpose whatsoever. 
Inclusion of the foregoing statement in any such franchise shall not be deemed to limit the authority of the city to include any other reasonable condition, limitation or restriction which it may deem necessary to impose in connection with the franchise pursuant to the authority conferred by this chapter, and set forth by the ordinance or resolution granting such franchise under Section 5.16.220. 
(Ord. 97 §20, 1967)  
5.16.210 - Franchise renewal. 
Any franchise granted under this chapter is renewable at the application of the grantee, in the same manner and upon the same terms and conditions as required in this chapter for obtaining the original franchise, except to those which are by their terms expressly inapplicable; provided, however, that the council may at its option waive compliance with any or all of the requirements of Section 5.16.200. 
(Ord. 97 §21, 1967)  
5.16.220 - Acceptance and effective date of franchise. 
A.  No franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall become effective unless and until the ordinance or resolution granting the same has become effective and, in addition, unless and until all things required in this section and Section 5.16.140 and subsections A and B of Section 5.16.150 are done and completed, all of such things being declared to be conditions precedent to the effectiveness of any franchise granted under this chapter. In the event any of such things are not done and completed in the time and manner required, the council may declare the franchise null and void. 
B.  Within thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance awarding a franchise, or within such extended period of time as the council in its discretion may authorize, the grantee shall file with the city manager his written acceptance, in form satisfactory to the city attorney, of the franchise, together with the bond and insurance policies required by Section 5.16.140 and subsections A and B of Section 5.16.150, respectively, and his agreement to be bound by and to comply with and to do all things required of him by the provisions of this chapter and the franchise. Such acceptance and agreement shall be acknowledged by the grantee before a notary public, and shall in form and content be satisfactory to and approved by the city attorney. 
(Ord. 97 §22, 1967)  
5.16.230 - Violations. 
A.  From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or carry on the business of distributing to any persons in this city any television signals or radio signals by means of a CATV system unless a franchise therefor has been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. 
B.  From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain within any public street in the city, or within in any other public property of the city, or within any privately owned area within the city which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the city, any equipment or facilities for distributing any television signals or radio signals through a CATV system unless a franchise authorizing such use of such street or property or area has been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any authorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchised CATV system within this city for the purpose of taking or receiving television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound. 
D.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any authorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchised CATV system within this city for the purpose of enabling himself or others to receive any television signal, radio signal, picture, program or sound, without payment to the owner of the system. 
E.  It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner, to wilfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used in the distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound. 
(Ord. 97 §23, 1967)  
Chapter 5.20 - CARD ROOMS 
Sections: 
 
5.20.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words are defined as follows: 
A.  "City" means the city of McFarland. 
B.  "Person" means any and all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock companies, partnerships of every kind, Massachusetts, business or common law trusts and individuals. 
(Ord. 14 §1, 1957)  
5.20.020 - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, conduct or maintain or cause to be so operated, conducted or maintained any place, business or establishment in the city where any kind of game is played with cards without first obtaining a license therefor as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 14 §2, 1957)  
5.20.030 - Application for license. 
Application for any license required by this chapter shall made to the city council and shall contain the following information: 
A.  Name of the applicant; 
B.  Address of the applicant and address of the place proposed to be licensed under this chapter; 
C.  Length of residence of the applicant in the city; 
D.  Such other information as may be deemed necessary by the city council to properly determine the applicant's eligibility for a license under this chapter. 
(Ord. 19 §1(part), 1958; Ord. 14 §3, 1957)  
5.20.040 - Ineligible applicants for licenses. 
A.  No license shall be issued to any person under the age of twenty-one years or to any person convicted of a felony in any state of the United States or to any person not of good moral character or to any person who has resided in the city less than one year. Provided, however, that the city council at a regular meeting may waive the residence requirement upon such terms and conditions as may be determined by the city council not otherwise inconsistent with this chapter. 
B.  No license shall be issued to any applicant to own or operate a gaming club, as such is defined in Section 19802 of the Business and Professions Code of the state, unless that person possesses a valid registration from the Attorney General of the state pursuant to Section 19805 of the Business and Professions Code of the state. 
(Ord. 210 §4, 1987: Ord. 14 §4, 1957)  
5.20.050 - Fingerprints required. 
All applicants for licenses under this chapter shall furnish the city council with copies of the fingerprints of both hands of every person proposed to be employed by the applicant, should the license be granted. The applicant shall also be fingerprinted. 
(Ord. 19 §1(part), 1958; Ord. 14 §5, 1957)  
5.20.060 - Employees to meet requirements of chapter. 
All persons employed by any person holding a license issued under this chapter shall meet the requirements imposed under this chapter on applicants with the exception of the residency requirements. 
(Ord. 65 §1, 1962: Ord. 14 §6, 1957)  
5.20.070 - Issuance of license. 
If the city council is satisfied that the applicant meets all requirements of this chapter and will maintain an orderly and reputable place of business, the city council shall issue a license to the person upon payment of the license fees provided for in this chapter. Any license so issued is purely permissive and such license shall not grant the licensee any fixed interest or property rights therein and such license shall be revocable at any time by the city council, and the city council may, in its discretion, limit, reject, refuse, take up or fail to issue a license to any applicant at any time, if in the city council's judgment it appears to be in the best interest of the public health, safety and morals of the people of the city that such action should be so taken. 
(Ord. 19 §§1, 2, 1958; Ord. 14 §7, 1957)  
5.20.080 - License fee. 
The license fee for any license issued under this chapter shall be the sum of five hundred dollars per year, payable in advance, together with the additional license fee for each and every table in the sum of twenty-five dollars per calendar quarter, or any part thereof without proration. The license for each and every table shall be separately and distinctly designated by number and shall not be transferable to any other table. 
(Ord. 19 §3, 1958; Ord. 14 §8, 1957)  
5.20.090 - Licensing year—No proration. 
The year for the purpose of any license under this chapter shall be the fiscal year July 1st to June 30th and the license fees shall not be prorated for any part of the year. 
(Ord. 14 §9, 1957)  
5.20.100 - Licenses not assignable or transferable. 
The license provided in this chapter shall not be assignable or transferable and shall terminate upon the death of the licensee. 
(Ord. 14 §10, 1957)  
5.20.110 - Movement to another location. 
The license provided in this chapter may be removed from one location to another within the city provided that written permission therefor be first obtained from the city council. 
(Ord. 19 §1(part), 1958; Ord. 14 §11, 1957)  
5.20.120 - Continuation after notice of revocation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or cause to be operated, conducted or maintained, any card table after notice of revocation of such license. 
(Ord. 14 §12, 1957)  
5.20.130 - Separate and distinct offenses. 
Each day that any provision of this chapter is violated is a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. 14 §13, 1957)  
5.20.140 - License to be used at one address only. 
The license provided in this chapter shall be used only at one address or contiguous place of business and never at two separate and disconnected locations. 
(Ord. 14 §14, 1957)  
5.20.150 - Persons under twenty-one prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this chapter to permit any individual under the age of twenty-one years to play at any card table in the licensed premises or to be present in any licensed premises. 
(Ord. 14 §15, 1957)  
5.20.160 - Posting of rules of conduct required. 
Every licensee shall post in two conspicuous places in the licensed premises the rules and regulations governing the conduct of all games in the premises. 
(Ord. 14 §16, 1957)  
5.20.170 - Lapsed licenses require new applications. 
If a license issued pursuant to this chapter is allowed to lapse or expire for a period of over thirty days, the licensee must submit a new application as required by Section 5.20.030. 
(Ord. 83 §1, 1964: Ord. 14 §21, 1957)  
5.20.180 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating this chapter or any provision hereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding three months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 14 §18, 1957)  
Chapter 5.24 - CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES 
Sections: 
 
5.24.010 - Permit required. 
A.  No carnival or circus shall operate in the city without first obtaining a permit so to do from the city council. 
B.  No permit therefor shall be issued until the applicant has furnished adequate information to the city council as to the proposed location of the operation; proposed shows and attractions and sufficient evidence to satisfy the city council, in its absolute discretion, that the carnival or circus shall be conducted so as not to constitute a public nuisance. 
C.  Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked at any time by the city council and no appeal shall lie from the decision of the city council and the decision of the city council shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing being made to the city council, it being understood that the granting of the permit and operation thereunder is a revocable license. 
(Ord. 51 §1, 1961)  
5.24.020 - Chapter does not affect business license reg ulations. 
This chapter shall not be construed in any way to amend the provisions of Ordinance No. 7, as amended, the business license regulations. 
(Ord. 51 §2, 1961)  
5.24.030 - Nonapplicability of chapter. 
This chapter shall not be applicable to any carnival or circus conducted on the premises of any school or institution regulated under the Education Code of the state. 
(Ord. 51 §3, 1961)  
5.24.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each and every day's continuance of violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 51 §4, 1961)  
Chapter 5.28 - FORTUNETELLING AND OCCULT ARTS 
 
5.28.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of the city council in enacting this chapter to protect the health, welfare, and safety of the public at large and patrons of fortune telling, palmist, clairvoyant and any occult arts establishments by ensuring that the services provided by those establishments are, to the greatest extent possible, free from fraud, corruption, vice trickery and other criminal influences. It is also the purpose and intent of the city council to minimize the impact upon local neighborhoods caused by concentrations of fortune telling establishments in localized areas and to provide that such establishments are located in areas designated to serve broader portions of the community and region. 
(Ord. No. 004-2018, 6-14-18)  
5.28.015 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given herein: 
"Establishment" shall mean the premises, location or place advertised for or purported to be used for the practice of fortunetelling and/or occult arts. 
"Fee" shall mean for a fee, reward, donation, loan or receipt of anything of value in exchange for the practice of fortunetelling and occult arts. 
"Fortuneteller" shall mean any person who advertises by sign, circular, handbill, newspaper, periodical, magazine or other means whatsoever the practice of fortunetelling and/or occult arts, and shall include any person who advertises as a "psychic" or "spiritual reader" or "spiritual counselor" for the purpose of the practice of fortunetelling and/or the occult arts. 
"Fortunetelling and occult arts" shall mean telling of fortunes and forecasting of futures by means of any occult, psychic power, faculty, force, clairvoyance, clairaudience, cartomancy, psychology, psychometry, numerology, hypnosis, phrenology, spirits, tea leaves or other such reading, mediumship, seership, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mindreading, telepathy or other craft, art, science, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or substance, cunning or foresight, crystal gazing, mysteries or magic of any kind or nature. 
(Ord. No. 004-2018, 6-14-18)  
5.28.020 - License required. 
No person, association, partnership or corporation shall conduct, operate or advertise for an establishment in which the practice of fortunetelling and occult arts is carried on for pay, compensation or gratuity without obtaining and maintaining in effect a license as required by this chapter. 
No licensee hereunder shall employ any person who practices fortunetelling and/or occult arts, or who offers to or solicits to perform fortunetelling and occult arts, or who holds himself/herself out to be a fortuneteller if said person does not hold a current, unrevoked license as required by this chapter. No license shall be issued to any person who is not eighteen years of age or older. 
(Ord. No. 004-2018, 6-14-18)  
5.28.025 - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Any person solely by reason of the fact that he or she is engaged in the business of entertaining the public by demonstrations of mind reading, mental telepathy, thought conveyance, or the giving of horoscopic readings, at public places and in the presence of and within the hearing of other persons and at which no questions are answered, as part of such entertainment, except in a manner to permit all persons present at such public place to hear such answers, when not conducted in connection with the business of fortunetelling; 
B.  Any person who conducts or participates in any religious ceremony or service when such person holds a certificate of ordination as a minister, missionary, medium, healer or clairvoyant from any bona fide church or religious association maintaining a church and holding regular services, and having a creed or set of religious principles that is recognized by all churches of like faith; provided, further, that the fees, gratuities, emoluments and profits thereof shall be regularly accounted for and paid solely to or for the benefit of said church or religious association; 
C.  Nothing in this section shall be construed as exempting any person from the payment of any applicable business license fee which may be required to be paid by the licensing provisions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 004-2018, 6-14-18)  
5.28.030 - Establishment. 
Every person who engages in and is licensed for the practice of fortunetelling and occult arts shall maintain a fixed establishment for said practice, and shall maintain a current business license for said establishment as required by the licensing provisions of this code and shall conduct said practice only on the premises of the fixed establishment. 
(Ord. No. 004-2018, 6-14-18)  
5.28.035 - Classification of use. 
The practice of fortunetelling/occult arts is a use similar to, compatible with and no more objectionable than those uses permitted in the C-2 (commercial) zone. 
(Ord. No. 004-2018, 6-14-18)  
5.28.040 - License application and renewal—Fees. 
An application for a license to practice fortunetelling and occult arts shall be made to a duly authorized representative of the chief of police under penalty of perjury on forms provided by the chief of police. The application to practice fortunetelling and occult arts shall be accompanied by an investigation filing fee of five hundred dollars, plus the fee charged by Department of Justice for fingerprint processing. Said fees are not refundable in the event such application is denied. The filing fee may be modified either by resolution or ordinance. 
Each license under this chapter shall expire on June 30th of the current fiscal year. An unrevoked license may be renewed for one year on written application to the chief of police, made on or before June 15th of each year, accompanied by the required fees. Said application for renewal shall be made on a form provided by the chief of police. 
The renewal application shall be accompanied by an investigation filing fee of two hundred fifty dollars. Licenses and fees required under this chapter shall be in addition to any license, permit or fee required under any other chapter of this code. 
(Ord. No. 004-2018, 6-14-18)  
5.28.045 - Application contents. 
Any applicant for a license under this chapter shall submit the following information under penalty of perjury: 
A.  The full name and present residence and business address and telephone numbers of the applicant; 
B.  Any and all maiden, fictitious or other names ever used by the applicant; 
C.  Prior residence and business addresses used by the applicant during the five-year period preceding the date of the application; 
D.  The birthdate and place of birth of the applicant; 
E.  The Social Security number and a California Driver's License or California Identification Card number or other satisfactory government-issued identification number of the applicant; 
F.  The applicant's height, weight, hair and eye color, and all distinguishing marks, scars or tattoos; 
G.  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for a period of five years preceding the date of application; 
H.  The name or names under which the applicant proposes to conduct said activity or practice and the business address of the premises where such practice is to be carried on in connection with a similar or other kind of business; 
I.  The name or names, both true or fictitious, and addresses of any and all persons, associations, partnerships or corporations holding an interest or involvement in said activity or practice; 
J.  A statement of any and all criminal convictions, except minor traffic offenses not designated as a felony, including the nature thereof, where they occurred and the sentence therefor; 
K.  A list of fortunetelling or similar licenses currently or previously held by the applicant and whether any such license had been revoked or suspended and the reason therefor; 
L.  A list of at least three character references unrelated to the applicant by blood or marriage, and known to the applicant for at least five years. The list shall include true and fictitious names and current addresses and telephone numbers of said character references; 
M.  Such other identification and information as is necessary to discover the validity of the matters hereinabove specified as required to be set forth in the application. 
(Ord. No. 004-2018, 6-14-18)  
5.28.050 - Required information and documents. 
Before the application is considered to be complete, the applicant must produce, provide and submit to the following: 
A.  A California Driver's License or California Identification Card, or other valid and satisfactory documentary evidence of the age and identity of the applicant. 
1.  To be "satisfactory," the documentary evidence of age and identity must be of official issue of some governmental agency, be currently valid and furnish a photograph, weight, height, color of eyes and hair, sex, age and/or date of birth and signature of the applicant. Birth certificates are not satisfactory identification as they do not include evidence of identity by description of the person named; 
B.  A photograph of the applicant, to be taken by an authorized employee of the chief of police at the time of application; 
C.  Live Scan is required of the applicant; 
D.  Such other information as the chief of police shall deem necessary and relevant to a determination of whether a police permit should be issued pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 004-2018, 6-14-18)  
5.28.055 - Separate license for individuals. 
Each and every person engaged in or who proposes to engage in the practice of fortunetelling and occult arts shall file a separate and individual application as set forth in this chapter and shall pay separate and individual filing and renewal fees. This shall include persons who engage in said practice under one common establishment. 
(Ord. No. 004-2018, 6-14-18)  
5.28.060 - Notification of change. 
Any person granted a license to practice fortunetelling and occult arts shall report immediately to the chief of police, or his authorized representative, any change of individuals, associations, partnerships or corporations having a financial interest in the fortunetelling establishment, or any transfer or interest in said establishment by such individuals, associations, partnerships or corporations. 
Further, any person granted said license shall report immediately to the chief of police, or his authorized representative, any change of location or address of the fortunetelling establishment. Said change shall be approved by the Police Chief upon the determination that the provisions of this chapter have been fully met and upon the payment of a fifteen dollar change of location fee. 
(Ord. No. 004-2018, 6-14-18)  
5.28.065 - Investigation. 
The chief of police, or his authorized representative, shall conduct and complete an investigation of the moral character and reliability of the applicant and either grant or deny the license within a period of thirty days after the submission of the completed applications, except as provided by the following exceptions: 
A.  If good cause exists the chief of police may extend the period of investigation for a period of time not to exceed thirty days, provided that applicant is notified in writing that the investigation has not been completed; 
B.  If good cause exists the applicant may appear in person and submit a written request for a thirty day extension on a form provided by the chief of police. Said request must be submitted no later than five working days prior to the last day of the forty-five day period. Said request may or may not be granted by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 004-2018, 6-14-18)  
5.28.070 - Refusal to issue license. 
The chief of police shall not issue or grant a license if any of the following occurs: 
A.  An applicant fails to or refuses to furnish the information and documents required by this chapter or who submits false or misleading information on said application; 
B.  The fortunetelling establishment does not comply with the city's building, fire, health or zoning regulations; 
C.  Upon receiving satisfactory evidence that the applicant has been convicted of, or has entered plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other law or ordinance relating to morals, theft, fraud or narcotics or other restricted drugs, unless the chief of police finds that the offense regulated occurred more than five years before the date of application. 
Denial of a license shall be given to the applicant in writing and shall specify the grounds for such denial. Notice of the denial of the license shall be deemed to have been served upon personal service of the applicant or when deposited in the United States mail with postage prepaid and addressed to the applicant at his or her last known address. 
(Ord. No. 004-2018, 6-14-18)  
5.28.075 - Revocation. 
The city manager shall revoke any license upon any grounds for which the city manager may have refused the issuance thereof or upon conviction or upon a plea of guilty or nolo contendere for any violation of this chapter or because the operation of the establishment does not comport with the peace, health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
To revoke a license the city manager, or the city manager's authorized representative, shall serve upon the holder thereof, a written notice either by personal service or by deposit in a United States mail with appropriate postage affixed, to the address shown on the application or otherwise more recently of record, that said license shall be revoked effective upon personal service or five days after the date of mailing of said notice. 
A revoked license shall be immediately surrendered to the city manager, city clerk or his/her authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 004-2018, 6-14-18)  
5.28.080 - Appeal. 
A notice of appeal must be deposited with the city clerk within thirty days after denial of the application or revocation of the license has been served. Upon the filing of a notice of appeal, the revocation of a license shall remain in effect until such time as a decision has been rendered. 
Upon the filing of the written notice of appeal, the city clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the city council, which hearing shall be within thirty days after the date of said notice. The city council shall receive a copy of the denial or revocation notice and shall conduct a hearing to determine whether or not the license should be granted or reinstated. The scope of evidence presented to the city council shall be limited to evidence regarding the reasons for denial or revocation. The burden of proof shall be upon the appellant/applicant. 
The decision of the city council shall be final with no right of further appeal to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 004-2018, 6-14-18)  
5.28.085 - Location of establishment. 
No person shall conduct, carry on or engage in the practice of fortunetelling and/or occult arts except in an area where the city's zoning laws, rules and regulations allow such activity. 
(Ord. No. 004-2018, 6-14-18)  
5.28.090 - Hours permitted. 
It shall be unlawful to keep open to the public or to conduct the activity and practices defined in this chapter on any day of the week between the hours of ten p.m. and eight a.m. 
(Ord. No. 004-2018, 6-14-18)  
5.28.095 - Inspection. 
The city's police chief, fire chief and building official and their authorized representatives, shall have the right to enter the fortunetelling establishment from time to time during regular business hours for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with applicable building, fire or electrical regulations and the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 004-2018, 6-14-18)  
5.28.100 - Records. 
Every person, association, partnership or corporation operating a fortunetelling establishment under a license as herein provided shall keep accurate business records. 
Said records shall be maintained and open for inspection for a period of three years and shall be kept on the premises of the fortunetelling establishment. Failure to keep and maintain said records as provided in this section shall be grounds for suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 004-2018, 6-14-18)  
5.28.105 - Display of license. 
The license issued to a fortuneteller shall be prominently displayed at the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 004-2018, 6-14-18)  
5.28.110 - Compliance and penalty. 
No person shall commence, engage in, carry on or advertise that he or she will engage in or carry on any fortunetelling or occult arts activity as described in this chapter without first having procured a license as required by the licensing provisions of this chapter, or without complying with any and all regulations of such activity contained in this or any other ordinance of the city. 
Failure to comply with the provisions contained in this chapter shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter for each and every day that such activity is so advertised, engaged in or carried on. 
Revocation of a license shall not be a defense against prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 004-2018, 6-14-18)  
5.28.115 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the chapter. The city council declares that it would have passed this chapter and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more other sections, subsections, clauses or phrases may be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 004-2018, 6-14-18)  
Chapter 5.32 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 
Sections: 
 
5.32.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
A.  "Alarm Company Act" means Business and Professions Code Section 7590 et seq. as such statutes now exist or may subsequently be amended. 
B.  "BSIS" means the California Department of Consumer Affairs' Bureau of Security and Investigative Services." 
C.  "Engaged in business" means and includes the conducting, managing or carrying on of any business mentioned in this chapter by any person or owner, officer, agent, manager, employee, servant, tenant or lessee. 
D.  "Peddler" means and includes any person, whether a resident of the city or not, who travels by foot or by any type of conveyance from door to door, house to house, place to place or street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting food, goods, wares, merchandise, or other personal property of any nature whatever, offering or exposing the same for sale or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who without traveling from place to place shall sell or offer the same for sale from any vehicle, or from any place not a permanent store building. The word "peddler" shall mean and include the words "hawker," "huckster" and "itinerant vendor." 
E.  "Person" means and includes the singular and the plural and shall also mean and include any individual, firm, corporation, association, club, copartnership and any other organization. 
F.  "Referral sales" mean the sale of goods in which part of the inducement offered by the seller is a rebate, discount, commission or other consideration to be given the buyer when the latter either sells or gives information leading to a sale by the seller of the same or related goods. 
G.  "Solicitor" means and includes any person, whether a resident of the city or not, who travels either by foot or by any type of conveyance from door to door, house to house, place to place or street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of foods, goods, wares, merchandise, or other personal property of any nature whatever for future delivery or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such person has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he collects advance payments on such sales or not. The word "solicitor" shall include any person who uses or occupies any building, structure, room, shop, conveyance or other place other than a permanent store building within the city for the purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. The word "solicitor" shall include "itinerant merchants." The word "solicitor" shall also include any person who engages in the business of contacting persons by telephone to secure an appointment to sell subscriptions to magazines, periodicals or other publications and who then goes to the residence or place of business of such person to sell the subscriptions. 
(Ord. 107 §1, 1969) 
(Ord. No. 044-2015, § 1, 9-10-15)  
5.32.020 - License required. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler or solicitor within the city, or to go from door to door or house to house or street to street within the city for the purpose, directly or indirectly, and whether or not the same is for the sole purpose, of peddling or soliciting, without first obtaining a license therefor as provided in this chapter. 
B.  Applicants for a license under this chapter must file with the city clerk a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city clerk which shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name and description of the applicant. 
2.  The applicant's local residence address and permanent or legal residence address. 
3.  The name and address of the applicant's business, his interest in or relationship with such business, and, if the applicant is employed, the name and address of the employer. 
4.  A brief description of the nature of the applicant's business and of the product or service to be peddled or solicited. 
5.  If any food product or substance for oral human consumption which is not prepackaged is to be peddled, a statement by a licensed physician and surgeon dated not more than ten days prior to the filing of the application certifying that the applicant is free of contagious, infectious or communicable disease. 
6.  If farm products are to be peddled or solicited, whether the same is produced or grown by the applicant. 
C.  At the time of making application for a license the applicant shall deposit with the city clerk any license fee payable by the provisions of Ordinance No. 7, as amended, or any amendment or revision thereof hereafter ordained, except for those veterans exempt from the payment of a license fee pursuant to Sections 16001 and 16001.5 of the Business and Professions Code of the state. In the event no license pursuant to application is issued, any license fee deposited shall be refunded to the applicant. 
D.  In the event the application is for a license to engage in the business of peddling any food products or substances for oral human consumption which is not prepackaged, or other thing which might endanger the public health, the city clerk shall refer such application to the health officer of the county who shall cause to be made such investigation and examination of the applicant and the applicant's equipment, facilities, place of business and manner of operation of the same, as the health officer shall deem necessary for the protection of the public health and welfare and to assure compliance with the sanitation laws of the state, county and ordinances of the city. If as a result of such investigation, any of the matters investigated by the health officer are found to be unsatisfactory, the health officer shall endorse on the application his disapproval thereof and his reasons for such disapproval and shall return the application to the city clerk who shall notify the applicant that his application has been disapproved and that no license will be issued. If as a result of such investigation the applicant's equipment, facilities, place of business and manner of operation are found to be satisfactory, the health officer shall endorse on the application his approval and return the application to the city clerk. 
E.  Except in the case of applications for licenses which have been disapproved by the health officer in the manner provided in this chapter, the city clerk shall, if the foregoing provisions of this section have been complied with, issue a license pursuant to such application which shall contain the name of the licensee, his address, the name and address of his employer, if any, the kind of product or service peddled or solicited, the number of the license, the fee paid, if any, the dates of issuance and expiration thereof, the license number or other identifying description of any vehicle used, and the signature of the issuing officer. The city clerk shall endorse the fact of issuance of a license on the application therefor and shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued. 
F.  All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid only for the period of time for which a license fee has been paid to the city, but if no fee is payable for a license issued pursuant to this chapter then such license shall be valid until the next succeeding thirty-first day of December, provided, however, that no license shall be valid during suspension or after revocation in the manner provided in this chapter. 
G.  Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, persons licensed by or registered with the BSIS pursuant to the Alarm Company Act shall satisfy the requirements of this section by doing both of the following: 
1.  Registering their name and filing with the city clerk a copy of their state issued identification card; and 
2.  Paying the fee required by subsection C of this section. 
(Ord. 210 §9, 1987; Ord. 107 §2, 1969) 
(Ord. No. 044-2015, § 2, 9-10-15)  
5.32.030 - Police permit required. 
A.  This section is for the purpose of regulating peddlers and solicitors under the police powers of the city to preserve the peace and general welfare of the community and is not for the purpose of revenue. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler or solicitor within the city without first procuring a written permit to do so from the chief of police. 
C.  Applications for a police permit shall be made in writing to the chief of police, shall be on a form furnished by the chief of police, and shall be signed by the applicant who shall pay an application fee of five dollars upon the filing of such application. The application shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name and description of the applicant. 
2.  The applicant's local residence address and permanent or legal residence address. 
3.  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods or services to be peddled or solicited. 
4.  If the applicant is employed, the name and address of his employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship between the applicant and such employer. 
5.  The length of time for which the permit to peddle or solicit is desired. 
6.  A statement whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any felony or of any misdemeanor involving the violation of any municipal ordinance regulating or taxing any business or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
7.  Such other information as the chief of police shall deem necessary and relevant to a determination of whether a police permit should be issued pursuant to this section. 
D.  Term and Renewal. The permit will expire on the same date that the business license of the peddler or solicitor expires. Renewals shall be granted upon the payment of a renewal fee of one dollar. 
E.  Exemptions. Any person of the age of seventeen years or under, or any person of the age of sixty-five or over, and any person who has been issued a gratuitous business license is exempt from the payment of the fees referred to in this section. 
F.  It shall be the duty of the chief of police to make or cause to be made, within a reasonable time after the filing of each such application, an investigation of the moral character and business responsibility of the applicant. 
G.  If as a result of such investigation the applicant's moral character and business responsibility are found to be unsatisfactory, or if the applicant has been convicted of a felony, or of a misdemeanor involving the violation of any municipal ordinance regulating or taxing any business or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, then the chief of police shall disapprove the application, and shall endorse his disapproval on the application and his reasons therefor, and shall notify the applicant and the city clerk of such disapproval and shall not issue a permit pursuant to such application. 
H.  If as a result of such investigation the applicant's moral character and business responsibility are found to be satisfactory, and the applicant has not been convicted of a felony, or of a misdemeanor involving the violation of any municipal ordinance regulating or taxing any business or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, the chief of police shall issue or cause to be issued a permit addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied for, and the chief of police shall keep a record showing the number of each permit, the purpose for which it is issued, to whom it is issued, and the dates of issue and expiration thereof. 
I.  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler or solicitor within the city without having in his possession a valid police permit, issued pursuant to this section. Any person holding a police permit issued pursuant to this section is required to exhibit the same upon the request of any person. 
J.  The police permit required by this section shall be deemed to be a business permit in the case of persons licensed by the BSIS pursuant to the Alarm Company Act. Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, employees of persons licensed by the BSIS pursuant to the Alarm Company Act shall not be required to obtain a police permit. 
(Ord. 107 §3, 1969) 
(Ord. No. 044-2015, § 3, 9-10-15)  
5.32.040 - Solicitors—Bond required. 
A.  In addition to obtaining a permit as required by Section 5.32.030, where payment or deposit is demanded in advance of final delivery, a bond shall be furnished to the city clerk by each such person engaged in the business of solicitor. Such bond shall be in the penal sum of five hundred dollars executed by a surety company or by two responsible property owners residing within the city, or, in lieu thereof, a cash bond of equal amount, conditioned upon the making of final delivery of the goods ordered or services to be performed in accordance with the terms in such order, or failing therein, the advance payment of such order be refunded. Any person aggrieved by the action of such solicitor shall have the right of action on the bond for the recovery of money or damages or both. Such bond shall remain in full force and effect and in case of cash deposits, such deposits shall be retained by the city for a period of ninety days after the expiration of such license unless sooner released by action of the council. Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, employees of persons licensed by the BSIS pursuant to the Alarm Company Act shall not be required to furnish a bond pursuant to this section. 
B.  Referral Sales-Bond Required. In addition to obtaining a permit as required in this chapter, a bond shall be furnished to the city clerk by each person engaged in the business of peddler or solicitor who conducts his business by referral sales. Such bond shall be in the penal sum of five hundred dollars executed by a surety company or by two responsible property owners residing within the city, or, in lieu thereof, a cash bond of equal amount, conditioned upon the seller performing the conditions of the contract entered into in the referral sale. Any person aggrieved by the action of such peddler or solicitor shall have the right of action on the bond for the recovery of money or damages or both. Such bond shall remain in full force and effect and in case of cash deposits, such deposits shall be retained by the city for a period of one hundred eighty days after the expiration of such license unless sooner released by action of the city council. 
(Ord. 107 §4, 1969) 
(Ord. No. 044-2015, § 4, 9-10-15)  
5.32.050 - False statements—Revocation of licenses and permits. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any false statement or misrepresentation in or in connection with any application for a license or permit issuable pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  Any license and any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked at any time by the city clerk, chief of police or health officer of the city for any of the following reasons: 
1.  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for a permit or license. 
2.  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on the activity authorized by such permit. 
3.  Violation of any provision of this chapter. 
4.  Conducting the activity authorized by the permit in an unlawful manner, or in such manner as to cause a breach of the peace or as to constitute a menace to the public health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
5.  Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude. 
(Ord. 107 §5, 1969)  
5.32.060 - Peddling and soliciting of signed premises prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle or solicit at any premises within the city which are posted with a clearly visible sign bearing the words "No Peddlers or Solicitors" or similar words of the same purport and effect. 
(Ord. 107 §6, 1969)  
5.32.070 - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by any action of the city clerk, the chief of police or the health officer taken pursuant to this chapter shall have the right of appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city clerk, within fourteen days after notice of the action complained of has been received by such person, a statement setting forth fully the grounds of such appeal. The council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and the city clerk shall promptly give notice of such hearing to the appellant in writing and mailed, postage prepaid, to the appellant at his last known address at least five days prior to the date set for such hearing. The decision and order of the council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 107 §7, 1969)  
5.32.080 - Farm product containers. 
Every person peddling fruit, vegetables or other farm products prepackaged in sacks, boxes or other containers shall have plainly and indelibly marked on the outside of such container or on a tag attached thereto the correct net weight of the contents of such container where such net weight of the contents exceeds five pounds. 
(Ord. 107 §8, 1969)  
5.32.090 - Exception to chapter—Peddling or soliciting for noncommercial purposes. 
Anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, none of the provisions of this chapter shall apply to persons peddling or soliciting goods or publications solely for a bona fide noncommercial (e.g. charitable, religious or political) purpose. 
(Ord. No. 044-2015, § 5, 9-10-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 044-2015, § 5, adopted September 10, 2015, amended § 5.32.090 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 5.32.090, pertained to exception to chapter—peddling or soliciting for religious purposes, and derived from Ord. No. 107, 1969.  
5.32.100 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 107 §9, 1969)  
Chapter 5.36 - PUBLIC AND PRIVATE DANCES 
Sections: 
 
5.36.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Private dance" means a gathering of persons in or upon any premises where dancing is participated in as the main purpose of such gathering or as an incident to some other purpose and to which the general public is not admitted with admission to this gathering being with or without charge. 
B.  "Public dance" means a gathering of persons in or upon any premises where dancing is participated in either as the main purpose of such gathering or as an incident to some other purpose, and to which premises the public is admitted, with or without charge. 
(Ord. 246 §2(part), 1992: Ord. 115 §1, 1970)  
5.36.020 - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or any group or combination of persons, or any employee, representative or agent of such person, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or any group or combination of persons, to operate or conduct, or participate or assist in the operation or conduct of a public dance or private dance in the city unless the proprietor or operator of the place of business or establishment, or private property where such public or private dance is conducted has been issued a license therefor by the city council of the city, and such license has not expired, or been suspended or revoked. Any public agency or nonprofit organization may be exempted from the requirement of the license hereunder provided an application for the exemption thereof is submitted to the city council of the city and an exemption therefor is granted by the city council. (Ord 246 §2(part), 1992: Ord. 115 §2, 1970)  
5.36.030 - Public/private permitted to dance—Hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dance at any public or private dance in the city excepting between the hours of two p.m. of any day and one forty-five a.m. of the following day. 
(Ord. 246 §2(part), 1992: Ord. 115 §3, 1970)  
5.36.040 - Owners/public permitted to conduct dances—Hours. 
It shall be unlawful for the proprietor or operator, or for any employee or agent of the proprietor or operator, of a public or private dance, to permit dancing in such establishment excepting between the hours of two p.m. of any day and one forty-five a.m. of the following day. 
(Ord. 246 §2(part), 1992: Ord. 115 §4, 1970)  
5.36.050 - Private security officers—Required to be present. 
It shall be unlawful for the proprietor or owner, or for any employee or agent of the proprietor or owner, of any establishment or place of business, or the person promoting and/or in charge of any other public or private dance, to permit any person or persons to dance in such establishment or place of business or private property, unless there is in constant attendance adequate private security personnel who have been approved in writing for such service by the chief of police of the city. Such private security officers' services and attendance shall be at the expense of the operator, proprietor, promoter or person in charge of the public or private dance. The chief of police shall have the power to grant, withhold or revoke such approval at the chief's discretion. 
(Ord. 246 §2(part), 1992: Ord. 115 §5, 1970)  
5.36.060 - Private security officers—Duties. 
The duties of the private security officers at the public or private dance shall be substantially as follows: They shall be present at all times while dancing is taking place to see that the provisions of this chapter relating to the conduct of the persons attending such public or private dance are enforced, and to see that the laws of the state relating to the sale, use and consumption of alcoholic beverages are observed and enforced. No such private security officer shall drink any alcoholic beverage, indulge in any dancing or serve any food or drinks. 
(Ord. 246 §2(part), 1992: Ord. 115 §6, 1970)  
5.36.070 - Intoxication—Public or private. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain in a place of business or establishment where a public or private dance is conducted while under the influence of intoxicating beverages, or indulging in obscene, profane, vulgar or boisterous language or conduct. 
(Ord. 246 §2(part), 1992: Ord. 115 §7, 1970)  
5.36.080 - Intoxication—Responsibility of owners. 
It shall be unlawful for the proprietor or operator, or any employee or agent of the proprietor or operator, of a place of business or establishment where a public dance is conducted, to permit any person to remain in such a place of business or establishment who conducts himself or herself in violation of Section 5.36.070. 
(Ord. 246 §2(part), 1992: Ord. 115 §8, 1970)  
5.36.090 - Persons under twenty-one—Not permitted—Exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one years to attend any public dance or loiter at or near the doors of any public dance, while a public dance is being conducted therein, unless: 
A.  The public dance is conducted solely for the benefit of persons under the age of twenty-one years; or 
B.  The persons under the age of twenty-one years are accompanied by a parent or parents to the public dance; or 
C.  The proprietor or operator of a public dance conducts the same for the joint benefit of adults and persons under the age of twenty-one years. 
(Ord. 246 §2(part), 1992: Ord. 119 §1, 1971: Ord. 115 §9, 1970)  
5.36.100 - Persons under twenty-one—Responsibility of owners/operators. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of or conducting a public dance to permit any person under the age of twenty-one years to enter or remain in any public dance or engage in dancing in such place, or to loiter at or near the doors of any public dance, while a public dance is being conducted therein, unless the public dance is being conducted solely for the benefit of persons under the age of twenty-one years. 
(Ord. 246 §2(part), 1992: Ord. 115 §10, 1970)  
5.36.110 - Application for license. 
Any person seeking a license to conduct a public or private dance shall present an application therefor to the chief of police of the city. This application shall show the identity of the proposed proprietor or operator of such dance, the address and location of the premises where such dance is proposed to be conducted and the residence and the residence and mailing address of the applicant, together with such other information as may be requested by the chief of police. The chief of police shall make his recommendation with respect thereto of the application and submit it to the city council at its next regular meeting for consideration. The city council shall consider the application, and may permit any person to be heard with respect thereto, and may continue decision thereon and consideration thereof until a subsequent meeting or meetings, and shall by resolution approve or reject such application. If the application is approved, the city clerk shall issue a license to the applicant, which shall be enforced until revoked or suspended. 
(Ord. 246 §2(part), 1992: Ord. 115 §11, 1970)  
5.36.120 - Revocation or suspension of license. 
The city council or chief of police may revoke or suspend for a specified or indefinite period, any license issued pursuant to this chapter, after a notice to the licensee is given as hereinafter specified. Notice that the city council or chief of police proposes to consider such revocation or suspension shall be given by registered mail to the licensee at the mailing address shown on the application for the license under consideration, which notice shall be signed by the city clerk or chief of police and mailed not less than five days prior to the date of the meeting at which the city council or chief of police proposes to consider such revocation or suspension, and shall state the time and place of the meeting. At the meeting, or any adjournment or continuation thereof, the city council or chief of police shall hear the licensee and the licensee's attorney or representative, if any, and may hear such other persons as it sees fit, and shall thereupon, by resolution, act upon the proposed revocation or suspension. If the meeting is conducted by the chief of police and the licensee is not willing to accept his recommendation or decision, the licensee may file an appeal thereof with the city council within fifteen days after licensee has received the written recommendations or decision from the chief of police. The city clerk shall set the time, date and place for the appeal which shall be at the next regular council meeting, and give licensee not less than five days' prior written notice of the time, date and place of the appeal. At the appeal hearing, or any adjournment or continuation thereof, the city council shall hear the licensee and the licensee's attorney or representative, if any, and may hear such other persons as it sees fit, and shall thereupon, by resolution, act upon the appeal of the police chief's recommendation or decision. A license suspended for any indefinite period may be reinstated by a resolution of the city council at any meeting, with or without notice to the licensee. 
(Ord. 246 §2(part), 1992: Ord. 115 §12, 1970)  
5.36.130 - Revocation or suspension of license-Causes. 
The rejection, revocation or suspension of a license may be supported by a finding of the city council or chief of police substantially to the effect of one or more of the following: 
A.  That the applicant or licensee, if previously licensed, failed to conduct the licensed public or private dance in a manner consistent with the standards of conduct and prohibitions established by this chapter; 
B.  That the applicant or licensee, whether or not previously licensed under this chapter, has permitted disorderly, boisterous, obscene, profane or indecent conduct in the place of business licensed or proposed to be licensed; or 
C.  That the physical characteristics of the place of business licensed or proposed to be licensed are such as to tend to make enforcement of the standards of conduct and prohibitions established by this chapter difficult. 
(Ord. 246 §2(part), 1992: Ord. 115 §13, 1970)  
5.36.140 - Violation-Penalty. 
Every person violating or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding the sum of five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for not more than ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which the violation of, or failure, neglect or refusal to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person. 
(Ord. 246 §2(part), 1992: Ord. 115 §14, 1970)  
Chapter 5.40 - WRECKED CAR DEALERS 
Sections: 
 
5.40.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings set forth in this section unless the context otherwise indicates: 
A.  "City" means the city of McFarland. 
B.  "Person" means any and all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock companies, partnerships of every kind, Massachusetts, business or common law trusts, and individuals. 
C.  "Wrecked car dealer" means any person who, in the city, carries on, conducts, maintains or engages in the business, trade or calling of acquiring, storing or dismantling of wrecked or dilapidated motor driven or animal drawn vehicles of any description whatsoever, or the buying, selling, trading or bartering of used parts from said vehicles or deals in said vehicles or used parts therefrom. 
(Ord. 79 §1, 1964; Ord. 52 §1, 1961)  
5.40.020 - Businesses to be enclosed. 
All premises on which any person conducts the business of a wrecked car dealer shall be enclosed by an eight-foot-high fence or enclosed building which substantially eliminates the view of the wrecked or dilapidated cars or vehicles from the street, alley or public way. The fence shall be constructed from any of the following materials: wood, metal, concrete or synthetic compositions. A reasonable regulation for the construction of the fence will be established by the city building inspector, upon approval of the city council of the city, and the construction must meet with his approval. The premises shall be kept at all times in a sanitary condition. All wrecked or dilapidated cars or vehicles or portions thereof owned by or in which an interest is held by a wrecked car dealer shall be kept behind the fence or in the closed building and shall not be removed except on sale of the wrecked or dilapidated car or vehicle or parts therefrom. 
(Ord. 79 §2, 1964: Ord. 52 §2, 1961)  
5.40.030 - Finding of necessity. 
The city council of the city finds that the practice of acquiring wrecked or dilapidated cars or vehicles, storing or dismantling thereof and dealing therein or the parts thereof has produced unsightly and unsanitary conditions in the city, has adversely affected the peace and quiet and is detrimental to the safety, health and welfare of the city and should be regulated. 
(Ord. 79 §3, 1964: Ord. 52 §3, 1961)  
5.40.040 - Violation-Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding a term of six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each and every day's continuance of violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 52 §4, 1961)  
Chapter 5.44 - VENDING FROM VEHICLES[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 310-2006, § 1, adopted May 11, 2006, repealed the former Chapter 5.44, §§ 5.44.010—5.44.030, and enacted a new Chapter 5.44 as set out herein. The former Chapter 5.44 pertained to businesses conducted from vehicles and derived from Ord. No. 247, 1992 and Ord. No. 250, 1992. 
 
5.44.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
"Goods" means items and products of every kind and description including, without limitation, all food, produce and beverage items. 
"Vehicle" shall have the same meaning as in the Vehicle Code of the state of California. 
"Vendor" means any person who engages in the act of selling or offering for sale any goods from a vehicle or who drives or otherwise uses any such vehicle for the purpose of selling or offering for sale any goods therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 310-2006, § 1, 5-11-06)  
5.44.020 - Permits. 
Any person wishing to be a vendor in the city must comply with the same conditions as peddlers and solicitors more particularly described in Chapter 5.32 of this code and each of the provisions in Chapter 5.32 are hereby made applicable to vendors. No person may be a vendor in the city without first complying with each and every requirement under Chapter 5.32. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no more than ten vendors may be licensed in any calendar year and no more than five may be ice cream vendors and no more than two may be taco trucks. Permits shall be issued first to those vendors with existing permits requesting renewals of same provided the request for renewal is made on or before July 15 following expiration of the permit and, thereafter, on a first - come - first - serve basis for remaining permits, if any; provided, however, that the City may choose not to issue a permit to any applicant who has violated City regulations or the conditions of its license or failed to follow any other regulations of any other governmental jurisdiction." 
(Ord. No. 310-2006, § 1, 5-11-06; Ord. No. 324-2008, § 1, 10-15-08; Ord. No. 013-2011, § 1, 9-8-11)  
5.44.030 - Prohibited conduct. 
A.  No vendor shall sell or offer for sale any goods within three hundred feet from the exterior boundary of property used or occupied by any of the following: 
1.  A public or private school during the hours that school is in session; 
2.  A business establishment which is opened for business and is offering for sale the same or similar product as offered for sale by the vendor; 
3.  A restaurant, cafe, or eating establishment which is opened for business; 
4.  A public park at such times as a concession stand authorized by the public agency with jurisdiction over the park is operating; 
5.  Any city property where a city authorized concession stand is operating; 
6.  A church or other place for religious gathering during the hours of church services or church-related activities; and 
7.  Any permitted location where the vendor has sold goods or offered same for sale within a period of less than four hours. 
B.  No vendor shall sell goods or offer same for sale at any permitted location for a longer consecutive period of time than one hour. 
C.  No vendor shall sell goods or offer same for sale in violation of any of the provisions of this code or of the laws of any other jurisdiction. 
D.  No vendor shall obstruct or cause to be obstructed the passage of a sidewalk, street, or any other public place by causing people to congregate at or near the place where goods are being sold or offered for sale. 
E.  No vendor shall serve customers on the street side of the vehicle and the right wheels of the vehicle shall be parallel to and within twelve inches of the right hand curb or the right hand edge of the roadway. 
F.  No vendor shall sell or offer to sell goods in such a manner as to cause a traffic hazard. 
G.  No music which can be heard outside of the vehicle nor any sound amplification systems shall be used whenever the vehicle is stopped or parked. 
H.  Vendors shall maintain on the vehicle leak-proof, plastic or galvanized refuse receptacles with tight fitting lids. The vendor shall clean all public property surrounding the vehicle of all refuse generated by the vendor's activity. All wastewater must be retained in a spill-proof, leak-proof container maintained on the vehicle with a larger capacity than the water supply available on the vehicle. 
I.  No vendor shall set portable tables or chairs for customer use or promote a sit down dining environment at any location. 
J.  No vendor shall conduct business between the hours of ten p.m. and nine a.m. 
K.  All vendors preparing food in the vehicle by cooking, frying, or other similar means shall be equipped with at least one 2A-40-BC fire extinguisher. 
(Ord. No. 310-2006, § 1, 5-11-06)  
5.44.040 - Applicability of regulations to existing business. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described herein whether established before or after the effective date of the ordinance enacting this chapter into law. 
(Ord. No. 310-2006, § 1, 5-11-06)  
5.44.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
Every person violating or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon violation thereof, shall be punishable as provided for in Chapter 1.20 of this code. Each day any violation of any provision of this chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 310-2006, § 1, 5-11-06)  
CHAPTER 5.48 - GARAGE SALES 
Sections: 
 
5.48.010 - Definitions. 
As used herein, "garage sales" means those occasional sales conducted on residential premises other than those occurring from a home occupation as more particularly described in Section 17.04.340 of the McFarland Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 306-2005, § 1, 11-10-05)  
5.48.020 - Permit and fees. 
It is unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale without obtaining a permit in the manner as hereinafter described. The fee for a permit may be established from time to time by resolution of the city council and shall be for one garage sale. An application for a permit may be obtained from city hall. The fee shall be paid at the time the application is filed and shall be nonrefundable whether or not the permit is issued. A permit and fee shall be required for each garage sale. 
(Ord. No. 306-2005, § 1, 11-10-05)  
5.48.030 - Limitations. 
No more than four garage sales on the same premises may be held in any calendar year. No garage sale shall be conducted for more than two consecutive days. A garage sale may not commence before six a.m. or end any later than five p.m. on the permitted days. 
(Ord. No. 306-2005, § 1, 11-10-05)  
Chapter 5.52 - TAXICABS[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 007-2009, § 1, adopted November 12, 2009, set out provisions intended for use as Chapter 5.48. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Chapter 5.52. 
 
5.52.010 - Definition. 
As used in this chapter, "taxicab" shall have the same meaning as in Section 5412.2(b) of the California Public Utilities Code or as same is amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 007-2009, § 1, 11-12-09)  
5.52.020 - Permit—Required. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to be operated, any taxicab along or upon any public street in the city without first having obtained a permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, or without having complied with all of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 007-2009, § 1, 11-12-09)  
5.52.030 - Permit—Application and fee. 
Any person desiring to obtain the permit referred to in Section 5.52.020 shall pay a fee which shall be established by the city council by resolution or minute order to the city clerk, and make application for such permit to the city manager. The application shall set forth: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant and, if a company, the names and addresses of its principal officers or of each of its partners or members; 
B.  A description of every motor vehicle which the applicant proposes to use, including its trade name, motor and serial number, state license number, seating capacity, and body style; 
C.  A schedule of proposed fares; 
D.  The distinctive color scheme, name, monogram or insignia, if any, which applicant proposes to be used on his taxicabs; 
E.  Street number and exact location of the place or places where applicant proposes to stand taxicabs. If any such place is to be in a public street, the application must be accompanied by the written consent thereto of the owner of any building in front of which such stand is to be located. 
(Ord. No. 007-2009, § 1, 11-12-09; Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
5.52.040 - Application—Grounds for denial. 
The following grounds shall be sufficient for denial of the application by the city manager: 
A.  That the application is not in the form or does not contain the information required by Section 5.52.030; 
B.  That the vehicle or vehicles described in the application are inadequate or unsafe for the purposes for which they are to be used; 
C.  That the color scheme, name, monogram or insignia to be used upon the taxicabs in question is in conflict with or imitates or so closely resembles the color scheme, name, monogram or insignia of another permit holder as to be misleading or tend to confuse or deceive the public; 
D.  That the location of any cab stand, as designated in the application, will congest or interfere with travel on any public street, or is within three hundred feet of any other stand theretofore authorized; 
E.  That the applicant has had a prior permit revoked. 
(Ord. No. 007-2009, § 1, 11-12-09; Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
5.52.050 - Approval of rates. 
If the city manager otherwise approves the permit, the city manager shall refer the proposed rates to the city council for the city council's approval. The city council may approve or deny the rates. upon denial, the applicant may submit a different proposed rate schedule for further review by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 007-2009, § 1, 11-12-09; Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
5.52.060 - Permit—Insurance required. 
Before a permit shall be issued, the applicant shall provide evidence of liability insurance in an amount not less than one million dollars per occurrence, in a combined single limit insurance policy issued in standard form by a company authorized and qualified to do business in the state. The policy shall not be cancellable without thirty days prior written notice to the city. 
(Ord. No. 007-2009, § 1, 11-12-09)  
5.52.070 - Permit—Transfer. 
No permit issued under the terms of this chapter shall be transferable, either by contract or operation of law, without the permission of the city council, and any such attempted transfer shall be sufficient cause for revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 007-2009, § 1, 11-12-09)  
5.52.080 - Permit—Revocation conditions. 
Any permit granted under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the city manager, either as a whole or as to any car or cars described therein, or as to the right to use any distinctive color, monogram or insignia, after five days' notice to the permit holder, requiring him to appear at a certain time and place and show cause why the permit should not be revoked for any of the following reasons: 
A.  The undertaking provided for in Section 5.52.080 has not been given or has been withdrawn or lapsed for nonpayment of premium, or is not in force for any reason; 
B.  The nonpayment of any city business license fee; 
C.  Failure to observe any of the rules and regulations or provisions set forth in this chapter; 
D.  The violation of any law of the state, or ordinance of the city, pertaining to the operation of taxicabs or motor vehicles, by a permit holder, operator, or driver of a taxicab; 
E.  Failure to maintain satisfactory service to the public, or failure to keep any vehicle described in the permit in use for an unreasonable length of time, or failure to use the distinctive color, monogram or insignia described in the application; 
F.  Any cause which, in the opinion of the city council, makes it contrary to the public interest, convenience and necessity for the permit to be continued. 
(Ord. No. 007-2009, § 1, 11-12-09; Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
5.52.090 - Driver's license and permit requirements. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab within the city without having first obtained a class C driver's license from the state and a city taxicab driver's permit, issued in writing by the chief of police. 
B.  Each applicant for a driver's permit shall file an application therefor with the chief of police, accompanied by a fee to be established by resolution by the city council. 
C.  No permit shall be issued to any driver or operator under the age of twenty-one years, or to any person who is for any reason whatever is unable or incompetent to safely operate an automobile as reasonably determined by the city manager, or who is not a citizen of the United States, or who has not lawfully declared his intention of becoming such, or to any person who has been convicted of a felony, or to any person who within a period of two years immediately preceding such application has been convicted of reckless driving, or of driving a vehicle upon a highway while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs, or to any person who is for any reason whatever unable or incompetent to safely operate an automobile. 
D.  Each applicant must demonstrate his skill and ability to operate a motor vehicle, under such conditions as the chief of police may prescribe. 
E.  Each applicant for a permit shall also be examined by a person designated by the chief of police as to his knowledge of the provisions of this chapter, traffic regulations, and the geography of the city, and if the result of the examination is unsatisfactory, a permit shall be refused. 
F.  The chief of police may refuse a permit to any person if, after investigation, it appears to him that the issuance thereof would not be compatible with the public interest and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 007-2009, § 1, 11-12-09; Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
5.52.100 - Driver's badge and card. 
A.  Upon obtaining a permit, as required in this chapter, the holder thereof shall be entitled to a badge of such design and having such number as the chief of police may prescribe; also an identification card. 
B.  Such badge and card shall be the property of the city, and must be returned to the police department upon the termination of employment in the city as an operator of a taxicab, but such badge and card must be carried on the person of such operator while employed and shown upon demand. 
(Ord. No. 007-2009, § 1, 11-12-09)  
5.52.110 - Operation—General rules. 
The following rules and regulations shall be observed by all persons operating taxicabs, and it is unlawful to operate any taxicab in violation of such rules and regulations: 
A.  No taxicab shall remain standing upon any public street except for unloading and loading passengers, and then for a period not exceeding five minutes, except at a stand authorized by the city manager. This section shall have no application to any taxicab while it is engaged by a passenger. 
B.  The operator of a taxicab shall carry passengers to their destinations by the most direct and accessible route, unless otherwise directed by a passenger. 
C.  All taxicabs shall be kept in good mechanical condition, and operated in a careful and prudent manner. 
(Ord. No. 007-2009, § 1, 11-12-09; Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
5.52.120 - Changes in operation—Application—City council authority. 
In the event that any permit holder desires to change his schedule of rates and charges, or color scheme, name, monogram or insignia used on such taxicab, or to substitute any vehicle for and in place of the vehicle or vehicles described in the application for permit, or to increase or decrease the number of vehicles operated by him, he shall first make application for permission to do so from the city manager, which permission shall be granted if, in the discretion of the city manager, it deems the public interest, necessity and convenience will be subserved by such change, and provided further that the permit holder has complied with all provisions of this chapter. The application fee shall be established by the city council by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 007-2009, § 1, 11-12-09; Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
5.52.130 - Rates and regulations posted in taxicab. 
Every taxicab shall have posted in the passenger's compartment a schedule of rates and charges for the hire of the vehicle, a copy of this chapter, also a card bearing the owner's name, address and telephone number, and the police department phone number, all contained in a metal container or holder and placed in conspicuous place in the passenger department. 
(Ord. No. 007-2009, § 1, 11-12-09)  
5.52.140 - Clean taxicabs required. 
No taxicab shall be operated unless the passenger compartment is kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 007-2009, § 1, 11-12-09)  
5.52.150 - Lights in passenger compartment. 
Every taxicab shall be equipped with a light of not less than two candlepower, so arranged as to illuminate the whole of the passenger compartment; the light shall be constantly lighted while any passenger is in the vehicle (except when the same is in motion) from one-half hour after sunset until one-half hour before sunrise of the next day, and no shades or blinds shall be drawn over the windows while any passenger is in the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 007-2009, § 1, 11-12-09)  
Title 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 037-2014, § 1, adopted March 13, 2014, repealed Title 6, §§ 6.04.010—6.04.120, which pertained to similar material and derived from Ord. No. 155, 1976; Ord. No. 210, 1987; Ord. No. 243, 1992 and Ord. No. 327-2008, adopted March 13, 2008. 
 
Chapter 6.04 - ANIMALS 
 
6.04.010 - Purpose. 
The regulations set out in this title are designed to establish the framework for an effective and humane animal control program; to focus on protect the health, safety and welfare of both human and animal populations in our city; and to provide a good quality of life for residents and their pets. 
(Ord. No. 037-2014, § 1, 3-13-14)  
6.04.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this title, the following words and phrases will be construed to have the meanings set forth in this chapter unless it is apparent from the context that different meaning is intended: 
A.  "Abandon" means and includes leaving of an animal by its owner or other person responsible for its care or custody without making effective provisions for its proper care. 
B.  "Administration" means the city of McFarland shall supervise the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this title and of the laws of the state pertaining to the control of animals, and shall have charge of shelter employees and facilities. 
C.  "Animal at large" means to be outside of a fence or other enclosure which restrains the animals to a particular premise or not under the control, by leash or lead, of the owner or other authorized person capable of restraining the animal. Animals tethered to a stationary object within range of public thoroughfares are deemed to be at large. 
D.  "Animal control officer" means any person designated by the state of California and/or a municipal government, as a law enforcement officer who is qualified to perform such duties under the laws of this state. Certification from the California State Humane Academy or equivalent education and training and a P.O.S.T. certified PC 832 course is required within six months of hire. 
E.  "Animal shelter" means any facility operated by a humane society, municipal agency or its authorized agents, for the purpose of impounding animals under the authority of this title or state laws for the care, confinement, redemption, adoption or euthanasia. 
F.  "Animals" means all vertebrate and invertebrate animals such as but not limited to bovine cattle, horses and other equines, hogs, goats, dogs, cats, rabbits, sheep, chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, pigeons, and other fowl, or wild animals, reptiles, fish or birds that have been tamed and domesticated or captivated. 
G.  "Auction" means any place or facility where animals are regularly bought, sold or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this chapter. This definition does not apply to individual sales of animals by owners. 
H.  "Bite" means any actual or suspected abrasion, scratch, puncture, tear, or piercing of the skin, caused by any animal, which is actually or suspected of being contaminated or inoculated with the saliva from the animal, directly or indirectly, regardless of the health of the animal causing such bite. 
I.  "Cat" means any member of the species felis catus which includes male, neutered male, female, spayed female of any age. 
J.  "Circus" means a commercial variety show featuring animal acts for the public entertainment. 
K.  "Commercial animal establishment" means any pet shop, grooming shop, guard dog auction, riding school or stable, zoological park, circus, performing animal exhibition, boarding, or breeding kennel. 
L.  "Cruelty" means and includes every act, omission, or neglect whereby unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or suffering is caused or permitted. 
M.  "Dog" means a member of canis familiaris which includes male, neutered male, female, spayed female of any age. 
N.  "Dog tags" means and includes the metallic tags issued at the time of licensing of any dog at the time of vaccination of any dog. 
O.  "Enclosed vehicle" means a vehicle with structure on top and all sides. An enclosed vehicle with open windows or doors shall be deemed enclosed for purposes of this title. 
P.  "Fowl" means all animals that are included in the zoological class aves, which shall include, but not limited to, chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, guineas and pigeons. 
Q.  "Grooming shop" means a commercial establishment where animals are bathed, clipped, plucked or otherwise groomed. 
R.  "Guard dog" means any dog trained to guard, protect, patrol, or defend any premises, area, or yard, or any dog trained as a sentry or to protect, defend, or guard any person or property, or any dog such as a schutzhund-trained dog or any similar classification. 
S.  "Harbor" means any person who shall allow any animals to habitually remain or lodge or to be fed within his or her home, store, yard, enclosure or place of business or any other premise where he or she resides or controls. Ownership will be justified and perceived after a consecutive seven-day period of time. 
T.  "Humane live animal trap" means any cage trap that upon activation encloses an animal without placing any physical restraint upon any part of the body of such animal. 
U.  "Humanely euthanize" means to properly inject a substance that quickly and painlessly terminates the life of an animal or other method approved by the American Veterinary Medical Association. A certificate for the completion of a state-mandated euthanasia course is required for any personnel performing euthanasia. 
V.  "Immediate control" means the regulation and supervision by a competent person so that an animal is unable to run or get loose at will. 
W.  "Impounded" means an animal having been received into the custody of the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel or designated personnel. 
X.  "Kennel" or "cattery" means any building or premises upon or within which four or more dogs or four or more cats, four months of age or older are kept or maintained or any premise wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee or selling dogs or cats. 
Y.  "Livestock" means and includes, but is not limited to cattle, horses, goats, sheep, or other animals commonly regarded or used as farm or ranch animals. 
Z.  "Owner" means any person keeping or harboring, or having custody or control over any dog or cat for thirty consecutive days, except a veterinarian duly licensed and practicing as such and having in his or her possession or control animals for the purpose of treatment or care. 
AA.  "Potentially dangerous dog" means any of the following: 
1.  Any dog which, when unprovoked, on two separate occasions within the prior three-year period, engages in any behavior that requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury when the person and the dog are off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog. 
2.  Any dog which, when unprovoked, bites a person causing a less severe injury than as defined in this chapter. 
3.  Any dog which, when unprovoked, on two separate occasions within the prior thirty-six-month period, has killed, seriously bitten, inflicted injury, or otherwise caused injury attacking a domestic animal off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog. 
BB.  "Public nuisance animal" means any animal(s) that unreasonably annoys humans, endangers the life or health of other animals or persons, or substantially interferes with the rights of citizens, other than their owners, to the enjoyment of life or property. The term "public nuisance animal" means and includes, but not limited to, any animal that: 
1.  Is repeatedly found at large. 
2.  Damages the property of anyone other than its owner. 
3.  Molests or intimidates pedestrians or passersby. 
4.  Chases vehicles. 
5.  Excessively makes disturbing noises, including, but not limited to, continued and repeated howling, barking, whining or other utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored. 
6.  Causes fouling of the air by odor and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored. 
7.  Causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings where the animal is kept or harbored. 
8.  Is offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare by virtue of the number and/or types of animals maintained. 
9.  Attacks other domestic animals off of its own property. 
10.  Has been found by the animal control officer, after notice to its owner and a hearing, to be public nuisance animal by virtue of being a menace to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
CC.  "Quarantine" means the strict confinement, upon the private premises of the owner, under restraint by leash, closed cage, or enclosure, of all animals specified in the order of the animal control officer, police officer, or other authorized personnel. 
DD.  "Restraint" means any animal secured by a leash or led under the control of a responsible person and obedient to that person's commands. 
EE.  "Severe injury" means any physical injury to a human being that results in muscle tears or disfiguring lacerations or requires multiple sutures, or corrective or cosmetic surgery. 
FF.  "Vicious dog" means the following: 
1.  Any dog seized under Section 599aa of the California Penal Code and upon the sustaining of a conviction of the owner or keeper under subdivision (a) of Section 597.5 of the Penal Code. 
2.  Any dog which, when unprovoked, in an aggressive manner, inflicts severe injury on or kills a human being. 
3.  Any dog previously determined to be and currently listed as a potentially dangerous dog which, after its owner or keeper has been notified of this determination, continues the behavior described in this chapter. 
4.  Any dog which has been evaluated and deemed vicious by articulable facts obtained and reviewed by the animal control manager. 
GG.  "Wild animal" means any living member of the animal kingdom, including those born or raised in captivity except the following: domestic dogs (excluding hybrids with wolves, coyotes or jackals), domestic cats (excluding hybrids with ocelots or margays), farm animals, rodents, any hybrid animal that is part wild and captive bred species of common cage bird. 
(Ord. No. 037-2014, § 1, 3-13-14)  
6.04.030 - Adoption procedure. 
To adopt an animal from the McFarland animal shelter an animal adoption contract will need to be completed. Every dog or cat adopted from the city of McFarland must be spayed or neutered as required by state law. Dogs must also be licensed as required by state law. In most cases our shelter staff will schedule an appointment for surgical sterilization and transport the animal from the animal shelter to a nearby veterinary clinic or hospital. The city of McFarland retains ownership of the animal until surgical sterilization has been conducted, and the prospective owners have claimed the animal. 
A.  A deposit may be accepted in lieu of immediate alteration of an adopted animal only for health reasons that might hinder the surgical sterilization at the time of adoption or if the animal is under six months of age. The deposit shall be temporary, and shall be retained until the animal is healthy and/or old enough to be altered, as certified by a licensed veterinarian or as determined by the animal control manager. If an animal has not been altered within the above-referenced guidelines, then a licensed veterinarian must certify, in writing, that the animal is too sick or injured to be altered, or that it would be otherwise detrimental to the health of the animal. If the adopter presents proof of spaying or neutering to the city of McFarland within thirty days of the sterilization, the adopter shall receive full refund of the deposit. In adoptions of dogs, a proof of license in the adopters' home area is additionally required for return of the deposit. 
B.  No unclaimed dog shall be sold or given away to a new owner that has not been spayed or neutered except as otherwise described in this chapter. Dogs may be adopted, by a new owner, after an animal adoption contract is completed and approved and upon the payment of an adoption fee, spay or neuter fee, rabies vaccination fee, and a dog license fee according to the current animal control fee schedule. Any costs incurred by the city of McFarland in assisting the successful adoption of an animal will be withdrawn from the fund maintained by the finance department and collected from fines under Section 30804.7 of the Food and Agriculture Code for failing to spay or neuter impounded dogs. 
C.  No unclaimed cat shall be sold or given away to a new owner that has not been spayed or neutered except as otherwise described in this chapter. Cats may be adopted, by a new owner, after an animal adoption contract is completed and approved and upon the payment of an adoption fee, spay or neuter fee according to the current animal control fee schedule. Any costs incurred by the city of McFarland in assisting the successful adoption of an animal will be withdrawn from the fund maintained by the finance department and collected from fines under Section 31751.7 of the Food and Agriculture Code for failing to spay or neuter impounded cats. 
D.  If an adopter fails to comply with the spaying or neutering agreement within the given time period as provided in adoption contract, the adopter shall forfeit the sterilization deposit and will be subject to fines as established by the city council by resolution. The animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel may extend the date by which the spaying or neutering is to be completed at their discretion for good cause shown. Any extension shall be in writing. 
E.  All other animals (excluding cats and dogs) may be adopted and are subject to individual pricing or priced by breed of the fair market value or may be auctioned off. There may be additional charges for veterinary services rendered. 
(Ord. No. 037-2014, § 1, 3-13-14)  
6.04.040 - Licensing—Dog registration. 
A.  Any person owning, keeping, harboring or having custody of any dog over four months of age within this municipality must obtain a license as herein provided. 
1.  Written application for licenses, which shall include name and address of applicant, description of the dog, the appropriate fee and rabies certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian or anti-rabies clinic shall be made to the McFarland police department. 
2.  If not revoked, licenses for the keeping of dogs shall be for a period of one, two, or three years. 
3.  Dogs must wear city-issued license tags at all times when dogs are off the premise of the owner, caretaker, or person harboring the dog. 
4.  No person shall use any license for any animal other than the animal for which it was issued. 
5.  The license fee is due and payable within thirty days of having the dog vaccinated for rabies. 
6.  All licenses expire at the same time their supporting rabies vaccination expires, or the previous license fees expire whichever comes first. 
7.  An unpaid dog license fee shall become delinquent thirty days after it is due and payable. Upon delinquency, a penalty shall be added to the regular fee in accordance with the fee schedule as established by the city council by resolution. 
8.  Any owner of any dog in the city who refuses, fails or neglects to furnish the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel as provided in this chapter, information necessary to properly vaccinate and license such dog, or who resists, hinders or obstructs the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel in the exercise of their duties, or who fails, neglects or refuses to pay any required license fee at the time and in the manner herein provided, is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be issued a notice to appear for violation of this subsection. 
B.  All dogs shall be vaccinated with an approved canine anti-rabies vaccine within ten days after becoming four months of age. The rabies vaccination shall be performed by or under direct supervision of a California State licensed veterinarian. The veterinarian shall issue to the owner of the dog a certificate on a form required by state law. 
C.  No license tag shall be issued for any dog until satisfactory written evidence is presented that the dog has been vaccinated against rabies in a manner approved by the director which must be consistent with the rabies compendium of the centers for disease control. 
(Ord. No. 037-2014, § 1, 3-13-14)  
6.04.050 - Impound enforcement. 
The animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel, charged with the enforcement of this chapter, shall capture and may impound any dog found within the city limits which is not wearing a current license issued by the city of McFarland or any other municipality in the county of Kern or found running "at large" within the city limits. 
A.  The animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel shall have the right to enter upon any private or public property in the city in order to examine or capture any dog thereon or therein. The animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel shall not have the right to enter a house, which is used as a residence without first having secured a search warrant. 
B.  Not later than twenty-four hours after the impounding of any animal, the owner shall be notified of the impoundment of the owner animal, or if the owner is unknown, a true and faithful record of all animals taken into custody shall be kept conspicuously posted at the animal shelter. 
1.  Records shall include an impound number, a description of the animal, the date of the impoundment and a date and manner of disposition. 
2.  All animals shall be provided the necessary care and sustenance required and no animal shall suffer cruel treatment or neglect. No mark or tattoo shall be altered while in custody. All animals shall be checked for identifying microchips by the approved method of scanning. 
C.  An owner of any animal impounded may, at any time before the sale or other disposition, redeem the animal by paying the city of McFarland all required fees and charges, including but not limited to license fees. 
1.  The animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel shall charge, in addition to any impound or license fees, a deposit for vaccination of any impounded dog which has not been vaccinated against rabies, and shall issue a separate receipt to the person paying them. 
2.  All sums received by the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel shall be deposited in the city finance office forthwith and shall be kept in a separate account or trust fund, which may be appropriately designated and provided for by the city council. 
3.  A vaccination deposit shall be collected by the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel in accordance with the fee schedule as established by the McFarland city council by resolution. 
4.  The receipt referred to in subsection A of this section shall contain the following statement: "Any licensed veterinarian accepting this receipt in payment for the rabies vaccination of any dog shall be reimbursed by the city of McFarland a sum not to exceed the amount shown hereon upon presentation of this receipt to the city finance office or any person designated by the city council to pay such claims." 
5.  Veterinarians who accept receipts in payment for rabies vaccinations of dogs shall, upon presenting receipts and claim forms approved by the city finance office shall be entitled to payment from the city finance office of the amount stated on the receipt. 
D.  In accordance with Sections 30804.7 and 31751.7 of the Food and Agriculture Code, the owner of any non-spayed or non-neutered dog or cat that is impounded shall be fined in amounts as established by the city council by resolution. 
E.  The animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel shall charge proposed fees for animal control services, including adoption, impoundment, food and care, in accordance with the fee schedule as established by the McFarland city council by resolution. 
F.  All animals shall be held a minimum of four full working days, not counting the day picked up, before any sale or other disposition occurs, except any cat determined to be feral, may after three days be humanely disposed of because they pose a particular safety hazard for shelter employees and it is cruel to cage feral cats for long periods of time. 
G.  It is unlawful for any person to keep, abandon or turn loose without care any animal suffering distress from disease, injury, or other infirmity. Any such animal taken up by the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel may be euthanized. This section shall not apply to persons keeping diseased, injured, or infirm animals, which are under medical care from a veterinarian. A written statement prepared by a veterinarian shall be deemed sufficient evidence of such care. 
H.  The owner of any animal, which dies, shall dispose of the animal in a manner so as not to create a nuisance or health hazard by contacting the animal control officer to inquire as to the appropriate arrangements. Whenever a dead animal is discovered within the city limits, which has not been properly disposed of, the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel shall order its owner to dispose of it properly. If the order is not promptly obeyed, the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel shall collect from its owner the reasonable cost of the disposal of the animal. In the event the owner of the animal is unknown, the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel shall remove and dispose of the animal. 
I.  If the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel picks up any cat or dog at the request of the owner, or if the owner of a cat or dog brings the owned animal to the animal shelter for the purpose of destroying or disposing of the same, the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel shall charge and collect a fee in accordance with the fee schedule established by the McFarland city council by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 037-2014, § 1, 3-13-14)  
6.04.060 - Trap rental. 
The city of McFarland may at its discretion, provide animal traps to local residents on a rental basis. Traps will be loaned out on a per day and per trap basis. A renter must sign a trap rental information sheet and a trap agreement contract. The renter will be responsible to pick up a trap at the animal shelter during normal operating hours, and return the trap within the time frame required by the agreement. A deposit for the trap will be required in case of loss or damage, and an additional fee may be assessed if a renter fails to return the rental trap according to the rental agreement. 
A.  The city animal control officer may at his or her discretion utilize animal traps as a part of animal control operations without cost to any resident. 
B.  Any person who tampers, damages, or releases any animal from a city of McFarland animal trap without proper authorization is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 037-2014, § 1, 3-13-14)  
6.04.070 - Leashing and tethering. 
It is unlawful for any person owning, or having possession, charge, custody or control of any dog, to cause or permit or allow the same to stray or run, or any manner to be at large in or upon any unenclosed lot or place in the city, except upon the premises of and under the immediate care and control of the owner of such dog. It is unlawful for any person owning, or having possession, charge, custody, or control of any dog, to cause or permit or allow the same to stray or run, or in any other manner to be in or upon any enclosed lot or place absent permission from the property owner or lessee. It is likewise unlawful for any person owning or having possession, charge, custody or control of any animal to cause or permit or allow the same to be staked out, to herd, or to graze upon any unenclosed private lot or land in the city in such manner that the rope or other attachment by which such animal is tethered may permit such animal to be or go beyond the boundaries of the unenclosed private lot or land. Any animal permitted to be at large, as defined above, or otherwise to be within the city in violation of the provisions of this chapter, is a nuisance and a menace to public health and safety. 
A.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, unless otherwise prohibited by this chapter, dogs may be permitted upon the streets and other public places of the city if on a leash not to exceed six feet in length and under the immediate care and control of the owner or another person competent to exercise care, custody and control thereof. A retractable leash may be used if the person can demonstrate proper control of the animal on the device. 
B.  Any person who at any time finds any animal at large in violation of any of the provisions of this section may take up, confine and hold the animal, provided that such person shall within twenty-four hours thereafter notify the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel of the fact that he or she has possession and shall surrender possession of the animal to the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel upon demand when deemed by the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel to be in the animal's best interest and in accordance with the law. If the animal is taken up at a time when the animal shelter is not open for business, the person confining it shall within twenty-four hours after the shelter reopens, notify the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel. 
C.  No person owning, having or harboring any dog, or having charge, care, control or possession of any dog shall fail, refuse or neglect to keep said dog off of any public or private school ground, public playground or public park in the city. Unless otherwise prohibited by this chapter, dogs may be permitted on any public park in the city if on a leash not to exceed six feet in length and under the immediate care and control of the owner or another person competent to exercise care, custody and control thereof. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the possession, charge, custody or control of an official police dog while such dog is on duty. 
D.  It is unlawful for any person to permit any female dog which is owned, harbored, or controlled by him or her, to run at large at any time during the period when the dog is in heat or breeding condition. 
E.  The animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel, regular or reserve or city employee charged with the enforcement of this chapter shall not seize or impound a dog for the violation of a code requiring a dog to be leashed or issue citations for violation of such ordinance when the dog has not strayed from and is upon private property owned by the dog owner or the person who has a right to control the dog, or upon private property to which the dog owner or person who has a right to control the dog has a right of possession. 
1.  A dog that has strayed from but then returned to the private property of its owner or the person who has a right to control the dog shall not be seized or impounded, but in such a case a citation may be issued; provided, however, that if in such a situation the owner or person who has a right to control the dog is not home, the dog may be impounded, but the officer or employee of the city shall post a notice of impound on the front door of the residence of the owner or person who has a right to control the dog. Such notice shall contain the following: that the dog has been impounded, where the dog is being held, the name, address and telephone number or the agency or the person to be contacted regarding release of the dog, and an indication of the ultimate disposition of the dog if no action to regain it is taken within four full working days not counting the day picked up by its owner or by the person who has a right to control the dog. 
2.  This section shall not otherwise affect existing authority to seize or impound a dog or issue citations as a result of a dog being on property other than that owned by its owner or the person who has a right to control the dog. 
F.  No animal shall be tethered in a manner that does not allow for the animal to have access to adequate shelter, food and water. The chain, cord, or cable shall be affixed in a manner that it will not become entangled and have a swivel device at each end. The chain, cord, or cable shall be attached to a collar of leather or nylon and shall be at least fifteen feet in length. No dog shall be affixed with a choke or correction-type collar. The collar shall be checked daily to ensure that it does not become embedded or cause irritation to the skin. 
1.  A dog shall not be restrained by a fixed chain or tether for more than three consecutive hours in a twenty-four hour period. A dog may be exclusively restrained by a chain or tether provided that it is at least fifteen feet in length and attached to a pulley or trolley mounted on a cable which is also at least fifteen feet in length and mounted no more than seven feet above ground level. Any tether system shall not allow the dog or puppy to leave the owners property. 
G.  The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the possession, charge, custody or control of an official police dog while the dog is on duty. 
(Ord. No. 037-2014, § 1, 3-13-14)  
6.04.080 - Vicious dogs—Seizure hearing procedure. 
A.  No person owning or harboring or having custody of a potentially dangerous or vicious dog shall do any of the following: 
1.  Permit such dog to go unconfined on the premises of such person. A potentially dangerous or vicious dog is "unconfined" as the term is used in this section if such dog is not securely confined indoors or confined in a securely enclosed and locked pen or a dog run area upon the premises of such person. Such pen or dog run area must have sides a maximum of six feet in height with a secure top, and be located within a fenced yard. If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be imbedded into the ground no less than one foot. 
2.  Fail, neglect, or refuse to keep posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the premises on which said dog is kept a sign having letters at least two inches in width and height and reading "Beware of Vicious Dog." 
3.  Permit such dog to go beyond the premises of such person unless such dog is securely muzzled and restrained with a chain having a minimum tensile strength of three hundred pounds and not exceeding three feet in length. 
4.  Own or train, torment, badger, bait or use any dog for the purpose of causing or encouraging such dog to unprovoked attacks upon humans or domestic animals. 
5.  Possess with intent to sell, or offer for sale, breed or buy within the city any potentially dangerous or vicious dog. The owner or keeper of a potentially dangerous dog must notify the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel if the dog dies, is sold, transferred, or permanently removed from the city. 
6.  Any person owning or harboring or having the control of any potentially dangerous or vicious dog shall maintain a policy of insurance in an amount of not less than two hundred thousand dollars for each occurrence and insuring such person against any claim, loss, damage or injury to persons, domestic animals, or property resulting from the acts, whether intentional or unintentional, of the potentially dangerous or vicious dog. Such persons shall produce evidence of such insurance upon the request of the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel, and when purchasing a license for such animal. 
B.  In the event that a law enforcement officer or animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel of the city has probable cause to believe that a potentially dangerous or vicious dog is being harbored or cared for in violation of any section of this chapter, said officer shall have the authority summarily and immediately to impound the dog. 
1.  A law enforcement officer or animal control officer may summarily and immediately seize and impound any dog which is alleged to have bitten or attacked a human being or domestic animal pending the completion of a hearing for the purpose of determining whether the dog is a vicious or potentially dangerous animal. Any animal seized and impounded pursuant to this chapter shall be boarded and housed in the animal shelter or other place which the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel deems equally secure until such time as the hearing is completed. The owner or keeper of the dog shall be liable for any cost or expenses of impounding the dog. 
2.  Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, such official may enter private property at all reasonable times to inspect the premise or to perform any duty imposed by this chapter. Provided that if such property is occupied, such official shall first present proper credentials and demand entry. If entry is refused, or if the owner or other person having control of such property is not present to permit entry, such official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry at a later time. 
C.  A hearing shall be held to determine if a dog is potentially dangerous or vicious or if the owner of a previously determined potentially dangerous or vicious dog is in violation of this chapter and if the dog is a significant public threat. The chief of police or his or her designee shall be the hearing officer who shall conduct all hearings for the purpose of determining whether a dog is potentially dangerous or vicious. 
1.  If an investigation conducted by any peace officer or animal control officer results in a determination that there is probable cause to believe that a dog is potentially dangerous or vicious; or that the owner of a previously determined potentially dangerous or vicious dog is in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or orders of the appointed hearing officer; or if any dog is a significant threat to the public health, safety and welfare, the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel shall file with the appointed hearing officer a verified complaint setting forth facts that establish probable cause to believe the dog in question is potentially dangerous or vicious, that the owner of a previously determined, potentially dangerous or vicious dog is in violation of this chapter or orders issued by the appointed hearing officer. 
2.  The animal owner shall be served a copy of the verified complaint, a notice of the hearing date, time and place, either personally or by first class mail with return receipt requested. 
3.  A hearing conducted pursuant to this chapter shall be held promptly with no less than five working days nor more than ten working days after service of the notice upon the animal owner. 
4.  The hearing officer shall receive all relevant evidence from both the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel and the animal owner. Such evidence may include incident reports and affidavits or witnesses. 
5.  The findings, determinations, declarations and orders of the appointed hearing officer shall be in writing based upon whether, by a preponderance of the evidence, the dog is proven potentially dangerous or vicious, or the owner of a previously determined potentially dangerous or vicious dog is proven in violation of this chapter or orders issued pursuant thereto, or a dog is proven to pose a significant threat to public safety and welfare. Service of the findings, determination and any orders issued pursuant thereto shall be made upon the animal owner either personally or by first class mail, return receipt requested. The findings, determinations and orders of the appointed hearing officer are final. 
D.  A vicious dog may be destroyed if the appointed hearing officer determines that the release of the dog would create a significant threat to the public health, safety and welfare. If the appointed hearing officer determines that the vicious dog should not be destroyed, it must impose conditions upon the dog's owner or keeper that will protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
E.  The city may prohibit the owner of a vicious dog from owning, possessing, controlling or having custody of any dog for a period of up to three years when the appointed hearing officer finds, after proceedings conducted, that such ownership or possession would create a significant threat to the public health, safety and welfare. 
F.  Notwithstanding the provisions regarding licensing and vaccination, a dog determined to be potentially dangerous or vicious must have that designation in its registration records. A fee shall be imposed in addition to the regular licensing fee to provide for the increased costs maintaining the records of the dog in an amount established by the city council by resolution. 
G.  A dog may not be declared potentially dangerous or vicious under the following circumstances: 
1.  If the dog inflicted injury or damage to a person committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
2.  If it was protecting or defending a person within the dog's immediate vicinity from an unjustified attack or assault. 
3.  If the damage or injury was sustained by a domestic animal which was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog? 
4.  If the injury or damage to a domestic animal was sustained while the dog was working as a hunting dog, herding dog or predator control dog on the property of or under the control of its owner or keeper, and the damage or injury was to a type of domestic animal appropriate to the dog's work. 
H.  The hearing officer shall remove a dog from the list of potentially dangerous dogs if no additional instances of behavior described in the potentially dangerous dogs definition occur within a thirty-six-month period from the date of designation as a potentially dangerous dog. 
I.  If any party contests the determination, he or she may, within five days of the mailing of the notice of determination, appeal the decision to the city council. The appeal shall list the name, address and phone number of the legal owner(s) of the animal(s) and shall state the reason(s) for opposing the determination. The appeal shall be heard within two weeks of its filing by city council. The disposition of the appeal shall be as decided by a majority of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 037-2014, § 1, 3-13-14)  
6.04.090 - Rabies quarantine and procedure 
Any person having knowledge of the whereabouts of an animal known to have or suspected of having rabies shall report the facts immediately to the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel or McFarland police department. The animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel or the McFarland police department will also be notified of any person or animal bitten by a rabid or suspected rabid animal. 
A.  The quarantine may be conducted at the home of the owner of the animal, at a licensed veterinary clinic, or at the McFarland animal shelter. The animal will be kept securely confined while under observation. Dogs or cats that have bitten a person and are not vaccinated for rabies shall be quarantined at the McFarland animal shelter and the owner shall be liable for the board and care fees. If it is deemed by the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel or the McFarland police department that an animal, that has been vaccinated for rabies, cannot be properly quarantined on the premises of the owner, authorization to quarantine on the premise may be revoked at any time during the quarantine period. The owner will be liable for all fees incurred as a result of the impoundment. Quarantining an animal on the premise of the owner is solely at the discretion of the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel or the McFarland police department, and in no way indicates that a future quarantine will be conducted in the same manner. 
1.  The animal may not be removed from the quarantined premises for any reason, without prior written permission from the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel or the McFarland police department. 
2.  The animal may not be taken for walks or rides. 
3.  The animal must be under control of a responsible adult at all times. 
4.  The animal must not be permitted to come into contact with any other animals or humans, other than your immediate household. Note: All animals in the household will be quarantined and subject to the same requirements. 
5.  The animal must be confined under restraint on the owner's premise and may be allowed outside only if the owner's fence is sufficiently secure to prevent the animal from jumping, digging, or otherwise escaping. The owner must not allow other animals' access to their property where they could come into contact with the quarantined animal including cats, wild animals, etc. 
6.  The animal cannot be in any open or unfenced area. 
7.  The animal must be available for inspection or examination by authorized personnel at any time during the quarantine period. 
8.  The animal shall remain quarantined until released by the McFarland animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel. 
9.  If the quarantined animal becomes sick or dies, it is the owner's responsibility to notify the McFarland police department immediately. If the animal dies, do not dispose of the body. Instead, contact McFarland police department who will arrange for the pickup and transport of the animal to the health department for rabies analysis. 
B.  Any animal of a species subject to rabies which has been bitten by a known rabid or suspected rabid animal or has been in intimate contact with a rabid or suspected rabid animal shall be quarantined in a place and manner approved by the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel, for a period of six months or destroyed, with the exception that the following alternatives are permitted in the case of dogs and cats as follows: 
1.  If a dog or cat over one year of age has been vaccinated against rabies within thirty-six months but not less than thirty days with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by the AVMA and quarantined in a place and manner approved by the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel for a maximum immunity of thirty-six months, the dog may be revaccinated immediately (within forty-eight hours) and quarantined in a place and manner approved by the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel for a period of thirty days following revaccination. 
2.  If a dog or cat under one year of age has been vaccinated against rabies within twelve months but not less than thirty days with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by the AVMA, the dog or cat may be revaccinated immediately (within forty-eight hours) in a manner prescribed by the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel and quarantined in a place and a manner approved by the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel for a period of thirty days. 
C.  Any person who, after notice, violates any order of the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel concerning the isolation or quarantine of an animal of a species subject to rabies, that has bitten or otherwise exposed a person to rabies or who, after that order, fails to produce the animal upon demand of the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
D.  Any person who willfully conceals information about the location or ownership of an animal subject to rabies that has bitten or otherwise exposed a person to rabies, with the intent to prevent the quarantine or isolation of that animal by the animal control officer, police officer, or other authorized personnel is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 037-2014, § 1, 3-13-14)  
6.04.100 - Keeping or maintaining noisy animals prohibited. 
No person shall keep or maintain, or cause or permit to be kept or maintained upon any premises in the city or upon any public street highway, sidewalk, alley, park, playground or other public place in the city, any animal, bird or fowl crowing or by any sound or cry whatsoever disturbs the peace and comfort of reasonable and comfortable enjoyment of life or property by any person. Every day during which any person continues to keep or maintain any such animal, bird or fowl shall be a separate violation of this chapter. 
A.  It is the duty of the animal control officer, police officer, or other authorized personnel to receive and investigate or cause to be investigated all complaints regarding any animal, bird or fowl being kept or maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter, and to enforce the provisions of this chapter. If the owner of such animal is not able to be contacted for investigation after attempts within a twenty-four hour period, then the investigating officer shall remove the nuisance animal, leave a posted notice of the removal of the animal, and impound the animal at the shelter. If an owner is not able to be contacted within ten days, the animal shall be declared abandoned and disposed of according to this title. 
B.  Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and punishable by: 
1.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation; 
2.  A fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for each additional violation within one year; 
3.  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation within one year. 
(Ord. No. 037-2014, § 1, 3-13-14)  
6.04.110 - Animal care requirements. 
Every person within the city of McFarland who owns any domesticated animal or who owns, conducts, manages or operates any facility engaged in the housing or confinement of animals shall comply with each of the following conditions: 
A.  Housing facilities for animals shall be structurally sound and shall be maintained in good repair, to protect the animals from injury, to contain the animals, and to restrict the entrance of other animals. 
B.  All animals shall be supplied with sufficient palatable food and potable water as often as the feeding habits of the respective animals require. 
C.  All animals and all animal buildings or enclosures shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
D.  All animals shall be maintained so as to eliminate excessive noise. 
E.  No animals shall be without proper care more than eighteen consecutive hours. 
F.  Every reasonable precaution shall be used to ensure that animals are not teased, abused, mistreated, annoyed, tormented or in any manner made to suffer by any person or means. 
G.  No condition shall be maintained or permitted that is or could be injurious to the animals. 
H.  Animal buildings and enclosures shall be so constructed and maintained as to prevent escape of the animals enclosed therein. All reasonable precautions shall be taken to protect the public from the animals and the animals from the public. 
I.  Every animal establishment shall be made to isolate sick animals sufficiently so as not to endanger the health of other animals. Sick animals shall at all times be isolated from the other animals. 
J.  Every building or enclosure wherein animals are maintained shall be constructed of material easily cleaned and sanitized and shall be properly ventilated to prevent drafts and to remove odors. Heating and cooling shall be provided as required, according to the physical need of the animals, with sufficient light to allow observation of the animals and sanitation. 
K.  Animal owners, caretakers, custodians of any animal shall take any animal to a veterinarian for examination for treatment, if the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel finds this is necessary in order to maintain the health, safety and welfare of the animal and orders the owner, caretaker or custodian to do so. 
L.  All animal rooms, cages, kennels, and runs shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate and proper accommodations for the animal contained therein. All animals must be able to turn around and lie down in a reasonable manner and have adequate space to maintain proper sanitation. 
M.  Every violation of an applicable regulation shall be corrected within a reasonable time to be specified by the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel. 
N.  All persons shall provide proper shelters and protection from the weather for all animals at all times. 
O.  No person shall give an animal any alcoholic beverages, illegal drugs, or controlled substances, unless prescribed by a veterinarian. 
P.  No person shall allow animals which are natural enemies temperamentally unsuited, or otherwise incompatible, to be quartered together, or so near each other as to cause fear, injury, or torment. If two or more animals are so trained that they can be placed together and do not attack each other or perform or attempt any hostile act to the others, such animals shall be deemed not to be natural enemies. 
Q.  No person shall allow the use of any tack, equipment, device, substance or material that is, or could be injurious or cause unnecessary cruelty to any animal. 
R.  Proper rest period shall be given to all working animals. Confined or restrained animals shall be given exercise proper for the individual animal under the particular conditions. 
S.  No person shall work, use or rent any animal which is overheated, weakened, exhausted, sick, injured, diseased, lame or otherwise unfit. 
T.  No person shall allow any animal, which the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel has suspended from use to be worked or used until released by a licensed veterinarian. 
U.  No person shall display animals bearing evidence of malnutrition, ill health, unhealed injury or having been kept in an unsanitary condition. 
V.  No person shall allow any animal to constitute or cause a hazard, or be a menace to the health, peace or safety of the community. 
(Ord. No. 037-2014, § 1, 3-13-14)  
6.04.120 - Control of neglected and mistreated animals. 
No animals shall be exposed to or placed in conditions which constitute a violation of Section 597(f) of the California Penal Code or other state laws or county ordinances as may be in effect from time to time. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, it is unlawful for any person to have, maintain, keep or harbor any animals on any premises wherein the physical conditions of the premises constitute a violation of state laws, county or city ordinances. 
A.  A conviction for violation of any of the sections listed in subsection A of this section arising out of circumstances involving the keeping or harboring of animals shall be prima facie evidence that the person in control or possession of the premises on which the animals are located cannot or will not keep the animals in a healthy condition or cannot or will not keep the premises in a sanitary condition; whereupon, the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel may order the person to remove some or all of the animals from the premises and if the animals are not removed within forty-eight hours after the date of the order, the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel may remove the animal for appropriate disposition. Upon a veterinarians examination and determination that an animal has been neglected or mistreated, the animal may be impounded by the McFarland animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel subject to normal board and care fees pending a hearing within seven days of impoundment. 
B.  Failure to comply with any order given by the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel under subsection B of this section is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 037-2014, § 1, 3-13-14)  
6.04.130 - Vehicles—Transporting animals. 
No person shall transport any dog in or on the back of any open truck or other open vehicle while traveling on any city road, street, highway, lane or alley except when the vehicle is sufficiently enclosed by stakes, racks, or is equipped with other devices which prevent the dog from falling, hanging, or escaping from the vehicle. It is unlawful for any person to leave, unattended, any animal within an enclosed vehicle and may be removed forthwith by the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel and impounded in the animal shelter. When an animal has been removed from a vehicle, the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel shall cause to be posted in a conspicuous place on the vehicle a notice stating that the animal has been removed and impounded at the animal shelter. 
A.  This section is not applicable to animals that are in a peace officers vehicle or animal control unit while such officers are engaged in their regular assigned duties or a dog being transported for purposes associated with ranching or farming. 
(Ord. No. 037-2014, § 1, 3-13-14)  
6.04.140 - Animal waste—Improper sanitation. 
The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the immediate removal of any excreta deposited by his or her animal on public walks, recreation areas or private property other than his or her own. Animal owners are responsible for the removal of excreta deposited by their animals on their own private property within twenty-four hours. 
(Ord. No. 037-2014, § 1, 3-13-14)  
6.04.150 - Animals creating a nuisance. 
It is unlawful to suffer or permit any animal or fowl to trespass on private or public property so as to damage or destroy any property or thing of value, or so as to commit any other act dangerous to public health or safety, and any animal of fowl committing such act is a public nuisance. In addition, any animal which is impounded or whose owner is cited under this section because of the animal's disturbances two or more times within any twelve month period; or three or more times within any thirty-six month period, is a public nuisance. 
A.  Whenever it is affirmed with justification in writing by two or more persons, within a ninety-day period, having separate residences or regularly employed in the neighborhood that a public nuisance as defined in this section exists, the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel shall attempt to verify the complaint. The animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel may issue a citation against this section in furtherance to the applicable provisions of the Penal Code. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, when the animal control officer, police officer, other authorized personnel personally witnesses a public nuisance, as described by the complainant, a citation may be issued. Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 037-2014, § 1, 3-13-14)  
6.04.160 - Resisting authorized personnel. 
A.  No person shall: 
1.  Obstruct or interfere with the animal control officer, police officer, or other authorized personnel in the performance of duties under this title or aid or abet others in so doing; 
2.  Remove or attempt to remove any animal taken into custody by the animal control officer, police officer, or other authorized personnel without authorization; or 
3.  Cause or aid the escape of any animal sought for custody by the animal control officer, police officer, or other authorized personnel or aid and abet others in doing so. 
B.  Any person who commits any act prohibited by this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 037-2014, § 1, 3-13-14)  
6.04.170 - Permitting animals to go without care—Pre-seizure and post-seizure hearings. 
Prior to seizing any animal from the owner or the owner's property, the owner of such animal shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing, as set forth herein, unless such animals poses a present danger to life or property or is not confined and has been observed committing a nuisance and its immediate seizure to prevent harm or nuisance to humans, animals or property. 
A.  Written notice containing the information required by this section shall be sufficient if it provides reasonable time and opportunity to appear at the hearing and a copy of the notice is served on the owner or person in control of the animal as follows: 
1.  By personal delivery which shall be deemed complete at the time of such delivery. 
2.  By posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the door or near the doorway of the main entryway of the owner's premises or the premises at which the animal is found, or mailing a copy to the owner or the owner's last known address, by registered or certified mail. Service in this manner shall be deemed complete seventy-two hours after such posting and mailing has been accomplished. 
3.  Actual notice of the hearing shall be deemed sufficient service of the notice. 
B.  The notice shall be in bold ten point type or larger and shall contain the following information: 
1.  A description of the animal; 
2.  The address or description of the location where the owners' facility or animal is located; 
3.  The grounds for seizing the animal, stating the times, location, circumstances and events giving rise to the necessity for the seizure of the animal; 
4.  The proposed action to be taken with respect to the animal; 
5.  The time, date and place of the hearing conspicuously placed in the notice; 
6.  The right to oppose the proposed action by written, documentary, physical or oral evidence. 
7.  The right to be represented by an attorney or other person at the hearing. 
C.  At the time and place set forth in the notice a hearing shall be held before the hearing officer if any person appears to oppose the seizure of the animal. The hearing officer shall consider all relevant evidence submitted at the hearing 
(Ord. No. 037-2014, § 1, 3-13-14)  
6.04.180 - Violations—Penalties. 
The violation of any provision of this chapter may be prosecuted as either an infraction or misdemeanor, and punishable by a fine. These fines shall be in addition to any cost or fee provided for in this title for the redemption or disposition of impounded animals. A person is guilty of a separate offense for each animal and for every day during which a violation of any of the provisions of this title is committed, continued or permitted by such a person. 
(Ord. No. 037-2014, § 1, 3-13-14)  
6.04.190 - Student-oriented projects involving animals. 
The breeding and raising of livestock by minors in conjunction with a student-oriented fair project shall be permitted upon application to and approval by the planning director. 
(Ord. No. 037-2014, § 1, 3-13-14)  
6.04.200 - Exotic animals. 
The keeping of exotic animals or wild animals, which include lions, tigers, bears, simians, cougars, badgers, wolves, coyotes, foxes, lynx, peacocks, monkeys, any venomous or otherwise dangerous reptile or dangerous or carnivorous wild animal, any wild animal as defined in Section 2116 of the California Fish and Game Code of the State of California, or any other animal determined to be dangerous or potentially dangerous by the planning director, are prohibited within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 037-2014, § 1, 3-13-14)  
6.04.210 - Mandatory licensing of dog kennels and catteries. 
A.  No person shall operate or maintain a dog kennel or cattery without first obtaining a license from animal control. The city council may set the fee for such applications by resolution. Such license shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. An application for renewal of such license shall be made not less than thirty days prior to the date of expiration thereof. Where a dog kennel license has been issued and is in effect, the dogs contained in such a dog kennel shall be exempt from the requirements of individual license tags, as provided in this chapter. The dog kennel license fees, and late fees if an application for license is made after the date such license or renewal application is required, shall be as may be set from time to time by resolutions of the city council. Nothing herein shall exempt a kennel or cattery from obtaining a business license pursuant to Chapter 5.04. 
B.  Application for a dog kennel or cattery license shall be filed with animal control on a form prescribed. The application form shall contain such information as may reasonably be required by animal control for the purpose of enforcement of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the current home telephone number of the caretaker of the subject dog kennel or cattery and another current telephone number for emergency use or messages when such caretaker is absent from the subject kennel or cattery. Where a dog kennel or cattery is sought to be operated upon leased or rented premises, a letter of consent from the owner of the premises shall be submitted to animal control at the time the application is submitted. 
C.  Upon receipt of an application for a dog kennel or cattery license, animal control shall make an inspection of the premises of the dog kennel or cattery for which a license is requested. No dog kennel or cattery license shall be issued or renewed unless it is in compliance with this chapter and all other applicable laws and regulations. Upon application for issuance or renewal of a dog kennel or cattery license, animal control may limit the number of dogs or cats which are to be kept or maintained on the licensed premises. 
D.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, animal control or any peace officer of the city is authorized to enter upon and inspect the premises of any dog kennel or cattery located in the city for the purpose of determining whether such dog kennel or cattery is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the standards for kennels and catteries incorporated in this chapter. In consideration of the issuance of a dog kennel or cattery license, each owner and operator of a dog kennel or cattery shall allow animal control to make such entry and inspection. Such right of entry shall be made a provision of the license application. Inspections made by animal control shall be made with such frequency, not less than annually, as animal control may deem appropriate. Inspections may, for good cause and at the discretion of animal control, be made without prior notice to the owner or operator of the subject dog kennel or cattery. Willful refusal on the part of the owner or operator of a dog kennel or cattery to allow inspection by animal control constitutes grounds for summary denial of an application for a dog kennel or cattery license and for summary suspension or revocation of a dog kennel or cattery license already issued. 
E.  Nonprofit corporations formed pursuant to the provisions of the California Corporations Code and Section 501(C)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code for the prevention of cruelty to animals, and which have furnished proof of such incorporations to animal control, shall not be required to pay a fee for the licenses required by this chapter. However, all other provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to any such nonprofit corporation. Each corporation claiming to be exempt from fees pursuant to the subsection shall, before issuance of any license, agree in writing to indemnify, defend and hold the city and its officers, employees and agents harmless from all liability arising out of the exercise of the license. 
(Ord. No. 037-2014, § 1, 3-13-14)  
6.04.220 - Denial, suspension and revocation of kennel or cattery license. 
A.  Animal control, after providing the applicant or licensee notice and an opportunity to be heard, may in her or his discretion, suspend or revoke any license and may deny any application for renewal of a dog kennel or a cattery license if it is found that a dog kennel or cattery fails to meet all of the standards for kennels and catteries contained or incorporated in this chapter or if the dog kennel or cattery is in violation of any other applicable federal, state or local law or regulation. 
B.  Animal control shall prepare a written notice of such denial, suspension or revocation which notice shall contain a concise statement of the reason or reasons for such denial, suspension or revocation. Animal shall serve such notice upon the applicant or licensee by personal delivery or by first class mail, postage prepaid. Denial, suspension or revocation shall be effective on the tenth day after service of such notice or upon such later date as may be specified in the notice. Service shall be deemed completed upon personal delivery or deposit in the United States mail. 
(Ord. No. 037-2014, § 1, 3-13-14)  
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY  
Chapter 8.04 - DAIRY PRODUCTS 
Sections: 
 
8.04.010 - Pasteurization required. 
All milk or cream sold, served, offered or exposed for sale, or delivered for human consumption within the city shall be pasteurized. 
(Ord. 22 §1, 1958)  
8.04.020 - Interpretation of terms. 
The terms "milk," "raw milk," "cream," "pasteurized," "pasteurization" and "certified," as used in this chapter, shall be as said terms are defined in the Agricultural Code of the state. 
(Ord. 22 §2, 1958)  
8.04.030 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of Section 8.04.010 shall not apply to: 
A.  Certified milk or cream; 
B.  The delivery and sale of raw milk to wholesalers or to pasteurization plants for the purpose of being pasteurized; 
C.  The production for sale or other distribution of milk by any person owning or maintaining less than three cows or seven goats in lactation for use or consumption by that person or any member of his household. 
(Ord. 22 §3, 1958)  
8.04.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not to exceed five hundred dollars or imprisoned in the county jail for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 22 §4, 1958)  
Chapter 8.08 - FIREWORKS 
Sections: 
 
8.08.010 - Safe and sane fireworks—Period of sale. 
Safe and sane fireworks, as defined by Section 12529 of the Health and Safety Code of the state may be sold and discharged within the city during the period beginning at twelve noon on the first day of July and ending on noon on the fifth day of July each year, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and not otherwise. 
(Ord. 226 §1(part), 1989: Ord. 139 §1, 1975)  
8.08.020 - License required. 
Except as provided in this chapter, no person shall offer for sale or sell at retail any fireworks of any kind in the city without having first applied for and received a license therefor. 
(Ord. 139 §2, 1975)  
8.08.030 - Application for license. 
All applications for a license to sell fireworks shall: 
A.  Be made in writing on the appropriate license application form provided by the city; 
B.  Be made concurrently with application for permit to sell safe and sane fireworks issued by the fire department as required by the Uniform Fire Code of the city; 
C.  Be made between the first day of April and the fifteenth day of May, except when the fifteenth falls on a Saturday or Sunday the next business day shall be determined to be the fifteenth; 
D.  Set forth the proposed size and location of the fireworks stand applied for. The application shall clearly show that all applicable requirements of Section 8.08.070 are complied with. The stand must be located on private property in any commercial, industrial or manufacturing zone and the written permission of the owner of record or the lessee must accompany the application; 
E.  Be accompanied by a three hundred thousand/five hundred thousand dollar public liability and a five hundred thousand dollar property damage insurance policy and products' liability insurance in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars designating the city and county, their officers and employees as additional insureds thereunder; 
F.  Include a statement that the applicant agrees to comply strictly with the terms of any permit granted to it and furnish any additional information upon request of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 226 §1(part), 1989: Ord. 139 §3, 1975)  
8.08.040 - Prerequisites to issuance of license. 
The following qualifications must be met by each applicant for a license: 
A.  No license shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation except nonprofit associations or corporations organized primarily for civic betterment or youth activities. 
B.  Each organization must have its principal and permanent meeting place in the corporate limits of the city, must maintain a bona fide membership of at least fifteen members, and must have been organized and established within the city's corporate limits for a minimum of one year preceding the filing of the application. 
C.  No organization may receive more than one license for fireworks sale during any one calendar year. One license may be issued to two or more qualifying applicants as a joint venture. The maximum number of licenses which may be issued pursuant to this chapter shall not exceed one license for each three thousand residents of the city, or fraction thereof, based on the latest official roster, state census estimate. 
(Ord. 139 §4, 1975)  
8.08.050 - Selection of licensees—Granting or rejecting license. 
If the number of applications exceed the number of licenses to be issued, the licensees during the preceding year shall have first priority for the available licenses, provided that each licensee retains the same participating organizations which operated under the license during the preceding year. Each participating organization shall be deemed to be a co-licensee and joint venturer with the licensee claiming first priority and shall have the same duties and liabilities under the license. If there are any additional licenses available, such additional licenses shall be granted by a drawing supervised by the city clerk. When no organization applying for the available license has the first priority, all licenses shall be granted by drawing as specified above. Applicants for such licenses shall be notified by the city clerk's office by mail within seven working days after the close of the application period of the granting or rejection of such application for a license. 
(Ord. 139 §5, 1975)  
8.08.060 - Operating of stand. 
A.  No person other than the licensee organization shall operate the stand for which the license is issued, or share or otherwise participate in the profile of the operation of such stand. 
B.  No person other than the individuals who are members of the organization, or the wives or husbands or adult children of such members shall sell or otherwise participate in the sale of fireworks at such stand. 
C.  No person shall be paid any consideration for selling or otherwise participating in the sale of fireworks at such stand. 
(Ord. 139 §6, 1975)  
8.08.070 - Temporary fireworks stands. 
All retail sales of "safe and sane" fireworks shall be permitted only from within a temporary fireworks stand, and sales from any other building or structure are prohibited. Temporary stands shall be subject to the following provisions: 
A.  No fireworks stands shall be located within thirty feet of any other building nor within one hundred feet of any gasoline pump or gasoline storage or repair garage. 
B.  Fireworks stands need not comply with the provisions of the building code of the city, provided, however, that all stands shall be erected under the supervision of the city manager, or whoever he may direct to act on his behalf, who shall require that stands be constructed in a manner that will reasonably insure the safety of attendants and patrons. 
C.  No stand shall have a floor area in excess of three hundred square feet. 
D.  Each stand shall have at least two exits, and each stand in excess of forty feet in length must have at least three exits spaced approximately equidistant apart; provided, however, that in no event shall the distance between exits exceed twenty-four feet. 
E.  Each stand shall be provided with two 2A rated fire extinguishers, underwriter approved, properly serviced and tagged and easily accessible for use in case of fire. 
(Ord. 226 §1(part), 1989: Ord. 139 §7, 1975; Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
8.08.080 - General requirements. 
A.  All weeds and combustible material shall be cleared from the location of the stand including a distance of at least twenty feet surrounding the stand. 
B.  "No Smoking" signs shall be prominently displayed on the fireworks stand. 
C.  Each stand shall have an adult in attendance and in charge thereof while the fireworks are stored therein. No person under age eighteen shall be permitted in the stand. Sleeping or remaining in the stand after the close of business each day is forbidden. 
D.  The sale of fireworks shall not begin before twelve noon on the first day of July and shall not continue after twelve noon on the fifth of July. 
E.  All unsold fireworks and accompanying litter shall be removed from the location by five p.m. on the fifth day of July. 
F.  The fireworks stand shall be removed from the temporary location by twelve noon on the fifteenth day of July and all accompanying litter shall be cleared from the location by said time and date. 
G.  Prior to the issuance of a license, each applicant shall file with the city clerk a cash deposit or surety bond made payable to the city in the amount of fifty dollars to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to the removal of the stand and the cleaning of the site. In the event the licensee does not so comply or remove the stand, or clean the site in the manner required by the city manager, the city may do so, or cause the same to be done by other persons, and the reasonable cost thereof shall be a charge against the licensee and his surety and the deposit certificate or bond. 
(Ord. 226 §1(part), 1989: Ord. 139 §8, 1975; Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
8.08.090 - License tax. 
The license tax for the selling of fireworks within the city shall be twenty-five dollars per year per stand, which fee must be paid at the time application for the stand is filed with the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. 139 §9, 1975)  
8.08.100 - Temporary sales tax permit required. 
Organizations licensed for the selling of fireworks are required to obtain a temporary sales tax permit from the Regional Office of the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. 139 §10, 1975)  
8.08.110 - Display of license and sales tax permit. 
Licenses to sell fireworks and temporary sales tax permits shall be displayed in a prominent place in the fireworks stand. 
(Ord. 139 §11, 1975)  
8.08.120 - Prohibitions on discharge. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite, explode, project or otherwise fire or use any fireworks, or permit the ignition, explosion or projection thereof, upon or over or onto the property of another without his consent, or to ignite, explode, project or otherwise fire or use any fireworks within ten feet of any residential, dwelling or other structure used as a place of habitation by human beings. 
(Ord. 139 §12, 1975)  
8.08.130 - Violation—Penalty. 
Persons violating this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the city or county jail for a period not to exceed thirty days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Further, the license shall be revoked. 
(Ord. 139 §13, 1975)  
Chapter 8.10 - MANDATORY CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS RECYCLING PROGRAM 
Sections: 
 
8.10.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates: 
"Applicant" means any individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever who applies to the city for the applicable permits to undertake any project within the city, unless otherwise specifically exempted by law. 
"Construction" means a project comprised of the erection of any building, structure, facility or pavement or any portion thereof, including any tenant improvements to an existing building, structure, facility or pavement. 
"Construction and demolition debris" means materials resulting from construction, remodeling, renovation, alteration, repair, or demolition of any project, excluding inerts. 
"Conversion rate" means the rate set forth in the standardized conversion rate table approved by the city pursuant to this chapter for use in estimating the volume or weight of materials identified in a recycling plan. 
"Deconstruction" means a project comprised of the systematic removal of reusable items from an existing building, structure or facility. 
"Demolition" means a project comprised of decimating, razing, ruining, tearing down or wrecking of any building, structure, facility or pavement, whether in whole or in part, whether interior or exterior. 
"Diversion requirement" means the diversion of all inerts and at least fifty percent by weight of the total construction and demolition debris generated by a project through reuse or recycling, unless the applicant has been granted an infeasible exemption pursuant to Section 8.10.060, in which case the diversion requirement shall be the maximum feasible diversion rate established by the recycle coordinator. 
"Divert" means to use material for any purpose other than disposal in a landfill, in a manner that excludes those materials from disposal reporting under the state of California's disposal reporting system and gives the city diversion credit as specified in Section 41780 of the California Public Resources Code. 
"Inerts" means the following materials: Concrete (that may have steel reinforcing bar embedded in the concrete), fully cured asphalt, glass, plastics, fiberglass, asphalt or fiberglass roofing shingles, brick, slag, ceramics, plaster, clay and clay and clay products and any other materials determined by the California Integrated Waste Management Board to constitute inerts; and treated industrial wastes, de-watered bentonite-based and drilling mud and materials determined by the State Water Resources Control Board to constitute inerts. "Inerts" do not include commingled hazardous or putrescible waste and do not contain soluble pollutants in excess of applicable water quality objections. 
"Project" means any activity which requires an application for a building or demolition permit or any other similar permit from the city, including construction, deconstruction, demolition, and renovation. 
"Recycle coordinator" means the officer charged with enforcing compliance with this chapter. 
"Recycling plan" means a completed recycling plan form, approved by the city for the purpose of compliance with this chapter, submitted by the applicant for any project. 
"Renovation" means a project comprised of any change, addition, or modification in an existing building, structure or facility. 
"Reuse" means further or repeated use of construction or demolition debris. 
"Salvage" means the controlled removal of construction and demolition debris from a permitted project site for the purpose of recycling or reuse, or storage for later recycling or reuse. 
(Ord. No. 292-2004, § 1, 12-9-04)  
8.10.020 - Submission of project recycling plans. 
All applicants for a project shall submit a recycling plan to the recycle coordinator prior to issuance of a permit and prior to beginning any project (including construction, deconstruction, demolition, and renovation) and shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be listed as a condition of approval on any permit issued for a project. 
(Ord. No. 292-2004, § 1, 12-9-04)  
8.10.030 - Form of recycling plan. 
A.  Applicants for project permits shall complete and submit a recycling plan on a recycling plan form approved by the city for this purpose as part of the application packet for the project permit. The completed recycling plan shall indicate all of the following: 
1.  The estimated volume or weight of project inerts and construction and demolition debris, by materials type, to be generated; 
2.  The maximum volume or weight of such materials that can feasibly be diverted by reuse or recycling; 
3.  The vendor or facility that the applicant proposes to use to collect or receive that material; and 
4.  The estimated volume or weight of construction and demolition debris that will be landfilled and inerts that will be diverted. 
B.  In estimating the volume or weight of materials identified in the recycling plan, the applicant shall use the conversion rates. 
C.  In preparing the recycling plan, applicants for building or demolition permits involving the removal of all or part of an existing structure shall deconstruct, to the maximum extent feasible, and shall make the materials generated thereby available for salvage. 
(Ord. No. 292-2004, § 1, 12-9-04)  
8.10.040 - Review of recycling plan. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, no building or demolition permit shall be issued for any project unless and until the recycle coordinator has approved the recycling plan. Approval shall not be required, however, where an emergency demolition is required to protect the public health, welfare or safety as determined by the chief building official. The recycle coordinator shall only approve a recycling plan if he or she first determines that all of the following conditions have been met: (1) the recycling plan provides all of the information set forth in Section 8.10.030(A); and (2) the recycling plan indicates that the diversion requirement will be feasibly met. If the recycle coordinator determines that these conditions have been met, he or she shall mark the recycling plan "approved", return a copy of the recycling plan to the applicant, and notify the building department that the recycling plan has been approved. 
B.  If the recycle coordinator determines that the recycling plan is incomplete by failing to include one or both of the items described in Section 8.10.040(A), he or she shall either: (1) return the recycling plan to the applicant marked "denied", including a statement of reasons, and so notify the building department; (2) return the recycling plan to the applicant marked "further explanation required", or (3) grant an infeasible exemption pursuant to Section 8.10.060. 
(Ord. No. 292-2004, § 1, 12-9-04)  
8.10.050 - Compliance with recycling plan. 
A.  Documentation. Prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy for the project, the applicant shall submit to the recycle coordinator documentation that the diversion requirement for the project has been met, unless the applicant has been granted an infeasible exemption pursuant to Section 8.10.060, in which case the diversion requirement shall be the maximum feasible diversion rate established by the recycle coordinator. The applicant shall include in this documentation all of the following: (1) receipts from the vendor or facility which collected or received construction and demolition debris and inert materials showing the actual weight or volume of each of those materials; (2) a copy of the previously approved recycling plan for the project adding the actual volume or weight of each of those materials diverted and landfilled; and (3) any additional information the applicant believes is relevant to determining its efforts to comply in good faith with this chapter. 
B.  Weighing of Wastes. Applicants shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that all inerts and construction and demolition debris diverted or landfilled are measured and recorded using the most accurate method of measurement available. To the extent practical, all inerts and construction and demolition debris shall be weighed by measurement on scales. Such scales shall be in compliance with all regulatory requirements for accuracy and maintenance. For construction and demolition debris for which weighing is not practical due to small size or other considerations, a volumetric measurement shall be used. For conversion of volumetric measurements to weight, the applicant shall use the conversion rates. 
C.  Determination of compliance. The recycle coordinator shall review the information submitted under Section 8.10.050(A) and (B) and determine whether the applicant has complied with the diversion requirement, as follows: 
1.  Full Compliance. If the recycle coordinator determines that the applicant has fully complied with the diversion requirements applicable to the project, he or she shall approve the recycling plan and inform the building department that a certificate of occupancy can be issued. 
2.  Substantial Compliance. If the recycle coordinator determines that the diversion requirement has not been achieved, he or she shall determine on a case-by-case basis whether the applicant has made a good faith effort and is in substantial compliance with this chapter. In making this determination, the recycle coordinator shall consider the availability of markets for the construction and demolition debris landfilled, the size of the project, and the documented efforts of the applicant to divert construction and demolition debris. If the recycle coordinator determines that the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter and is in substantial compliance, he or she shall approve the recycling plan and inform the building department that a certificate of occupancy can be issued. 
3.  Noncompliance. Any failure of an applicant to comply with this chapter shall be punishable by the penalties described in Section 8.10.080. 
D.  Falsification of Records. If the applicant deliberately provides false or misleading data to the city, the applicant may be subject to penalties in addition to those specified in Section 8.10.080. In any civil enforcement action, administrative or judicial, the city shall be entitled to recover its attorneys' fees and costs from an applicant who is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to have violated this chapter. 
E.  Final Approval. All conditions of this chapter shall be met prior to final project approval by the building department. 
(Ord. No. 292-2004, § 1, 12-9-04)  
8.10.060 - Infeasible exemption. 
A.  Application. If an applicant for a project experiences unique circumstances that the applicant believes make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement, the applicant may apply for an exemption at the time that he or she submits the recycling plan. The applicant shall indicate on the recycling plan the maximum rate of diversion he or she believes is feasible for each material and the specific circumstances that he or she believes make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement. 
B.  Meeting with Recycle Coordinator. The recycle coordinator shall review the information supplied by the applicant and may meet with the applicant to discuss possible ways of meeting the diversion requirement. The recycle coordinator may request that staff from the Kern County Integrated Waste Management Authority or designee attend this meeting or may require the applicant to request a separate meeting with Kern County Integrated Waste Management Authority staff. Based on the information supplied by the applicant and, if applicable, Kern County Integrated Waste Management Authority staff or designee, the recycle coordinator shall determine whether it is possible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement. 
C.  Granting of Exemption. If the recycle coordinator determines that it is infeasible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement due to unique circumstances, he or she shall determine the maximum feasible diversion rate for each material and shall indicate this rate on the recycling plan submitted by the applicant. The recycle coordinator shall return a copy of the recycling plan to the applicant marked "approved for infeasible exemption" and shall notify the building department that the recycling plan has been approved. 
D.  Denial of Exemption. If the recycle coordinator determines that it is possible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement, he or she shall so inform the applicant in writing. The applicant shall have thirty days to resubmit a recycling plan form. If the applicant fails to resubmit the recycling plan, or if the resubmitted recycling plan does not comply with Sections 8.10.030(A) and (B), the recycle coordinator shall deny the recycling plan in accordance with Section 8.10.040(B). 
(Ord. No. 292-2004, § 1, 12-9-04)  
8.10.070 - Appeals. 
An appeal of the recycle coordinator decision may be made to the city manager in writing not longer than ten days after the recycle coordinator's decision. The decision of the city manager shall be final. The appellant must specifically state in the notice of appeal: (1) the name and address of the appellant and appellant's interest in the decision; (2) the nature of the decision appealed from and/or the conditions appealed from; (3) a clear, complete, but brief statement of the reasons why, in the opinion of the appellant, the decision or the conditions imposed were unjustified or inappropriate; and (4) the specific facts of the matter in sufficient detail to notify the city. The appeal shall not be stated in generalities. 
(Ord. No. 292-2004, § 1, 12-9-04; Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
8.10.080 - Civil penalties. 
Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a civil penalty in the amount calculated as two percent of the total project valuation. This penalty shall be cumulative and in addition to all other remedies, both civil and criminal, available to city under this municipal code and at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 292-2004, § 1, 12-9-04)  
Chapter 8.12 - GARBAGE COLLECTION AND REGULATION[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 290-2004, § 3(G), adopted July 15, 2004, repealed §§ 8.12.030—8.12.140, and enacted new §§ 8.12.030—8.12.100 as set out herein. The former §§ 8.12.030—8.12.140 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 120, 1970; Ord. No. 151, 1976; Ord. No. 188, 1981; Ord. No. 238, 1990 and Ord. No. 241, 1992. 
 
8.12.005. - Legislative policy. 
The city council finds and determines that the storage, accumulation, collection and disposal of refuse, trash, rubbish, solid waste, debris and other discarded material is a matter of great public concern, in that improper control of such matters creates a public nuisance, which may lead to air pollution, fire hazards, illegal dumping, insect breeding and rat infestation and other problems affecting the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the city and surrounding cities. The city council further recognizes that recycling and waste reduction is of national, regional, and local importance, and that the adoption of uniform regulations for the collection, disposal, recycling, and transportation of solid waste, recyclable and compostable materials as provided in this chapter are designed to abide by State laws and eliminate environmental problems. 
(Ord. No. 290-2004, § 3(A), 7-15-04; Ord. No. 291-2004, § 1(A), 7-15-04)  
8.12.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the definitions following in this section. The enumeration of substances in this chapter shall not be deemed exclusive, the classification of substances not herein named to be determined by their character. 
"Bulky items" means non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of combustible and non-combustible waste materials from residential dwelling units, commercial, industrial, or institutional establishments which are either too large or too heavy to be safely and conveniently loaded in solid waste collection vehicles. 
"C&D debris" (construction and demolition debris) means solid waste that is collected by on appointment only and not as regular and continuous, scheduled collection service. Examples of C&D debris include waste building materials, packaging and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures, such as fully cured asphalt, concrete, brick and lumber and wood, gypsum wallboard, roofing material, tile, glass, metal, carpeting and floor covering, plastic pipes; heating, ventilating and air conditioning systems and their components; lighting fixtures; and furnishings and fixtures. 
"City" means the city of McFarland. 
"City agent" means any person or corporation, or the employees or agents thereof, with whom the city may contract for the collection and/or disposal of garbage, rubbish and other refuse. 
"Commercial refuse bin" means a solid waste storage container which is designed for front-loading refuse collection trucks and is utilized by a commercial, industrial or institutional establishment. 
"Commercial waste" means solid waste and recyclable materials which result from the operation of any commercial, industrial or institutional establishment. 
"Garbage" means and includes all animal and vegetable refuse from kitchen and all household waste that has been prepared for or intended to be used as food, or that has resulted from the preparation of food; all animal refuse and decayed or unsound fruit or vegetable matter from any place whatsoever. 
"Green waste" means organic waste that will decompose or putrefy generated form any landscape, including garden and yard waste such as grass, leaves, weeds, branches, brush, dead plants and trees (including Christmas trees) and bedding straw and clippings, prunings and trimmings therefrom, in sizes which can be placed in containers provided by the solid waste franchisee. 
Hazardous waste" means a waste, or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may do either of the following: 
1.  Cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness. 
2.  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of or otherwise managed. 
"Medical waste" means and includes, without limitation, biohazardous waste or sharps waste, waste that is generated or produced as a result of the diagnosis, treatment or immunization of human beings or animals, in research pertaining thereto, or in the production or testing of biologicals. Medical waste may contain infectious agents. "Medical waste" does not include any of the following: waste containing microbiological cultures used in food processing and biotechnology and any containers or devices used in the preparation or handling of these cultures that is not considered to be an infectious agent; waste that is biohazardous such as paper towels, paper products, articles containing non-fluid blood and other medical solid waste products commonly found in the facilities of medical waste generators, hazardous waste, radioactive waste, waste generated from residential uses, or waste generated from normal and legal veterinarian, agricultural and animal livestock management practices on a farm or ranch. 
"Mixed C&D debris" means C&D debris that is not source separated recyclables C&D debris. 
"Recyclable materials" means materials which are capable of being reprocessed or being manufactured and diverted to reuse and include, without limitation, office and higher grade paper, corrugated paper, newspaper, telephone books and cardboard, plastics, aluminum, ferrous metal, glass, tin and construction and demolition materials including dirt, concrete, brick, rock, asphalt, drywall, organics and other similar materials for which an end-market exists. 
"Recyclables franchisee" shall mean any person obligated in a franchise agreement awarded by the city to collect, transport, process, market and divert from disposal recyclables (including, without limitation, source separated recyclable C&D debris) that generators have segregated from solid waste and discarded in recycling containers. 
"Recyclables services" means collection, transportation, processing, marketing and disposal diversion of recyclable materials and source separated recyclable C&D debris. 
"Recycling agent" means the authorized recycling agent of the city to collect source-separated, commingled, mixed material and other recyclable waste streams with a combined residual of no greater than twenty-five percent. 
"Recycling container" means any container (including, without limitation, carts, bins and roll-off boxes) authorized or provided by the city or provided by the city's recyclables franchisee for the storage and collection of discarded: (1) recyclable materials that generators have segregated from solid waste and (2) source separated recyclable C&D debris, as indicated on the containers by color and/or labels. 
"Refuse" means and includes any or all types of rubbish, refuse, garbage or waste material defined in this section. 
"Rubbish" means trimmings from lawns, trees, plants or flower gardens; boxes, waste, wood, paper, straw, hay, packing materials, leaves, leather, rubber, clothing, carpets, bedding, feathers, bottles, glass, crockery, stone, brick, ashes, metal cans, wire, metals, and all refuse or waste matter of every description whatever excepting garbage. 
"Solid waste" means all putrescible and non putrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and discarded home and industrial appliances, dewatered, treated, or chemically fixed sewage sludge, which is not hazardous waste, and other discarded solid and semisolid waste. Solid waste does not include hazardous waste or low-level radioactive waste regulated under Chapter 7.6 of Division 20 of the California Health and Safety Code. Solid waste does not include medical waste which is regulated pursuant to the Medical Waste Management Act, Chapter 6.1 of Division 20 of the California Health and Safety Code, provided that the medical waste is not disposed of at a solid waste facility. Medical waste which has been treated and is deemed to be solid waste pursuant to the Medical Waste Management Act is considered solid waste. 
"Solid waste container" means any container (including, without limitation, carts, bins and roll-off boxes) authorized or provided by the city or provided by the city's solid waste franchisee for the storage and collection of discarded solid waste and mixed C&D debris, as indicated on the containers by color and/or labels. 
"Solid waste franchisee" means any person obligated pursuant to a franchise agreement awarded by the city to collect, transport and dispose of solid waste (including mixed C&D debris) that generators have discarded in solid waste containers. 
"Solid waste services" means collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste, mixed C&D debris and green waste. 
"Source separated recyclable C&D debris" means inerts or a single type of C&D debris that is separated at the point of generation from other types of C&D debris and is not commingled with more than five percent other types of C&D debris (including by example, concrete, dry wall, wood, metals) and which contain no putrescible solid waste, that can be recycled or otherwise diverted. 
(Ord. 120 §1, 1970) 
(Ord. No. 290-2004, § 3(B), 7-15-04; Ord. No. 291-2004, § 1(B), 7-15-04; Ord. No. 303-2005, § 3(A, B), 9-8-05; Ord. No. 304-2005, § 1(A, B), 10-27-05)  
8.12.020 - Collection. 
A.  Only the city shall be authorized and permitted to provide recycling and green waste services and solid waste services to residential, commercial and industrial recyclable, green waste, solid waste, and C&D debris generators in the city. The city may directly provide those services with municipal employees or it may provide those services by awarding one or more recycling and solid waste franchises. The city council may, by resolution, establish fees for these services and rules and procedures to be followed by recyclable, green waste, solid waste, and C&D debris generators as well as penalties for failure to pay fees and for failure to follow the rules and procedures. The city council may, by resolution, authorize the city's recyclable and solid waste franchisee to assess any such penalties. All such fees and penalties shall be collected by the city in the manner described in this Chapter 8.12 or elsewhere in the city's municipal code for any other fee or penalty. The city shall retain an administrative fee for processing the billing equal to ten percent of the penalties collected and the remainder shall be paid to the recyclable or solid waste franchisee. No person may refuse to pay service fees or penalties for solid waste or recyclables or green waste, provided, however, that persons authorized to collect, transport, process, market, and divert from disposal any recyclables or source separated recyclable C&D debris in accordance with Section 8.12.020(B) shall be exempt from payment of recycling service fees. 
B.  It is hereby declared unlawful for any person: (1) to collect, transport, process, market and divert from disposal any recyclables or source separated recyclable C&D debris; or (2) to collect, transport or dispose of any solid waste, mixed C&D debris or green waste, in the city except the following persons: 
1.  Any employee of the city acting within the scope of his or her employment. 
2.  A person engaged in the business of gardening or landscaping, when removing or disposing of garden trimmings incident to that person's business in vehicles that they own or lease. 
3.  A recyclables franchisee or solid waste franchisee. 
4.  Any owner of occupied premises located in the city who or which shall provide evidence satisfactory to the city manager in the city manager's sole discretion that the owner regularly collects, transports and delivers for recycling, processing, marketing and disposal diversion at least once every week substantially all recyclable materials generated at their premise, or will collect, transport and deliver for recycling, processing, marketing and disposal diversion all source separated recyclable C&D debris generated at that premise. However, no person may provide compensation, either directly or indirectly (such as by service fee credit, deduction or offset) to any person other than the recyclables franchisee to provide recyclables services. 
C.  No person shall violate Section 8.12.020(A) of this code designating the city and public works department as authorized recycling and solid waste collection agents. Violators of this section will be dealt with in the following manner: for the first offense, a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars per occurrence; for the second offense, a fine not to exceed five thousand dollars per occurrence; and for the third offense, confiscation of violators' equipment and vehicle(s) and a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars per occurrence. Additional offenses to this section may result in imprisonment. 
(Ord. 241 §4, 1992; Ord. 238 §3, 1990: Ord. 120 §2, 1970) 
(Ord. No. 290-2004, § 3(C—E), 7-15-04; Ord. No. 291-2004, § 1(C—E), 7-15-10; Ord. No. 303-2005, § 3(C, D), 9-8-05; Ord. No. 304-2005, § 1(C, D), 10-27-05; Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10; Ord. No. 055-2016, § 1,8-25-16; Ord. No. 074-2017, § 1, 9-14-17)  
8.12.025 - Accumulation of solid waste. 
No person can cause, allow, or permit the accumulation or retention of solid waste or recyclable materials for a period in excess of seven consecutive days or in a manner which creates a threat or danger to the public health, safety or welfare or which creates a fire hazard. In addition to any other remedies provided by law, the city may abate a nuisance which creates a threat to the public health, safety or welfare or which creates a fire hazard. 
(Ord. No. 290-2004, § 3(F), 7-15-04; Ord. No. 291-2004, § 1(F), 7-15-04)  
8.12.027 - Establishment of franchise fees. 
A.  Obligation and Amount. In consideration for the grant of the franchise agreements, all franchisees must pay a franchise fee to the city in the amount prescribed by resolution of the city council and in accordance with the terms of the franchise agreements and this chapter. Calculations will be truncated at four decimal places. A 4 th place decimal larger than five will be rounded up and less than 5 rounded down to the nearest decimal. Calculations less than one cent will not be considered. 
B.  Time. Franchisees must pay franchise fees monthly, due and payable on the first day of the second month immediately following the month in which solid waste services under the franchise agreements were rendered. For example, for services rendered in July, franchisees must pay a monthly franchise fee on September 1. 
C.  Payee. Franchisees must pay their franchise fees to the order of the city of McFarland. 
D.  Documentation and Warranty. Together with payment of their franchise fees, the person submitting the payment and the chief financial officer of the franchisee or other person acceptable to the city manager must submit the following (1) documentation and (2) representation and warranty: 
1.  Documentation in form and detail satisfactory to the city manager showing the basis for calculating the franchise fee, together with additional information that the city manager may determine to be necessary to calculate or verify the franchise fee; and 
2.  A representation and warranty as follows: 
 "I represent and warrant, under penalty of perjury of the laws of the State of California, that I am familiar with the financial transactions of [INSERT NAME OF FRANCHISEE] and am responsible for keeping and maintaining its financial records, including gross receipts thereof, and I have reviewed the [INSERT DATE AND DESCRIPTION OF ACCOMPANYING FRANCHISE PAYMENT ACCOUNTING STATEMENT]. To the best of my knowledge and belief, the statement is true, correct and complete." 
Documentation and representations and warranties filed by franchisees will not be deemed conclusive as to the information presented or statements made therein. Franchisees' submission of documentation and representations and warranties does not preclude the city from taking additional measures and actions to collect franchise fees actually due and payable. 
E.  Late Payment Charges. If a franchisee does not fully and timely pay its franchise fee in accordance with subsection B of this section, the franchisee must pay a basic penalty of ten percent of the amount of the unpaid franchise fee plus interest equal to one and one-half percent of the total of: (1) the unpaid monthly charges; and (2) the basic penalty, for each month, or part of a month, that the monthly franchise fee has not been paid. 
F.  City Audit. The city may audit the records of franchisees and franchisees must provide city with copies of records within two weeks of city's request. If the city's audit demonstrates to the satisfaction of city that the franchise fees paid by contractor to city were understated, then franchisee will pay the city the amount of the understated franchise fees plus the greater of late payment charges provided in this section or the franchise agreement, within thirty days following city's submission of the results of the audit to franchisee. 
G.  License Fees or Business Taxes. Franchise fees are in addition to any license fee, business tax or other charge prescribed by the city. 
H.  Use of Franchise Fees. City may use the proceeds of the franchise fees for any costs and expenses of the city permitted under law, including, without limitation, those costs listed in Section 8.12.020(A). 
(Ord. No. 303-2005, § 3(E), 9-8-05; Ord. No. 304-2005, § 1(E), 10-27-05) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 303-2005, § 3(E), adopted September 8, 2005, set out provisions intended for use as § 8.12.025. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 8.12.027.  
8.12.030 - Mandatory collection of recyclables, solid waste, C&D debris and green waste. 
A.  Owners of occupied premises in the city shall subscribe to recyclables service and solid waste service at last once every week from the city, the recyclables franchisee or solid waste franchisee unless an owner is authorized to collect, transport and deliver for recycling, processing, marketing and disposal diversion its recyclable materials in accordance with Section 8.12.020(B)(4). The city, the recyclables franchisee or solid waste franchisee shall provide those premises with recyclables containers and solid waste containers for storage of recyclables and solid waste, respectively, prior to collection. Owners shall fully and timely pay (or cause their tenant, lessee or occupant of their premises) the service fees established by city council in accordance with Section 8.12.020(A). 
B.  Every person engaged in construction or demolition of improvements to real property, including property owners, contractors and subcontractors, shall subscribe to services for: (1) source separated recyclable C&D debris collection, transportation, processing, marketing and disposal diversion by the city or the recyclables franchisee and (2) mixed C&D debris collection, transportation, processing and/or disposal and disposal diversion by the solid waste franchisee unless an owner is authorized to collect, transport and deliver for recycling, processing, marketing and disposal diversion its source separated recyclable C&D debris in accordance with Section 8.12.020B4. City, the recyclables franchisee or solid waste franchisee shall provide those premises with recyclables containers and solid waste containers for storage of source separated construction and recyclable demolition debris and mixed C&D debris, respectively, prior to collection. Owners shall fully and timely pay (or cause their tenant, lessee or occupant of their premises) the service fees established by city council in accordance with Section 8.12.020(A). The city has designated a recycling rate of seventy-five percent by weight of these types of materials. 
C.  No person shall discard or deposit recyclables, solid waste or C&D debris onto public streets or easements or other public property, or private property other than their premise, subject to nuisance abatement at Chapters 8.20 and 8.24 of the McFarland Municipal Code. The city may require any person who violates this section to pay for the clean-up and collection, transportation, processing, marketing and/or disposal or disposal diversion of those improperly discarded materials. 
D.  Individual refuse and recycling charges may, as an alternative to any other billing method utilized by the city including, without limitation, billing on the property tax rolls, be billed on the same statement as other city utilities including water and sewer, and same shall be collected as one item, together with, and not separately from, the other utility service charges even if separately set forth and any delinquency in the payment of same shall be deemed a delinquency in payment for the water fees and city may, in addition to all other remedies available for the collection of same, terminate water service. The city council may, by order or resolution, establish one or more classes of persons as exempt in whole or in part from the foregoing provision. 
(Ord. No. 290-2004, § 3(G), 7-15-04; Ord. No. 291-2004, § 1(G), 7-15-04; Ord. No. 303-2005, § 3(F), 9-8-05; Ord. No. 304-2005, § 1(F), 10-27-05; Ord. No. 326-2008, § 1, 3-13-08; Ord. No. 328-2008, § 1(b), 6-12-08)  
8.12.040 - Unlawful acts. 
A.  It is unlawful for any persons to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon any public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, rubbish, refuse, waste or other offensive or objectionable matter. 
B.  No person shall burn any refuse or other offensive substance in the open air within the city. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person, other than the owner thereof or a person authorized by the city to tamper with any solid waste container or bin on any premises, or to collect, remove, or dispose of the contents thereof. 
D.  No person other than a recyclables franchisee or solid waste franchisee shall (1) collect recyclable materials, solid waste or C&D debris from premises in the City or (2) carry, haul or transport those materials through the streets of the city unless authorized in accordance with Section 8.12.020(B)(4). 
E.  No person may litter recyclables, solid waste or C&D debris from their vehicle during collection, carrying, hauling or transporting those materials. 
(Ord. No. 290-2004, § 3(G), 7-15-04; Ord. No. 291-2004, § 1(G), 7-15-04; Ord. No. 303-2005, § 3(G), 9-8-05; Ord. No. 304-2005, § 1(G), 10-27-05)  
8.12.050 - Special services provision. 
In no case shall solid waste or recyclables be collected on private property unless the following conditions exist: 
A.  If a resident of the household is either a senior citizen or is totally disabled. 
B.  The city manager determines that conditions exist for the collection of containers on private property for the convenience of disabled or disadvantaged resident(s). 
In these instances, the city or its franchisee(s) will provide residents with walk-up service or a similar form of convenience for the collection of solid waste or recyclables. 
(Ord. No. 290-2004, § 3(G), 7-15-04; Ord. No. 291-2004, § 1(G), 7-15-04; Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
8.12.060 - City manager powers and duties. 
A.  The direct authority for the effective management of solid waste and diversion of recyclables shall be vested in the city manager. It is the duty of the city manager to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The city manager shall have the right to inspect any and all premises to determine whether the provisions of this chapter have been observed. Any person denying or obstructing such inspection or in any way interfering with the performance of such duties will be in violation of this chapter. 
B.  The city manager shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations consistent with the intent of this chapter and governing specifically the collection, transportation, processing and diversion of solid waste and recyclables generated by residents and businesses in the city. 
C.  The city manager shall have the authority to determine which business and multi-family locations are designated for recyclable materials collection and processing and which are designated for collection and disposal of non-recycled solid waste. 
D.  The city manager shall have the authority and set rules for the separate collection of recyclables and solid waste pursuant to California Public Resources Code Sections 41950 et seq. The city manager shall adhere to guidelines of twenty-five percent residual disposal when evaluating the recyclability of specific waste targeted for processing and diversion. 
E.  City manager shall have final authority in resolving disputes between franchisee(s) and solid waste generators. In case of failure to resolve such disputes, the city council shall have ultimate authority. 
F.  City manager shall oversee the public works department and designated franchisee(s) for the collection of recyclables and solid waste from all generators within the jurisdictional borders of city. 
(Ord. No. 290-2004, § 3(G), 7-15-04; Ord. No. 291-2004, § 1(G), 7-15-04; Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
8.12.070 - Commercial waste diversion guidelines. 
A.  Commercial waste generated by businesses, construction sites, offices, retail, wholesale and other similar sites shall maintain a diversion rate of fifty percent for all commercial waste materials generated at each location. 
B.  Violations to this section may result in fines and increased solid waste collection and recycling fees. These fees shall be set by city council resolution and may result in revocation of a generator's business license if diversion goals are not met in a timely manner. 
C.  The city manager may provide recycling assistance to businesses and commercial generators upon request. 
D.  The city manager shall determine franchisee requirements, rules, fees, insurance and bonding requirements, terms of agreement and other contractual provisions. These items will be agendized for approval by city council and set by resolution. 
E.  The city manager shall determine hours of operation for the collection of residential, commercial and industrial waste streams so as not to disturb the peace of the city and to minimize impact on traffic, safety and noise. The hours of operation shall be developed by the city manager and presented to city council for approval by resolution. 
F.  In order to prevent problems of traffic, noise, wear and tear to public highways, or other problems having the potential to adversely affect the health, safety, and the general quality of life of the community, the city manager may, by city council resolution, regulate the routes, intervals, delivery points, and days for collection by franchisee(s) operating within the city from time to time hereafter. 
(Ord. No. 290-2004, § 3(G), 7-15-04; Ord. No. 291-2004, § 1(G), 7-15-04; Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
8.12.080 - Bulky items collection and recycling. 
A.  Bulky items collected by the city or its franchisee(s) must be recycled to the maximum extent possible with a diversion rate of no less than seventy-five percent. If the diversion of bulky items does not reach the seventy-five percent goal, the franchisee(s) may be assessed a penalty per ton of non-recycled bulky items to be set by resolution. 
B.  No less than twice annually, a bulky item collection program will be adequately publicized in accordance with guidelines and tasks approved by the city manager. City or franchisee(s) will work cooperatively to collect, transport, process and divert bulky items generated at residential facilities to ensure that seventy-five percent of the collected materials are diverted. 
(Ord. No. 290-2004, § 3(G), 7-15-04; Ord. No. 291-2004, § 1(G), 7-15-04; Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
8.12.090 - Spillage during contraction. 
A franchisee shall exercise all reasonable care and diligence in collecting refuse and recyclable material so as to prevent spilling, scattering or dropping refuse, recyclables, or other waste and shall immediately, at the time of occurrence, clean up any such spillage. 
(Ord. No. 290-2004, § 3(G), 7-15-04; Ord. No. 291-2004, § 1(G), 7-15-04)  
8.12.100 - Civil remedies. 
The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 290-2004, § 3(G), 7-15-04; Ord. No. 291-2004, § 1(G), 7-15-04)  
Chapter 8.13 - LANDFILL GATE FEES 
Sections: 
 
8.13.010 - Definitions. 
"Bin" means any container, including cans, that may contain up to four cubic yards of material, used by any nonresidential establishment to hold solid waste until it is collected by a hauler. 
"City" means the city of McFarland. 
"County" means the county of Kern. 
"Demolition waste" or "construction waste" means the nonhazardous waste building materials, packaging and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. 
"Department" means the Kern County waste management department. 
"Director" means the director of the waste management department, or a designee authorized by the director. 
"Franchise hauler" means those persons granted a garbage collection franchise by the city. 
"Gate attendant" means a Kern County employee that is assigned to staff a gate house at a county waste facility and to collect gate fees. 
"Gate fee" means a Kern County solid waste management program service charge, charged for all nonresidential waste brought to a county waste facility and which shall include bin disposal fees. 
"Green waste" means any nonhazardous wastes which are derived from plant material, including but not limited to leaves, grass clippings, weeds, tree trimmings, untreated wood waste or shrubbery cuttings. 
"Hazardous waste" means a waste or combination of wastes, which because of the quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may do either of the following: 
1.  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness. 
2.  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
Unless expressly provided otherwise, the term hazardous waste shall be understood to also include extremely hazardous waste as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 25115 and acutely hazardous waste as defined in the Health and Safety Code Section 25110.2. 
"Municipal solid waste" means a mixture of solid waste that includes general refuse, garbage, paper, glass, cardboard, plastic, metal and/or green waste from residential and commercial sources. 
"Nonresidential waste" is any solid waste that was not directly generated on residential property within the city. Demolition or construction waste generated on residential property is considered to be nonresidential waste. Non-residential waste includes all tires, commercial, industrial, institutional, construction, demolition and agricultural waste. 
"Person" means an individual, association, co-partnership, joint venture or any other entity whatsoever. 
"Residential waste" means solid waste that is generated on residential property within the city and does not include tires, demolition waste or construction waste. 
"Solid waste" means all nonhazardous putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semi-solid waste such as refuse, garbage, rubbish, paper, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliance, vegetable or animal solid and semi-solid wastes. 
"Waste facility" means: 
1.  Facilities used to receive, temporarily store, separate, convert or otherwise process the materials in solid waste or transfer solid waste directly from smaller to larger vehicles for transport; and 
2.  Solid waste disposal sites which are Class III Disposal Sites in accordance with the meaning prescribed by Article 2, Subchapter 15, Chapter 3, Title 23 of the California Code of Regulations (commencing with Section 2510) as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 266 §2(part), 1993)  
8.13.015 - Application of chapter. 
This chapter shall apply to all the area currently within the city limits of McFarland and to such area as may hereafter be added to the city limits. 
(Ord. 266 §2(part), 1993)  
8.13.020 - Gate fees. 
A.  All persons disposing or causing the disposal of nonresidential waste at county waste facilities shall pay the gate fees required by this chapter unless specifically exempted by this chapter. Gate fees may be paid in cash at county waste facilities or as designated by the director and approved by the city. 
B.  The special fees set forth in this chapter for disposing of waste that requires county personnel to oversee disposal operations, for the disposal of tires and dead animals, and for checks returned to the county without payment for any reason shall be charged regardless of whether the waste being disposed of is residential or nonresidential waste. In addition demolition or construction waste will be charged a gate fee regardless of its source of origin. 
C.  The basis for computing gate fees shall be either the actual weight of the solid waste being disposed as measured by a scale, the estimated weight of the solid waste being disposed based on the type of material and its volume in cubic yards, the type of vehicle hauling the solid waste being disposed, the number of units being disposed and/or the special nature of the load. 
(Ord. 266 §2(part), 1993)  
8.13.025 - Bin disposal fees. 
A.  A bin disposal fee shall be charged for all nonresidential waste bins that are collected by any franchise hauler or city for disposal at a county waste facility. 
B.  The bin disposal fee shall be based on the basic per ton gate fee for nonresidential waste and shall be calculated using the following formula: The basic per ton gate fee for nonresidential waste, divided by two thousand pounds equals the fee per pound. The fee per pound, multiplied by the average weight in pounds of a cubic yard of municipal solid waste found in bins, equals the bin disposal fee per cubic yard. The bin disposal fee per cubic yard multiplied by the capacity of a bin, equals the total bin disposal fee per time the bin is collected by a hauler. 
C.  The average weight of a cubic yard of municipal solid waste from nonresidential waste bins shall be confirmed by the department by performing waste volume/weight studies, at least once per year. The department shall report the results of the waste basis and shall recommend modifications to the bin disposal fee as may be appropriate. 
D.  Each franchise hauler shall maintain adequate and accurate records of the number of nonresidential waste bins, the number of times each nonresidential waste bin has been collected for each nonresidential customer served by the franchise hauler or city. 
E.  Each franchise hauler shall prepare a nonresidential bin report and forward a copy of the report to the director within five working days of producing monthly invoices or statements for bin collection services rendered by the franchise hauler or city. The director may approve extensions granting franchise haulers or cities additional time to prepare or forward their nonresidential bin reports. The information in the nonresidential bin reports shall match the information that appears on the franchise hauler's and city's invoices or statements and any information required in the bin reports may be audited by the department. The nonresidential bin reports should list, at a minimum, the number of nonresidential bins billed to each nonresidential account, the bin volume (in cubic yards), the number of times each bin was collected in the billing period, and such information as may be required by the director. Nonresidential bin reports shall be reviewed by department accounting staff to confirm that the rates charged by each franchise hauler and city are in compliance with this chapter and all other applicable city and county ordinances, resolutions, regulations and rules. The number of reported cubic yards shall be used by the department to calculate the amount of the bin disposal fee the county will receive from each franchise hauler. 
F.  Each franchise hauler shall calculate the amount owed by each nonresidential customer for the bin disposal fee for the franchise hauler's or city's current billing period and shall include that bin disposal fee, in a separate line, or column, on the invoice or statement sent to each nonresidential customer for that billing period. Any franchise hauler's invoice or statement for a bin disposal fee shall become delinquent sixty days after it is due. 
G.  Each franchise hauler shall forward all moneys received from the billing of the bin disposal fees to the director within thirty-five days from the date that appears on the invoices or statements sent by that franchise hauler to its customers with bins. 
H.  Each franchise hauler shall maintain a fidelity bond covering each of that franchise hauler's employees who has the responsibility or power to handle any bin disposal fees which are to be paid by that franchise hauler to the county pursuant to this chapter. Any such fidelity bond must be approved by the director as to form and content. In addition, any such fidelity bond shall be executed by an admitted surety with a Best's rating of no less than B+. The limit of each such fidelity bond shall be in an amount to be approved by the director and this amount shall not be less than the average monthly amount of bin disposal fees collected by the franchise hauler maintaining this fidelity bond. Each such fidelity bond shall name the city and the county as additional named insured. Each such fidelity bond shall also contain an endorsement providing that the coverage of the fidelity bond shall not be reduced nor shall the fidelity bond be canceled until thirty days after county and city has received notice of any such cancellation or reduction. Each franchise hauler shall file a copy of the required fidelity bond with the department prior to initiating any collection of bin disposal fees. 
I.  The franchise hauler's actual and reasonable administration costs to comply with the foregoing provisions of this section, including but not limited to, the costs of obtaining the required fidelity bond, shall be considered by the city in the process of setting of the franchise hauler's rates. 
(Ord. 266 §2(part), 1993)  
8.13.030 - Use of unattended waste facility. 
It is unlawful for any person to dispose of nonresidential waste at a county waste facility where there is no gate attendant to collect the gate fee, unless that person has obtained a permit to do so from the department. The department may grant a permit to dispose of nonresidential waste at a county waste facility where there is no gate attendant upon the showing of good cause for such a permit and the payment of the gate fee for the type and amount of nonresidential waste intended to be disposed. 
(Ord. 266 §2(part), 1993)  
8.13.035 - Green waste facility fee. 
A.  If a county waste facility is equipped with a county operated green waste recycling facility, or if any green waste recycling facility is in the area, all loads containing clean green waste which is not mixed with other types of waste shall be directed to the green waste recycling facility. At county operated green waste recycling facilities, there shall be no charge for the disposal of loads of clean residential green waste and loads of clean commercial green waste shall be charged at the rates specified in the schedule of gate fees in Section 8.13.085. 
B.  Loads of green waste mixed with other materials shall be considered to be municipal solid waste, may not be disposed at county green waste recycling facilities and shall be subject to the same gate fees applied to solid waste being disposed at county waste facilities. 
(Ord. 266 §2(part), 1993)  
8.13.040 - Hourly rate. 
The director may charge an hourly fee, in the amount set forth in Section 8.13.085 below for services performed by the personnel of the department that are necessary to investigate unlawful dumping, to oversee disposal operations at county waste facilities for health, safety or operational reasons, at the discretion of the director, or to give consultation services as requested. This hourly fee shall be charged in addition to any other applicable county fees including, but not limited to, solid waste management program service charges, gate fees, bin disposal fees or permit fees. 
(Ord. 266 §2(part), 1993)  
8.13.045 - Disposal without payment. 
A.  The director may, upon written request made at least one week in advance, authorize the disposal of municipal solid waste at county waste facilities without the payment of the gate fees required by this chapter; provided, that the municipal solid waste is collected by youth groups, civic groups or cities as part of an anti-litter cleanup activity. 
B.  Youth groups, civic groups or cities for whom the director authorizes the disposal of municipal solid waste without the payment of gate fees are prohibited from disposing any recyclable materials with the municipal solid waste which has been allowed to be disposed at county waste facilities without payment. 
C.  In cases involving an emergency, accident or threat to public health, the department may authorize disposal without the immediate payment of the gate fees required by this chapter, although the required gate fee for such disposal shall be billed to the person whose waste was disposed. 
(Ord. 266 §2(part), 1993)  
8.13.050 - Misidentified waste. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to misidentify deliberately or make misrepresentations to a gate attendant regarding the type of wastes contained in a load or the source of origin of the waste in a load brought to any county waste facility for disposal or to conceal from a gate attendant the type of waste contained in a load or the source of origin of the waste in a load brought to any county waste facility for disposal. 
B.  In the event that misidentified wastes have been disposed at a county waste facility, the responsible party shall pay the full cost of any required cleanup, remediation or relocation of the waste, in addition to the full gate fee for the misidentified waste. 
(Ord. 266 §2(part), 1993)  
8.13.055 - Out of county waste. 
In order to preserve the limited landfill capacity in county which has been reserved for in-county uses, solid waste originating outside county shall not be accepted at county waste facilities and no person shall transport refuse from outside county to county waste facilities except by the express order of the board of supervisors. However, the board of supervisors may agree to accept solid waste originating outside county at county waste facilities on such terms and conditions as it may approve. 
(Ord. 266 §2(part), 1993)  
8.13.060 - Board established rules and regulations. 
The board of supervisors or the city council shall establish rules and regulations relating to solid waste disposal and related revenue collection. A copy of these rule and regulations shall be available for inspection by the public at each county waste facility and at the department. 
(Ord. 266 §2(part), 1993)  
8.13.065 - Scale violations. 
It is unlawful for any person to carry out any action which causes damage to a scale located at a county waste facility, including, but not limited to, driving a vehicle with excessive speed onto or over a scale, making sudden starts or stops while on a scale, and pumping the brakes of a vehicle while on a scale. Any act or violation of the provisions of this section is an infraction and shall be punished as provided in Section 1.20.010 of the McFarland Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 266 §2(part), 1993)  
8.13.070 - Notice. 
Written notice required by this ordinance shall be sufficient if it is served as follows: 
A.  By personal delivery. Service in this manner shall be deemed complete at the time of such delivery; or 
B.  By posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the door or near the doorway of the main entryway of the premises of the person receiving the notice, or by mailing a copy of the notice by first-class United States mail to the last known address of the person to be served. Service in this manner shall be deemed complete seventy-two hours after such posting or mailing has been accomplished. 
C.  Actual notice shall be deemed sufficient service of any notice required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 266 §2(part), 1993)  
8.13.075 - Compliance with laws. 
No provision of this chapter shall be interpreted to exempt any person from complying with any applicable federal, state and local laws, statutes, ordinances, regulations, rules and orders. 
(Ord. 266 §2(part), 1993)  
8.13.080 - Authorization to administer fees. 
The department is authorized to make such arrangements and institute such administrative procedures as may be necessary to facilitate the collection of the fees and penalties described in this chapter. 
(Ord. 266 §2(part), 1993)  
8.13.085 - Schedule of gate fees. 
A.  The basic per ton gate fee for nonresidential solid waste, excluding tires and clean nonresidential green/wood waste, is twenty-nine dollars per ton. 
B.  At county solid waste facilities equipped with scales and weighing devices capable of determining the weight of material deposited at the facility, persons shall be charged the following gate fees: 
Cars 	$ 2.00/vehicle 
Pickup trucks 	10.00/vehicle 
Pickup trucks loaded above cab 	14.50/vehicle 
Small trailers 	14.50/trailer 
Large vehicles, trailers or Roll-off boxes 	29.00/ton 
 
C.  At county waste facilities not equipped with scales or weighing devices, or at facilities equipped with weighing devices that are not operational, persons shall be charged the following gate fees: 
Cars 	$ 2.00/vehicle 
Pickup trucks 	10.00/vehicle 
Pickup trucks loaded above cab 	14.50/vehicle 
Small trailers 	14.50/trailer 
 
For large vehicles, trailers or roll-off boxes containing nonresidential solid waste, the gate attendant will estimate the cubic yard volume of the material in the vehicle, trailer or roll-off box and convert the cubic yard volume to an estimate of the weight of that material, using a material type/weight conversion table. After the volume has been converted to a weight, the basic twenty-nine-dollar per ton gate fee for nonresidential solid waste will be applied. 
D.  A green waste fee will apply only to county operated green waste recycling facilities. 
Clean, nonresidential green/wood waste 	$15.00/ton 
 
If the green waste facility is not equipped with scales or the scales are inoperable, the cubic yard volume of the clean, nonresidential green/wood waste will be converted to weight based on a material type/weight conversion table, and the fifteen-dollar per ton green/wood waste fee will be applied. 
E.  All tires, whether from residential or nonresidential sources will be charged the following fees to offset the costs of county's waste tire diversion program. 
Tires in bulk loads 	$100.00/ton 
Individual tires: 	
Light duty tires 
(Less than 15? × 18?) 	1.00/tire 
Heavy duty tires 
(15? × 18? to 17.5? × 24?) 	5.30/tire 
Oversized tires 
(more than 17.5? × 24?, but not earth mover) 	7.35/tire 
Earth mover tires 
(Extremely large tires used on earth movers 	100.00/ton 
F. Municipal solid waste in bins 	2.00/cubic yard 
 
G.  The following special fees shall be charged, in addition to the normal gate fee, regardless of whether the source of the waste is residential or nonresidential and in addition to any other fees that may apply: 
Any load requiring county solid waste personnel to oversee disposal operation, at county waste facilities, at the discretion of the Director, for safety, health and/or operations reasons 	Hourly rate,½ hour minimum 
Hourly rate for waste management personnel 	$ 60.00/hour 
Large dead animals (Over 200 pounds) 	10.00/animal 
Small dead animals(Under 200 pounds) 	5.00/animal 
Clean fill dirt (At designated sites) 	No charge 
Processing fee for each check returned to the county without check payment for any reason 	10.00/each 
 
(Ord. 266 §2(part), 1993)  
8.13.090 - Validity. 
If any portion of this chapter is held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 266 §2(part), 1993)  
8.13.095 - Violation-Penalty. 
A.  Each franchise hauler shall calculate the amount owed by each nonresidential customer for the bin disposal fee for the franchise hauler's or city's current billing period and shall include that bin disposal fee, in a separate line, or column, on the invoice or statement sent to each nonresidential customer for that billing period. Any franchise hauler's invoice or statement for a bin disposal fee shall become delinquent sixty days after it is due. Persons with delinquent bin disposal fees shall be charged a penalty in the amount of one and one-half percent of the delinquent amount per month. 
B.  The director may charge an hourly fee, in the amount set forth in the schedule of gate fees already listed in Section 8.13.085, for services performed by the personnel of the department that are necessary to investigate unlawful dumping, to oversee disposal operations at county waste facilities for health, safety or operational reasons, at the discretion of the director, or to give consultation services as requested. This hourly fee shall be charged in addition to any other applicable county fees including, but not limited to solid waste management program service charges, gate fees, bin disposal fees or permit fees. All fees for services billed at the hourly rate shall be billed within ninety days of the service rendered and are due as of the date of billing and shall be paid within thirty days of the billing date. Any county invoice for hourly fees for services shall become delinquent thirty days after it is due. Persons with delinquent hourly fees shall be charged a penalty in the amount of one and one-half percent of the delinquent amount per month. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to misidentify deliberately or make misrepresentations to a gate attendant regarding the type of wastes contained in a load or the source of origin of the waste in a load brought to any county waste facility for disposal or to conceal from a gate attendant the type of waste contained in a load or the source of origin of the waste in a load brought to a county waste facility for disposal. Any act or violation of the provisions of this subsection shall be an infraction and shall be punished as provided in Section 1.20.010 of the McFarland Municipal Code. The director is responsible for enforcing the provisions of this subsection and may issue a citation to a person committing an act or omission which is in violation of this subsection. In the event that misidentified wastes have been disposed at a county waste facility, the responsible party shall pay the full cost of any required cleanup, remediation or location of the waste, in addition to the full gate fee for the misidentified waste. 
D.  It is unlawful for any person to carry out any action which causes damage to a scale located at a county waste facility, including, but not limited to, driving a vehicle with excessive speed onto or over a scale, making sudden starts or stops while on a scale, and pumping the breaks of a vehicle while on a scale. Any act or violation of the provisions of this subsection is an infraction and shall be punished as provided in Section 1.20.010 of the McFarland Municipal Code. The director is responsible for enforcing the provisions of this subsection and may issue a citation to a person committing an act which is in violation of this subsection. 
(Ord. 266 §2(part), 1993)  
Chapter 8.16 - TENTS 
Sections: 
 
8.16.010 - Prohibited uses. 
No tent shall be used as living or sleeping quarters in the city. 
(Ord. 64 §1, 1962)  
8.16.020 - Permit required. 
No tent exceeding one hundred square feet in area shall be erected, maintained, operated or used in the city without first obtaining a permit from the city council. The permit shall be granted at a regular meeting of the city council upon satisfactory proof that the location, design, construction, flameproofing, maintenance, use and sanitation of the tent meets national-ly recognized good health and safety practices. 
(Ord. 64 §2, 1962)  
8.16.030 - Violation-Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months in the county jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 64 §3, 1962)  
Chapter 8.20 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 019-2012, § 1, adopted February 23, 2012, in effect repealed the former Chapter 8.20, §§ 8.20.010—8.20.150, and enacted a new Chapter 8.20 as set out herein. The former Chapter 8.20 pertained to weed and rubbish abatement and derived from Ord. No. 289-2004, adopted July 15, 2004. 
 
8.20.010 - Purpose and application. 
The purpose of this chapter is to identify property maintenance standards, and establish procedures for the prosecution and abatement of public nuisance conditions to eliminate visual blight, protect the value of adjacent properties, and to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the community as a whole. This chapter is not the exclusive regulation for public nuisance conditions in the city of McFarland. It shall be in addition to other regulations, codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereinafter enacted by the city of McFarland, the state or any other legal entity, or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 019-2012, § 1, 2-23-12)  
8.20.020 - Definitions. 
The words and phrases contained in this section shall, for the purposes of this chapter, be defined as follows, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
"City code enforcement officer" means the city code enforcement officer or a designee. 
"Commercial vehicle" means any motorized or non-motorized vehicle used or maintained to transport property or goods for profit or persons for hire or compensation. 
"Inoperative vehicle" means a vehicle is "inoperative" if it is: 
1.  Mechanically incapable of being driven; or 
2.  Prohibited from being operated on a public street or highway pursuant to the provisions of Vehicle Code Sections 4000 5202, 24002, or 40001. 
"On or adjacent to real property" means and includes all areas of the real property including, but not limited to, the rear side, or front yard areas, parkways, sidewalks, or on abutting streets in all zones in the city except for items contained within a receptacle for collection of solid waste pursuant to the city of McFarland Municipal Code. 
Owner, Vehicle. "Vehicle owner" means the last registered owner and the legal owner of record. 
"Parkway" means the area between any real property line and the edge of the pavement of a public street. 
"Public nuisance" means: 
1.  Any property that is in such a condition as to be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the public or the adjoining property. 
2.  The presence of vacant real property in the city that is not properly secured, fenced, boarded up, and maintained, and which is in such a condition as to be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the public or the adjoining property. 
3.  The presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or part thereof, on private or public property not including streets. 
"Public property" means land, buildings, structures, or fixtures that are owned by a public agency. For the purposes of this chapter, public property does not include streets. 
"Recreational vehicle" means any travel trailer, camper, motor home, or trailer (as defined in State Vehicle Code Sections 242, 243 and 630, respectively), or any camper shell or boat. 
"Residential use" means any property zoned for residential use as established in this title. Sidewalks, parkways and streets adjacent to residential property shall be considered a residential area for purposes of this chapter. 
"Residentially developed property" means any property developed with a conforming dwelling unit or legal nonconforming dwelling unit. 
"Responsible official" means city chief law enforcement official, fire chief, building official, code enforcement officer or designee. 
"Responsible party" means the owner, lessee, agent, person, or entity in lawful charge or possession of the property. 
"Street" means a public street, drive, right-of-way, avenue, highway, place, close, pass, alley, lane, court, or way. 
"Vacant real property" means any vacant parcel of land, building or structure on real property in all zones in the city where the responsible party has intentionally left such property vacant and unoccupied for a period of time exceeding thirty calendar days. 
"Vehicle" means an automobile, truck, motorcycle, trailer, and any other device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power. 
"Waste matter" means unused or discarded matter having no substantial market value, which is exposed to the elements and is not enclosed in any structure or otherwise concealed from public view, and which consists of but is not limited to construction debris and recycling. 
(Ord. No. 019-2012, § 1, 2-23-12)  
8.20.030 - Prohibited conduct. 
It is unlawful for any responsible party having charge or possession of any real property in the city to: 
A.  Operate any business activity in the city without a business license registration certificate and appropriate planning and zoning approval. 
B.  Operate any business or other activity in the city not consistent with all of the terms and conditions of all applicable zoning approvals and approved plans granted by the city. This includes, but is not limited to, business license registration certificates, home occupation permits and conditional use permits. 
C.  Allow upon any premises under his/her control the placement of any temporary or permanent signs without appropriate zoning and building permit approval. 
D.  Keep, store, or maintain on or in front of any real property, or in or on any vehicle upon the real property under his/her control any waste matter, litter, rubbish or weeds, when such material is open to view at street level from a parkway, street, or adjoining property, or in such a condition as to be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of such real property or any adjoining property. 
E.  Not maintain any parcel of land, building, or structure on real property in conformance with the standards contained in this chapter. 
F.  Permit any parcel of land, building, or structure on real property to remain a vacant real property without properly securing and maintaining the property pursuant this chapter. 
G.  Reserved. 
H.  Allow upon any premises under his/her control any swimming pool, pond, spa, or other body of water or excavation which is abandoned, unattended, or unfiltered. 
I.  Allow the disposal or storage of oil, grease, other petroleum products, noxious chemical, pesticides, or any gaseous, liquid, or solid waste in such a manner to constitute a health or fire hazard or degrade the appearance of or detract from the aesthetic and property values of neighboring properties. 
J.  Keep, store, or maintain upon any premises under his/her control any abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or part thereof except as allowed by Table 8.20(A). 
K.  Keep, store, or maintain upon any premises under his/her control any recreation vehicle except as allowed by Table 8.20(A). 
L.  Use any parked or stored vehicle or recreational vehicle, operative or not, as temporary or permanent living space unless the following conditions are satisfied: 
1.  Building permits for the construction of the conventional single-family residence shall be obtained prior to or concurrently with the installation of the mobilehome or recreational vehicle. 
2.  A mobilehome or recreational vehicle is to be removed from the premises or placed in dead storage when: 
a.  Six months have passed since the mobilehome or recreational vehicle was installed. 
b.  Seven days have passed since the conventional single-family dwelling unit was approved for occupancy. 
c.  The building permit has lapsed due to lack of activity. 
M.  Use a garage, shed or accessory structure, or any portion thereof, as a temporary or permanent living space or as a meeting room. 
N.  Keep, store, or maintain in any residential zone or on any residentially developed property any of the following: 
1.  Construction and/or business equipment, supplies, materials, or machinery of any type or description unless associated with a valid building permit for improvements to the property that the material is located on; 
2.  Buses and catering trucks, regardless of size, will be restricted from parking in residential zones and residentially developed areas; 
3.  Portable restroom facilities unless a temporary use permit has been issued. 
O.  Allow accessory structures including but not limited to walls, fences, drainages, sidewalks, sheds, garages, playhouses, lean-tos, and wall hedges to fall into a state of disrepair or deterioration. 
P.  Abandon or discard any personal property on any public property including a street, except when deposited in an approved city of McFarland refuse container. 
Q.  Keep or store any non-operable vehicle in any street or residential driveway. 
Table 8.20(A) 
Vehicle Storage and Parking Regulations 
	Residential Zones and Residentially 
Developed Property 	Non-residential Zones 
(Excluding Residentially Developed Property) 
Parking and storage options. 	Vehicles and recreational vehicles 	Abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or non-operative vehicles or parts thereof 	Vehicles and recreational vehicles 	Abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or non-operative vehicles or parts thereof 
Enclosed completely within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property. 	Permitted 	Permitted 	Permitted 	Permitted 
Stored or parked in a lawful manner in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard. 	Not 
permitted 	Not 
permitted 	Permitted 	Permitted 
Stored or parked on a lot pursuant to zoning approval granted by the city of McFarland for that purpose in connection with the operation of a lawfully conducted business. 	Not 
permitted 	Not 
permitted 	Permitted 	Permitted 
Stored or parked in an area screened from each abutting public street and property by a six-foot high permanent, solid, opaque fence or wall or building and consistent with Chapter 17.144 of this title. The fence or wall shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with applicable development standards for fences and walls. 	Permitted 	Permitted 	Permitted 	Not 
permitted 
Temporarily stored or parked on a paved driveway connecting to a garage or carport with a public or private street for the purposes of loading and unloading. 	Permitted 	Not 
permitted 
1, 2 	Not 
permitted 	Not 
permitted 
Stored or parked on any unpaved surface except as permitted above. 	Not 
permitted 	Not 
permitted 	Not 
permitted 	Not 
permitted 
 
1  One abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or non-operative vehicles may be stored in the front in the front yard provided such car is covered by a secured vehicle cover. Plastic tarps do not constitute a vehicle cover. 
2  There shall be no more than two abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or non-operative vehicles per residential lot. 
(Ord. No. 019-2012, § 1, 2-23-12; Ord. No. 039-2014, § 1, 7-24-14)  
8.20.040 - Public nuisance. 
A violation of this chapter is designated and declared a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 019-2012, § 1, 2-23-12)  
8.20.050 - Compliance responsibility. 
Compliance with the standards contained in this chapter shall be at the sole cost of the responsible party for the real property and shall not limit the remedies or recovery of costs of the abatement of any real property found to be in violation by the city council or its designee. 
(Ord. No. 019-2012, § 1, 2-23-12)  
8.20.060 - Property maintenance standards. 
All developed real property in the city shall be maintained at a level not less than the following standards: 
A.  Building Exteriors and Roofs. Exterior building surfaces and roofs for all buildings including accessory buildings and structures shall be maintained free of significant surface cracks, missing materials, warping and dry rot which either threaten the structural integrity, or result in a dilapidated, decaying, disfigured, or partially ruined appearance. 
B.  Condition of Structures. Structures shall not be partially destroyed, abandoned, unsecured, or permitted to remain in a state of, except properties with valid current building permits on file with the city of McFarland building department, partial construction for more than thirty days. Buildings or structures shall not be boarded up for a period in excess of ten days without a valid demolition or building permit on file. 
C.  Drainage. On-site drainage improvements shall be maintained in order to prevent deterioration, disrepair, and ineffectiveness. 
D.  Excavations. Excavations, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, and other holes shall be properly secured to prevent access by unauthorized persons. 
E.  Graffiti. All structures, equipment, walls, and fencing on the property shall be maintained free of graffiti. 
F.  Landscaping. All landscaping on the property shall be maintained and all landscaping visible from a public street shall be maintained in a healthy condition free of dying, dead, diseased, decayed, discarded and/or overgrown vegetation. 
G.  Lighting. All exterior light fixtures shall be maintained in good working order free of broken lamps, lens, and light bulbs. Furthermore, the structural integrity of all supporting poles and mounting fixtures shall be maintained. All insulation and connections shall be intact and free of exposed wire. 
H.  Outdoor Drying. In all residential zones or residential developments, the outdoor airing and/or drying of laundry, clothes, other household linens, or food is permitted only in rear or side yards, provided that the items are not visible from a public street excluding alleys. 
I.  Paint. Painted surfaces on buildings, trash enclosures, walls, retaining walls, fences, and structures shall be maintained in order to prevent decay, excessive cracking, peeling, chalking, dry rot, warping, or termite infestation. 
J.  Parking Areas, Sidewalks. Parking areas, private alleys, driveways, sidewalks, and walkways shall be maintained free of potholes, cracks, breaks, lifting, and other deteriorated conditions. 
K.  Pools. Barrier fencing and gates for swimming pools and spas shall be maintained as required by the California Building Code. Swimming pools and spas shall not contain unfiltered or stagnant water. 
L.  Rodent and Vermin Control. All property, including landscaped areas, buildings, and structures, shall be maintained free of rodents and other vermin in accordance with the requirements of the district Kern County mosquito and vector control. 
M.  Signs. All signs and sign structures shall be maintained in order to prevent deterioration, disrepair, and unsightliness. The structural integrity of all supporting poles, and mounting fixtures shall be maintained. All sign faces shall be maintained free of missing lettering or lighting. 
N.  Trash Bins. Trash bins or dumpsters shall be kept within an enclosed building, trash enclosure, or screened from public view to the maximum extent feasible. Overflowing trash bins or dumpsters due to inadequate number of bins and/or request for service from the trash hauler are prohibited. Use of commercial trash bins for residential uses other than during construction with a valid building permit is prohibited. 
O.  Use of Tarps. Excluding emergency repairs, the use of tarps for roof and building repairs is prohibited. Additionally, the use of tarps for vehicle covers, carports, or temporary canopies, enclosures, and/or awnings is prohibited in any outdoor area visible from any public street. 
P.  Walls, Fences, and Trash Enclosures. All walls, retaining and planter walls, and fences abutting a street or trash enclosure shall be maintained free of significant surface cracks, dry rot, warping, deterioration, leaning, missing panels or blocks which either threaten the structural integrity, or result in a dilapidated, decaying, disfigured, or partially ruined appearance. 
Q.  Window Screens. All window and glass door screens shall be maintained free of tears, rips, and holes. On residential rental properties, window screens are required on all windows. 
R.  Windows. Broken windows and glass doors and the use of materials other than glass as a replacement or covering of windowpanes are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 019-2012, § 1, 2-23-12)  
8.20.070 - Property maintenance standards for undeveloped or vacant properties. 
A.  Mandatory Standards. All vacant real property in the city shall be secured and maintained at a level not less than the following standards during the time period that such property remains vacant real property: 
1.  Graffiti. All structures, equipment, walls, and fencing on the property shall be maintained free of graffiti. 
B.  Additional Standards. When deemed necessary by the responsible official in order to maintain the safety of persons or property, the following standards may also be imposed: 
1.  Access Points. All windows, doors, and other open access features to the structures on the real property shall be boarded up and secured according to the following standards (alternate materials may be used if approved by responsible official): 
a.  Any missing or broken windows or doors shall be covered as specified. Complete boarding of all unbroken windows shall only be required when specified by the case officer; 
b.  Exterior door openings may be secured against entry by locking or using #10 minimum flathead wood screws penetrating a minimum of three-fourth inches into framing members, only if doors do not contain glazing panes; 
c.  All wood used to cover openings shall be new or comparable (to be approved by case officer), exterior grade one-half inch nominal thickness plywood or O.S.B. board. Only one piece of plywood or O.S.B. board shall be used per opening unless the opening requires more than one four-foot by eight-foot sheet in which case, splices shall have two-inch by four-inch backing the complete length of the splice. Plywood or O.S.B. board shall extend two inches minimum beyond opening on all sides and shall be seared by #10 minimum flathead wood screws. Screws shall be spaced twelve inches can center around complete opening and shall penetrate framing members a minimum of three-fourth inch; 
d.  Where applicable, plywood or O.S.B. board shall extend flush to top of door threshold and protruding windowsills; 
e.  All variations from above requirements shall be approved by case officer; 
f.  Contractor shall first confer with officer prior to submitting bid for special board-up conditions such as apartment buildings, motels, or commercial buildings; 
g.  All boards visible from the building's exterior shall be painted to match the buildings' exterior; 
h.  Refill holes, which are more than one-foot in depth. 
2.  A building shall be permitted to be boarded up for no longer than six months. If a demo permit or building permit are not issued within six months, the city shall initiate abatement proceedings. 
3.  Fencing. The property shall be temporarily fenced on all sides along the property line with a chain link fence or other type of secure fencing at a minimum height of six feet from grade, or greater, as determined by the fire chief or building official. The fence shall be properly posted with no trespassing signs, and kept clear of all other signs, except lawfully installed real estate signs for the lease or sale of the property and signs identifying ownership of the property or fencing. 
4.  Security Lighting. All structures which could be used for human habitation shall have a minimum of one light each in the front and rear yards. Such lighting shall be capable of illuminating the structure's exterior so as to be visible from the street or alley from dusk to dawn. However, the lights shall be shielded to avoid lighting adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 019-2012, § 1, 2-23-12)  
8.20.080 - Notice to abate authority. 
If it is determined by a responsible official that a public nuisance, as designated in Section 8.20.040, exists on any lot or premise in the city or upon any sidewalk, parking area or street adjacent to such lot or premises, the responsible official shall cause a notice to be issued to abate such a nuisance. There shall be two such notices. These notices are as follows: 
A.  Notice of Violation. A notice informing the property owner that their property is in violation of the McFarland Municipal Code. This notice will give the property owner twenty days to abate the nuisance. Failure by the property owner to abate the nuisance shall result in the issuance of a "notice to abate" to be issued. 
B.  Notice to Abate. A more formal notice requiring the property owner to abate the nuisance within seven days. This notice will state that failure to abate the nuisance will result in the issuance of an administrative citation as required in Title 1, Chapter 1.14 of the McFarland Municipal Code. 
It shall be the duty of the property owner, the agent of the owner, or the person in possession of any lot or premises in the city, within seven days from the date of the notification as provided in this chapter, or in case of an appeal to the city council, within ten days from the determination thereof, unless the same is sustained, to remove the nuisance as stated in the notice to abate. 
(Ord. No. 019-2012, § 1, 2-23-12; Ord. No. 067-2017, § 1(B), 5-25-17)  
8.20.090 - Notice to abate—Service. 
The notice required by Section 8.20.070 may be served in any of the following manners: 
A.  By personal service on the owner, occupant or person in charge or control of the property. 
B.  By regular mail addressed to the owner or person in charge and control of the property, at the address shown on the last available property assessment roll, or as otherwise known. Service shall be deemed completed upon the deposit of said notice, postage prepaid in the United States mail; 
C.  By posting at a conspicuous case on the land or abutting public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 019-2012, § 1, 2-23-12)  
8.20.100 - Notice to abate—Appeal. 
Within ten days from the date of posting, mailing or personal service of the required notice, the owner or person occupying or controlling such lot or premises affected may appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk. At the regular meeting or adjourned regular meeting of the city council, not less than five calendar days nor more than twenty calendar days thereafter, it shall proceed to hear and determine such appeal. The decision of the city council thereupon shall be final and conclusive. The city clerk shall notify the appellant in writing no later than three days prior to the scheduled hearing of the time, date and place of the hearing by mailing such notice to him or her at the address stated in his or her written appeal. 
(Ord. No. 019-2012, § 1, 2-23-12)  
8.20.110 - Duty to remove nuisance. 
It shall be the duty of the owner, the agent of the owner, or the person in possession of any lot or premises in the city, within ten days from the date of notification as provided in this chapter, or in case of an appeal to the city council, within ten days from the determination thereof, unless the same is sustained, to remove the nuisance as stated in the notice to clean premises. 
(Ord. No. 019-2012, § 1, 2-23-12)  
8.20.120 - Abatement by the city—Cost report and accounting—Filing required. 
If the owner fails or neglects to remove the nuisance as defined in this chapter, within the time specified in this chapter, the responsible official shall cause such nuisance to be abated. The abatement work may be done by city crews or by private contractor. A report of the abatement proceedings and an accurate account of the charges for abating the nuisance on or in front of each separate property shall be filed with the city council. 
(Ord. No. 019-2012, § 1, 2-23-12)  
8.20.130 - Cost report and account—Hearing and posting requirements. 
The city clerk shall thereupon set the cost report and account for hearing by the city council at the first regular or adjourned regular meeting, which will be held at least seven calendar days after the date of filing, and shall post a copy of the report and account and notice of the time, date and place of hearing in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance of the council chambers in the city office. 
(Ord. No. 019-2012, § 1, 2-23-12)  
8.20.140 - Cost report and account— Hearing procedure—Assessment of costs. 
The city council shall consider the cost report and account at the time set for hearing, together with any objections or protests by any interested parties. Any owner of land or person interested therein may present a written or oral protest or objection to the report and account. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall approve the report and account as submitted, or as modified or corrected by the city council. The amounts so approved shall be liens upon the respective lots or premises, upon which abatement was performed, and the city council shall adopt a resolution assessing such amounts as liens upon the respective parcels of land as they are shown upon the most recent available property assessment roll, and determining that such weeds, grasses, dead trees, dead shrubs and waste matter constitute a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 019-2012, § 1, 2-23-12)  
8.20.150 - Cost report and account—Filing of resolution. 
The city clerk shall prepare and file with the county auditor a certified copy of the resolution of the city council, as provided in Section 8.20.140. 
(Ord. No. 019-2012, § 1, 2-23-12)  
8.20.160 - Payment to city. 
The finance department of the city or their authorized representative may accept payment of any amount due at any time prior to the city council's final determination on the cost report and account, as called for in Section 8.20.140. 
(Ord. No. 019-2012, § 1, 2-23-12)  
8.20.170 - Government Code sections adopted by reference—Collection of assessments. 
The provisions of Government Code Sections 39580 to 39585, inclusive, are incorporated in this chapter by reference. The county auditor shall enter each assessment in the county tax roll opposite the parcel of land. The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes; and if delinquent, the amount is subject to the same penalties and procedure of foreclosure and sale as is provided for ordinary municipal taxes. 
(Ord. No. 019-2012, § 1, 2-23-12)  
8.20.180 - Violation—Penalty. 
The owner, occupant or agent of any lot or premises within the city who permits or allows the existence of a public nuisance, as defined in this chapter, upon any lot or premises owned, occupied or controlled by him, or who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 019-2012, § 1, 2-23-12)  
8.20.190 - Violation—Demolition. 
Where the responsible official or their designee find that a real property contains a structure that violates this chapter and presents a threat to the safety or health of the public, city council by resolution may declare the structure a public nuisance and order the demolition of the structure where it finds the property violates this chapter, presents an immediate threat to the safety or health of the public and finds that persons have continued to enter, occupy or inhabit such structures despite the application of the standards of this chapter. The demolition of a structure pursuant to this section shall not occur until the abatement procedures are complied with as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 019-2012, § 1, 2-23-12)  
8.20.200 - Violation—Emergency abatement. 
In the event the public nuisance constitutes a significant and immediate threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, the responsible official or their designee, may enter the property upon which the public nuisance exists, abate the public nuisance, and restore any property affected by the public nuisance. To the extent reasonably practicable, informal notice shall be provided to the owner or occupant before abatement. If necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare, abatement may proceed without prior notice to or consent from the owner/occupant thereof and without judicial warrant. 
A.  Imminent danger shall include, but is not limited to, circumstances that present a significant and immediate threat to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
B.  An administrative hearing before the city council shall follow the abatement action at the next regular meeting of the city council that the matter can be placed on the agenda wherein the city council shall determine the reasonableness of the action taken by the officer. Subject to the city council's determination, all costs of the abatement shall be borne by the owner of the property and all provisions described in this chapter relating to assessment and collection of same shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 019-2012, § 1, 2-23-12; Ord. No. 045-2015, § 1(B), 9-10-15)  
Chapter 8.28 - KILLING ANIMALS PROHIBITED 
Sections: 
 
8.28.010 - Unlawful killing of four-legged animals. 
No person shall and it shall be unlawful for any person to kill, slaughter and/or butcher any four-legged animal within the city unless such killing, slaughtering and/or butchering is performed by a person licensed by the county of Kern and/or the state of California to engage in such activity at a duly licensed facility or any public school facility. 
(Ord. 261 §1(part), 1993)  
8.28.020 - Violation—Penalty—Misdemeanor. 
Any person convicted of violating the provisions of Section 8.28.010 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished pursuant to Section 1.20.010 and supplemented by Chapter 1.16 of the McFarland Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 261 §1(part), 1993)  
Chapter 8.32 - INSECT ABATEMENT 
Sections: 
 
8.32.010 - Insects—Violation. 
It is unlawful and is declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any property in the city to permit or maintain such property which results in the breeding, nesting and growth of Cinch Bugs, False Cinch Bugs, or any other insect that migrates therefrom to adjacent or surrounding properties in numbers that is injurious to health, or is indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property. 
(Ord. 269 §1(part), 1994)  
8.32.020 - Abatement by eradication or removal. 
A.  All or any part of any property found, as provided in this chapter, to constitute a public nuisance may be abated by eradication and a lien established for the costs thereof pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 8.24 of this code, commencing with Section 8.24.030, all of which are incorporated herein by this reference, provided, however, the council shall have the authority to: 
1.  Modify the applicable wordings of any notices described therein to conform to the intent of this chapter; and 
2.  In the event of the immediate need of eradication, the council shall have the authority to shorten the periods of time of each notice to be given to the applicable parties therein and/or any other action to be taken by the city provided such time periods will give the applicable parties notice thereof at least forty-eight hours prior to the commencement of any eradication. 
B.  The procedures set forth in Chapter 8.24 shall not be exclusive, and shall not in any manner limit or restrict the city from enforcing other city ordinances or abating public nuisances in any other manner provided by law nor to prevent the city from commencing civil or criminal proceedings for the violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 269 §1(part), 1994)  
8.32.030 - Violations. 
A.  The owner or other person having charge or control of any such property who maintains any public nuisance defined in this chapter, or who violates an order of abatement made pursuant to this chapter, is guilty of an infraction. 
B.  Any person who removes any notice or order posted as herein required for the purpose of interfering with the enforcement of these provisions shall be guilty of an infraction. 
C.  Any person who obstructs, impedes or interferes with any representative of the city council or any representative of a city department with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 269 §1(part), 1994)  
Chapter 8.34 - TOBACCO RETAILERS PERMIT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 50-2016, § 1, adopted March 24, 2016, amended Chapter 8.34 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Chapter 8.34, §§ 8.34.010—8.34.040, pertained to similar material, and derived from Ord. No. 315-2007, adopted May 10, 2007. 
 
8.34.010 - General purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit any person from acting as a tobacco retailer without first obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco retailer's permit and to set forth the terms and conditions of obtaining the permit. 
(Ord. No. 050-2016, § 1, 3-24-16)  
8.34.020 - Incorporation by Reference. 
Pursuant to Government Code Sections 50022.1 et seq., Ordinance Nos. G-7724, G-8006, G-8495, and G-8586 of the board of supervisors of the county of Kern, state of California which amended Chapter 8.60 of Title 8 of the Kern County Ordinance Code regarding tobacco retailer's permit and each and every term, provision, rule, and regulation therein is hereby incorporated by this reference as if fully set forth herein verbatim. 
(Ord. No. 050-2016, § 1, 3-24-16)  
8.34.030 - Enforcement and penalties. 
8.60.100. Administrative penalties. 
 A. Upon a determination by the Department that a person has engaged in any conduct that violates the provisions of this chapter, the Director may suspend a tobacco retailer's permit, impose administrative penalties, or both suspend the permit and impose administrative penalties. 
 B. The Department shall notify the tobacco retail facility owner that there has been an initial determination of violation under the provisions of this chapter. The initial determination notice will specify the violation and the sanction imposed, including the effective date of the suspension, if applicable. The notice shall further state that the tobacco retail facility owner may, within fifteen (15) days, submit to the Department any written or documentary evidence to contest the initial determination of violation. 
 C. After receiving such evidence, if applicable and provided, the Director shall prepare a final written decision and shall serve this decision upon the tobacco retailer. Upon written request, the offender shall have the right to receive copies of any records or files upon which the administrative decision is based. This final determination shall be served through certified mail within sixty (60) days of the final determination. 
 D. When this chapter permits the Director to suspend a permit, the following sanction may be imposed: 
   1. For the first violation in any five-year period, the tobacco retailer shall receive a notice of violation from the Department. 
   2. For the second violation in any five-year period, the person's tobacco retailer's permit shall be suspended for up to thirty (30) days. 
   3. For a third violation in any five-year period, the person's tobacco retailer's permit shall be suspended for up to ninety (90) days. 
   4. For a fourth or subsequent violation in any five-year period, the person's tobacco retailer's permit shall be suspended for up to one hundred eighty (180) days and/or revoked. 
 E. When this chapter allows the Director to impose an administrative penalty, the following penalty may be imposed: 
   1. For the first violation, a penalty in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00); 
   2. For the second violation within five (5) years from the date of the first violation, a penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00); 
   3. For the third and each subsequent violation within five (5) years from the date of the first violation, a penalty in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
 F. Upon determination by the Department that a tobacco retailer has violated any provision of this chapter and that the tobacco retailer did not violate any provision of this chapter in the five (5) years immediately preceding the violation, the Director may suspend the imposition of any sanction under subsection (D) or penalty under subsection (E) for a period of six (6) months. 
   1. Within fifteen (15) days of the Director's decision to suspend the imposition of any sanction or penalty pursuant to this subsection, the tobacco retailer shall pay a fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the cost of inspections during the six-month period. Failure to pay this fee shall immediately restore the imposition of any sanction under subsection (D) or penalty under subsection (E). 
   2. During the six-month period, the Department shall inspect the tobacco retail facility for compliance as deemed necessary by the Department. 
   3. A determination by the Department that the tobacco retailer has engaged in any conduct that violates the provisions of this chapter during the six-month period shall restore the imposition of any sanction under subsection (D) or penalty under subsection (E) immediately and without further right to appeal. 
   4. If and only if the tobacco retailer completes the six-month period without violating the provisions of this chapter as determined by the Department, the sanction under subsection (D) or penalty under subsection (E) previously imposed shall be permanently stayed. 
8.60.110. Right to administrative review and procedures. 
 A. The tobacco retailer shall have the right to appeal the decision of the Department to the City Council. To obtain a review of the final determination, the tobacco retailer must file with the clerk of the Board of Supervisors within fifteen (15) days of the date of the final determination, a written request for a hearing. The timely filing of a request for hearing shall hold in abeyance any license suspension until the administrative review is heard and decided. 
 B. If a review is requested, the clerk of the Board of Supervisors shall provide written notice, within thirty (30) days of its receipt of the request, to the tobacco retailer of the date, time and place of the hearing on the appeal. 
 C. At the time fixed in the notice, the Board of Supervisors shall proceed to hear testimony from any interested person regarding the specified violation deemed by the Department to be the basis for the proposed administrative penalty, and any other matter which the Board of Supervisors may deem pertinent thereto. 
 D. Upon the conclusion of the hearing the Board of Supervisors will make a determination based on the evidence presented at the hearing, and may impose a suspension penalty without regard to the limits in Section 8.60.100. 
 E. The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 050-2016, § 1, 3-24-16)  
Chapter 8.36 - FOOD ESTABLISHMENT GRADING 
Sections: 
 
8.36.010 - General purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for the issuance of a grading score which represents the compliance of food establishments with local ordinances and state law. 
(Ord. No. 316-2007, § 1, 5-10-07)  
8.36.020 - Incorporation by reference. 
Pursuant to Government Code Sections 50022.1 et seq., Ordinance No. G-7463 of the Board of Supervisors of the County of Kern, State of California which adds Chapter 8.58 to Title 8 of the Kern County Ordinance Code regarding food establishment grading and each and every term, provision, rule, and regulation therein is hereby incorporated by this reference as if fully set forth herein verbatim. 
(Ord. No. 316-2007, § 1, 5-10-07)  
8.36.030 - Enforcement and penalties. 
Removal of the Inspection Summary Report is a violation of this Chapter and may result in the suspension or revocation of the Environmental Health Permit. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the provisions as specified in Chapter 8.54 of Title 8 of the Kern County Ordinance Code. 
(Ord. No. 316-2007, § 1, 5-10-07)  
Chapter 8.38 - CODE ENFORCEMENT RELOCATION PROGRAM 
 
8.38.010 - Applicability. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide owner-paid relocation payments and assistance to residential tenants who are displaced due to city code enforcement or voluntary code compliance in order to alleviate hardships associated with such relocation; to facilitate the correction of code violations; and to protect the health, safety and welfare of McFarland residents. 
(Ord. No. 057-2016, 8-25-16)  
8.38.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Building official" means the city official who is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the McFarland Building Code, as well as his or her designee. 
B.  "Code enforcement" or "code enforcement activities" means any activity or activities initiated by the city to determine the condition of a building and require the property owner to make necessary repairs, to vacate the building, or to take other action necessary to bring the property into compliance with applicable state or local zoning, building or housing standards, including but not limited to standards contained in the city of McFarland Municipal Code as adopted by the city and other technical codes adopted and enforced by the city for existing residential properties, including codes addressing dangerous or hazardous buildings. 
C.  "Declaration of substandard" means a declaration, notice, or order executed by the building official under the authority of the McFarland Municipal Code or other provision of law declaring that a property is substandard, unsafe and/or a public nuisance. 
D.  "Noncomplying building or unit" means a building, room or rental unit in the city which has been found or determined by an authorized enforcement official of the city to be substandard, blighted, unsafe, a public nuisance or otherwise not in conformance with applicable state or local zoning, building or housing standards. 
E.  "Notice to abate" means a notice or order to abate a substandard or noncomplying conditions issued by the city pursuant to its code enforcement activities. 
F.  "Notice to vacate" means a notice or order issued by the city or a court of competent jurisdiction to a property owner or tenant household pursuant to the city's code enforcement activities requiring that a residential building, unit or room be vacated, either immediately or at some future specified time, as a result of a determination that such building, unit or room is substandard, blighted, unsafe, a public nuisance or in noncompliance with applicable building, housing, zoning and other code standards. 
G.  "Property owner" or "owner" means a person, corporation, partnerships, limited liability company, or any other entity holding fee title to the subject real property. In the case of multiple ownership of the subject real property, "property owner" refers to each entity holding any portion of the fee interest in the property, and the property owner's obligations in this chapter shall be joint and several as to each property owner. 
H.  "Rental unit" means a dwelling space in the city containing a separate bathroom, kitchen and living area, including a single-family dwelling or unit in a multifamily dwelling which is hired, rented or leased to a household as defined by California Civil Code Section 1940. This definition applies to any dwelling space that is actually used for residential purposes whether or not the residential use is legally permitted. 
I.  "Room" means any subdivided portion for the interior of a residential building in the city which is used for the purpose of sleeping and is occupied by a tenant household for at least thirty consecutive days. This includes, but is not limited to, a single room occupancy (SRO) living space. This definition applies to any space that is actually used for residential purposes whether or [not] the residential use is legally permitted. 
J.  "Tenant household" or "tenant" means one or more persons who rent or lease a rental unit as their primary residence and who share living expenses. 
(Ord. No. 057-2016, 8-25-16)  
8.38.030 - Tenant eligibility. 
A.  A tenant household shall be eligible for the relocation payments from the property owner under this chapter if the tenant household is displaced from its rental unit or room due to the city's code enforcement activities. A tenant shall be deemed to be displaced from its rental unit or room due to code enforcement activities if such tenant household either: 
1.  Receives a notice from the property owner requiring the tenant household to vacate or quit the rental unit or room at any time after the city has issued a notice to vacate, notice to abate life-threatening conditions, or declaration of substandard covering that unit or room; or 
2.  Vacates its unit or room (weather or not the property owner requires vacation) after (a) the city has issued by notice to vacate, notice to abate life-threatening conditions, or declaration of substandard covering that unit or room, and (b) the abatement period has expired without correction of the noncomplying condition. 
B.  Notwithstanding the above, a tenant household shall not be deemed to be displaced due to code enforcement activities in any of the following cases: 
1.  The property owner can demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that the vacation of the unit or room was due to one of the following: (a) the noncomplying condition, (b) the city's or courts determination the rental unit, room, or building was a noncomplying or unit, or (c) the need to make repairs to rectify any noncomplying condition; 
2.  The property owner can demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that the noncomplying condition was created by the tenant household or household's guest or invitees, and was not created by the property owner or the owners agent, or it determined that the tenant household occupied the rental unit or room for the purpose of receiving relocation benefits; 
3.  The property owner can demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that the tenant household unreasonably prevented the owner or the owner's agent from undertaking maintained or repairs that would have prevented or rectified the noncomplying condition; 
4.  All noncomplying conditions are corrected, as determined by the city, prior to the time the tenant household has taken definitive steps to move; 
5.  The notice to vacate, notice to abate life-threatening conditions, or declaration of substandard is rescinded or withdrawn by the city or is overturned on appeal prior to the time the tenant household has taken definitive steps to move; 
6.  The property owner offers in writing to the tenant household immediately a replacement unit or room in the same building; and the following is true: (a) the replacement unit or room is at least substantially comparable in size, condition, and amenities as the former unit or room, (b) the replacement unit complies with all applicable zoning, building, and housing codes, (c) the replacement rent is no greater than the rent charged for the former unit or room, and (d) the offer was made prior to the time the tenant household had taken definitive steps to move; or 
7.  The tenant household is required to vacate the unit or room due solely to damage resulting from an earthquake, fire, flood, natural disaster, civil disturbance, or accident outside the control of the property owner, if (a) the vacation is required within six months of such an event, and (b) the property owner can demonstrate that such damages were not caused by the acts or the negligence of the property owner or by preexisting conditions in the building in violation of applicable building, housing, fire, or other health and safety codes. 
(Ord. No. 057-2016, 8-25-16)  
8.38.040 - Notice. 
A.  Whenever any notice given or other communication is required to be served, provided, given or delivered to, or filed with, any person, that notice or communication may be communicated by personal delivery, certified mail, first class mail, e-mail, or any other similar method that will provide a written record of the notice or communication. 
B.  Failure by the city to supply or attempt to supply any of the information or notices provided for this chapter shall not affect the validity of any code enforcement notice, order, or action, nor shall any such failure diminish any property owner's obligation to abate any noncomplying conditions or provide relocation assistance as required under this section. 
(Ord. No. 057-2016, 8-25-16)  
8.38.050 - Relocation payment. 
A.  The owner shall be responsible for providing relocation payments directly to the tenant household required to relocate pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  The relocation benefits required by this article shall be paid by the owner or designated agent to the tenant within ten days after the date that the order to vacate is first mailed to the owner and posted on the premises, or at least twenty days prior to the vacation date set forth in the order to vacate, whichever occurs later. 
C.  The relocation payment shall be made available by the owner or designated agent to the tenant in each residential unit and shall be a sum equal to two months of the established fair market rent for the area as determined by the Department of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to Section 1437f of Title 42 of the United States Code. In addition, the relocation payment shall include an amount, as determined by the local enforcement agency, sufficient for utility service deposits. The relocation benefits shall be paid by the owner or designated agent in addition to the return, as required by law, of any security deposits held by the owner. The relocation benefits shall be payable on a per residential unit basis. 
D.  If there are fewer than ten days between the first posting and mailing of the order to vacate and the vacation date, the relocation benefits shall be paid by the owner or designated agent to the tenant within twenty-four hours after the notice is posted and mailed. The local enforcement agency shall attempt to provide telephonic or written notice to the owner to notify the owner that the benefits are payable immediately. Failure to provide the notice as specified in this section shall not relieve the owner of any imposed obligation. 
E.  If a tenant is entitled to relocation benefits, the local enforcement agency shall provide either telephonic or written notice to the tenant of his or her entitlement to the benefits. Written notice may be satisfied by posting a written notice on the premises stating that tenants may be entitled to relocation benefits. 
F.  If the owner or the city determines that relocation is necessary, the owner shall provide a written notice of temporary relocation to any affected tenant households thirty days in advance of the required relocation unless the city orders abatement that requires relocation in less than thirty days and, in such case, the owner shall provide a notice within ten days of the city's abatement order. Such notice shall summarize the repairs to be undertaken and the estimated duration of relocation. Nothing in this section shall relieve the owner of their obligation to serve any notice that would otherwise be required pursuant to state or local law. 
G.  The owner shall notify the tenant household when repairs are completed and permit the tenant household to reoccupy the residential unit or room. The tenant household shall retain all rights of tenancy that existed prior to relocation. 
(Ord. No. 057-2016, 8-25-16)  
8.38.060 - City involvement in relocation payments. 
A.  The city may provide payment to tenant in situations where the owner fails or refuses to pay required relocation costs. In the event the city provides payment to tenant, the city may recover from the owner the amount of the payments and all costs incurred as a result of making such payments. 
1.  Request must be made by tenant within twenty days from refusal of owner to the city manager or designee. 
2.  Upon receipt of request from tenant the city shall mail a written notice to the owner of the owner's obligation to provide relocation assistance and the time the payment is required. Notice shall also specify that failure to make required payments may result in the city making such payments and recovering the cost through a lien on the owner's property. 
3.  If within ten days of receipt, owner continues to fail or refuse to make necessary payments, plus any administrative cost, the city may make the required relocation payment to the tenant. If owner does not pay the city within thirty days, the city may recover the costs as a lien on the owners property. 
(Ord. No. 057-2016, 8-25-16)  
8.38.070 - Immediate vacation. 
The building official may authorize in his or her discretion the immediate payment of relocation benefits by the city in the amounts authorized by the eligible tenant if the building official or other authorized code enforcement official has determined that immediate vacation of the rental unit or room is necessary due to public health and safety concerns. The tenant must sign a request for relocation assistance to receive immediate relocation payment. The property owner shall be notified subsequently in writing of any relocation payments by the city. Such payments and other cost shall be an obligation of the property owner, and the property owner shall be required to reimburse the city for these relocation cost and shall be subject to a lien against its property for the amount paid to the tenant by the city. 
(Ord. No. 057-2016, 8-25-16)  
8.38.080 - Rent increase during repairs. 
In those cases where the owner has been issued a notice and ordered by the city to repair or remedy any unsafe or hazardous living conditions or illegal use of residential rental property and where said repairs or remediation do not require relocation of tenant, thereby allowing the tenant to remain in the residence while the repairs are undertaken, it shall be unlawful for the property owner to increase the amount of rent for any structure rented for residential purposes during the time that repairs are made pursuant to the city notice and order requiring said repairs. No rent increase shall thereafter be levied until the city has issued a notice of correction verifying the fact that said repairs or remediation have been completed. 
(Ord. No. 057-2016, 8-25-16)  
8.38.090 - Violation. 
Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed an infraction for the first offense. Any subsequent violation occurring within six months from the first offense shall be deemed a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 057-2016, 8-25-16)  
Chapter 8.40 - FOOD SAFETY EDUCATION 
 
8.40.010 - General purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for the requirement of individuals to attend food safety education courses and to pass a competency examination when found to have a posed to the risk and safety of the community. 
(Ord. No. 049-2016, § 1, 3-24-16)  
8.40.020 - Incorporation by reference. 
Pursuant to Government Code Sections 50022.1 et seq., Ordinance No. G-8612 of the Board of Supervisors of the County of Kern, State of California which adds Chapter 8.59 to Title 8 of the Kern County Ordinance Code regarding food safety education and each and every term, provision, rule, and regulation therein is hereby incorporated by this reference as if fully set forth herein verbatim. 
(Ord. No. 049-2016, § 1, 3-24-16)  
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 9.04 - CURFEW[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 004-2010, § 1, adopted April 8, 2010, in effect, repealed the former Chapter 9.04, §§ 9.04.010, 9.04.020, and enacted a new Chapter 9.04 as set out herein. The former Chapter 9.04 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 26, 1958. 
 
9.04.010 - Minors in public places during school hours. 
A.  It is unlawful for any minor of age twelve to seventeen who is subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuation education to loiter, idle, wander, or be in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, or the premises of any establishment, vacant lots or any unsupervised public place on days and at times when the minor's school is in session. 
B.  A minor's presence in such location is not unlawful, however: 
1.  When the minor is accompanied by his or her parent or other adult having the care or custody of the minor; 
2.  When the minor is on an emergency errand directed by his or her parent or other adult having care or custody of the minor; 
3.  When the minor is going to, or coming directly from, his or her place of school-approved employment; 
4.  When the minor is going to, or coming directly from a medical appointment; 
5.  When the minor has permission to leave the school campus for lunch and has in his or her possession, a valid, school-issued, off-campus permit; 
6.  When the minor is going to, or coming from a compulsory alternative education program activity; 
7.  When the minor is attending or, without detour or stop, going to or returning from a school, religious, government-sponsored activity, or other recreational activity supervised by adults; 
8.  When the minor is attending or, without detour or stop, going to or returning from an event or activity directly related to the medical condition of a sibling or parent; 
9.  When the minor is enrolled in a private school or "home school" qualified under California Education Code Section 48222; or 
10.  When the minor has passed a general educational development test and received a California high school equivalency certificate. 
(Ord. No. 004-2010, § 1, 4-8-10)  
9.04.020 - Minors in public places during nighttime hours. 
A.  It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen years to loiter, idle, wander, or be in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, or the premises of any establishment, vacant lots, or any unsupervised public place between the hours of ten p.m. and five a.m. of the following day from September 1 to May 31, inclusive, of each year and between the hours of eleven p.m. and five a.m. of the following day from June 1 to August 31, inclusive of each year. 
B.  A minor's presence in such location during such hours is not unlawful, however: 
1.  When the minor is accompanied by his or her parent or other adult having the care or custody of the minor; 
2.  When the minor is going to, or coming directly from or being at night classes, library study, games, dances or other school, church, organized group or civic functions. 
(Ord. No. 004-2010, § 1, 4-8-10)  
9.04.030 - Responsibility. 
It is unlawful for the parent of any minor to knowingly permit or, by insufficient control, to allow the minor to be in violation of Section 9.04.010 or Section 9.04.020. 
(Ord. No. 004-2010, § 1, 4-8-10)  
9.04.040 - Enforcement procedure. 
A.  Upon any violation of Section 9.04.010 or Section 9.04.020, a peace officer may detain the minor until he or she can be placed in the care and custody of his or her parent, may transport the minor to his or her home or to the school from which the minor is absent, and may issue a citation to the minor. If cited, the minor and a parent or legal guardian shall appear in court as directed on the citation. The parent or legal guardian shall be advised that the minor was cited for a violation of McFarland Municipal Code Section 9.04.010 or Section 9.09.020. The parents shall be warned of their responsibility and liability as the minor's parents. 
B.  After a parent has been previously warned as set forth in Section 9.04.040(A), upon a parent's violation of Section 9.04.030 anytime thereafter, a peace officer may issue the parent a citation to appear in court. 
C.  When a parent has previously been issued a citation for an infraction pursuant to Section 9.04.040(A), upon any subsequent violation by a parent of Section 9.04.030 a peace officer may issue a citation for a misdemeanor to the same parent of the minor to appear in court. 
(Ord. No. 004-2010, § 1, 4-8-10)  
9.04.050 - Penalties. 
A.  Any person convicted of an infraction for a violation of Section 9.04.010 or Section 9.04.020 may be punished by a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars plus court fees, or by a requirement to perform county, city, or school-approved work projects or community service, or both. If required to perform a work project, the total time for performance shall not exceed twenty hours over a period not to exceed sixty days, at such times other than a minor's hours of school attendance or a minor or parent's hours of employment. 
B.  Any parent convicted of a misdemeanor violation of Section 9.04.030 may be punished by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of time not exceeding six months, or by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or both. 
(Ord. No. 004-2010, § 1, 4-8-10)  
Chapter 9.08 - WEAPONS 
Sections: 
 
9.08.010 - Use prohibited. 
No person shall, within the city limits, discharge any pistol, air gun, musket gun, shotgun, rifle, revolver, B-B gun, gas-operated gun, spring gun or any instrument of any kind, character or description which throws or projects bullets or missiles of any kind to any distance by means of elastic force, air or any explosive substance. 
(Ord. 23 §1, 1958)  
9.08.020 - Exception—Shooting gallery. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to prohibit any person from shooting in any licensed shooting gallery. 
(Ord. 23 §2, 1958)  
9.08.030 - Exception—Law enforcement officers. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to prohibit United States Marshals, sheriffs, constables and their deputies, and any regular, special or ex officio police officer, or any other law enforcement officer from discharging any of the weapons described in Section 9.08.010 as shall be necessary in the proper discharge of their duties. 
(Ord. 23 §3, 1958)  
9.08.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not to exceed five hundred dollars or imprisoned in the county jail for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 23 §4, 1958)  
Chapter 9.12 - GRAFFITI PROHIBITED 
Sections: 
 
9.12.010 - Intent. 
Graffiti on public and private property is a blighting factor which not only depreciates the value of the property but also the value of the adjacent and surrounding area, and the general morale of the local citizens; therefore, it is the intent of the city council to provide for the prohibition of the placement of graffiti on public and private property and for the removal thereof. 
(Ord. 257 §1(part), 1993)  
9.12.020 - Graffiti defined. 
"Graffiti," as used in this chapter, means the unauthorized inscribing, spraying of paint, dye or any marking substance, or the marking of ink, chalk, dye or similar substances on public or private fences, buildings, structures and places within the city. 
(Ord. 257 §1(part), 1993)  
9.12.030 - Possession of graffiti materials. 
It is unlawful for any person under twenty-one years of age to possess any aerosol container of paint, dye or any other marking substance in any public place within the city regardless of whether that person is or is not in any vehicle or other means of conveyance, other than in the course of one's employment or during an adult-supervised school project. 
(Ord. 257 §1(part), 1993)  
9.12.040 - Unlawful application of graffiti. 
It is unlawful for any person to apply graffiti on public or private fences, buildings, structures and/or places within the city. 
(Ord. 257 §1(part), 1993)  
9.12.050 - Removal of graffiti. 
A.  Within the limits set forth in this section, city funds may be used to remove graffiti and other similar inscribed material from publicly or privately owned structures located on publicly or privately owned real property within the city. The city will first seek to obtain the written consent of the owner of the affected property in order to enter upon the property to remove graffiti located thereon. The consent shall be in a form approved by the city attorney and shall: 
1.  Authorize entry of city employees or contractors on the affected property to accomplish the removal of the material; 
2.  Assign to the city any cause or causes of action which the owner may have against any person or persons who defaced the property; and 
3.  Hold the city, its officers, council members, commissioners, employees, and contractors harmless from all liability arising out of the entry on the property in order to perform the work of removing the material. 
B.  If the city is unable to secure entry upon the affected property for the purpose of the removal of the graffiti, or if the city shall have requested consent to remove or paint over graffiti and the property owner shall have refused consent for entry on terms acceptable to the city consistent with the terms of this section, the city may commence abatement and cost recovery proceedings for the removal of the graffiti pursuant to the nuisance abatement authority set forth in McFarland Municipal Code Chapter 8.24, which authority includes the recovery of all costs incurred by the city in abating graffiti and recordation of lien as to affected property as provided for in Government Code Section 38773 et seq. 
C.  Pursuant to California Civil Code Section 1714.1, each parent or legal guardian shall be personally liable for any and all costs incurred by the city or any person or business in connection with the removal of graffiti caused by that parent or guardian's minor child, and for all law enforcement costs, city staff costs, attorney's fees and court costs incurred in connection with the civil prosecution of any claim for damages or reimbursement up to the limits set in California Civil Code Section 1714.1(b). 
D.  Any individual who is determined to be responsible for violating the provisions of this chapter shall be personally liable for any and all costs incurred by the city or any person or business in the connection with the removal of graffiti caused by that person, and for all law enforcement costs, city staff costs, attorney's fees and court costs incurred in connection with the civil prosecution of any claim for damages or reimbursement. 
E.  In addition to civil restitution remedies, the city may pursue criminal charges for violators of this chapter as set forth in Penal Code Section 594 or 640.6. 
F.  In addition to the remedies described in subsections B, C, D, and E of this section, the city may also seek recovery for any and all costs incurred by the city for removal of graffiti pursuant to the remedies set forth in Government Code Sections 38772, 38773.2, and 38773.6. The procedures for recovery of costs under this particular paragraph shall be those set forth in Chapter 8.24 of the McFarland Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 257 §1(part), 1993) 
(Ord. No. 319-2007, § 1, 7-12-07)  
9.12.060 - Violation—Penalty—Misdemeanor. 
Any person convicted of violating the provisions of Section 9.12.030 or 9.12.040 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished pursuant to Section 1.20.010 and supplemented by Chapter 1.16 of the McFarland Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 257 §1(part), 1993)  
9.12.070 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 319-2007, § 1, adopted July 12, 2007, repealed § 9.12.070, which pertained to violation—penalty—infraction and derived from Ord. No. 257, 1993.  
9.12.080 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 319-2007, § 1, adopted July 12, 2007, repealed § 9.12.080, which pertained to violation—penalty—civil and derived from Ord. No. 257, 1993.  
Chapter 9.14 - NOISE 
 
9.14.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The city council declares and finds that excessive, unnecessary and annoying noise levels are detrimental to the public health, welfare and safety and contrary to the public interest as follows: 
1.  By interfering with the comfortable enjoyment of life, the full use and enjoyment of property, and with the conduct and operation of business and industry; 
2.  By contributing to hearing impairment and a wide range of adverse physiological and psychological stress conditions; and 
3.  By adversely affecting the value of the real property. 
B.  It is the intent of this chapter to protect persons from excessive levels of noise and the following regulations are enacted for this purpose. 
(Ord. No. 043-2015, § 1, 2-26-15)  
9.14.020 - Definitions. 
The following words, phrases and terms as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings specified in this section: 
"Construction" means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, demolition or similar action, for or of private or public rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property and includes the transportation or delivery of any materials, tools, equipment or personnel to or from the site of any construction project for the loading or unloading or use of such materials, tools, equipment or personnel. 
"Emergency work" means work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, work required to protect persons or property from exposure to danger, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility services. 
"Person" means any individual, partnership, corporation, organization, or association of any nature whatsoever. 
"Public place" means any area open to the public within the jurisdiction and control of the city of McFarland. 
"Public right-of-way" means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley, easement or the like dedicated to and accepted by the city of McFarland. 
(Ord. No. 043-2015, § 1, 2-26-15)  
9.14.030 - Noise generally. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person within the city to use or operate or cause to be operated or to play any radio, phonograph, jukebox, record player, loudspeaker, musical instrument, mechanical device, machine, apparatus, or instrument for intensification or amplification of the human voice or any sound or noise in a manner so loud as to be calculated to disturb the peace and good order of the neighborhood or sleep of ordinary persons in nearby residences, or so loud as to unreasonably disturb and interfere with the peace and comfort of the occupants of nearby residences. 
B.  Refrigerator trucks shall be permitted to operate in any commercial or manufacturing zone at all hours; provided, however, that such use does not emit noise or vibration detrimentally impacting neighboring residential properties and the occupants thereof between ten p.m. and seven a.m. 
(Ord. No. 043-2015, § 1, 2-26-15)  
9.14.040 - Exemptions. 
The following activities shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter: 
A.  The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or the emission of sound in the performance of emergency works for as long a period of time as is necessary to constitute adequate alerting of persons to the existence of the emergency or the emergency work; 
B.  Warning devices for the protection of the public safety, as for example, police, fire, ambulance, commercial, residential and vehicle alarm devices, and train horns; 
C.  All mechanical devices, apparatus or equipment which are utilized for the protection or salvage of agricultural crops during periods of potential or actual frost damage or other adverse weather conditions. 
(Ord. No. 043-2015, § 1, 2-26-15)  
9.14.050 - Noise during construction. 
A.  Except as provided herein or in subsection B, C or D of this section, it is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, demolish, alter or repair any building, or to grade or excavate land, streets or highways, other than between the hours of six a.m. and nine p.m. on weekdays, and between eight a.m. and nine p.m. on weekends; provided, however, that city crews and those of the city's contractors performing street work between nine p.m. and six a.m. are exempt herefrom if the city engineer has directed that work be performed between such hours to alleviate potential traffic congestion. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, if the city manager determines that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavating and grading of land, streets or highways between the hours of nine p.m. and six a.m., and if he or she further determines that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest by virtue of the requirements provided in subsection A of this section, he or she may grant a permit for such work to be done between the hours of nine p.m. and six a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work. Such permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days, and may be extended by the city manager for a period not to exceed three days. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any work of construction performed one thousand feet or more from the nearest residential dwelling. 
D.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to performance of emergency work as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 043-2015, § 1, 2-26-15)  
9.14.060 - Enforcement. 
A.  The operation of any such instrument, phonograph, jukebox, machine or device in such manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of one hundred feet from the building, structure, vehicle, or place in which, or on which it is situated or located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
B.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 043-2015, § 1, 2-26-15)  
Chapter 9.16 - PSYCHOACTIVE BATH SALTS, PSYCHOACTIVE HERBAL INCENSE (SPICE), AND OTHER SYNTHETIC DRUGS 
 
9.16.010 - General purpose. 
Recreational or other use of psychoactive bath salts, psychoactive herbal incense (commonly referred to as "spice" or "synthetic marijuana") and similar products commonly known as "synthetic drugs", has been documented to cause hallucinations, agitation, psychosis, aggression, suicidal and homicidal thoughts, and death. While state and federal laws and regulations prohibit some synthetic drugs, the makers of these drugs continually alter the composition of the compounds in their products so as to escape the purview of such laws and regulations. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to protect the public health and safety within the county of Kern from the dangers and ill effects of all synthetic drugs by declaring certain activities involving synthetic drugs to be a public nuisance and subject to all available civil remedies and, to provide the county of Kern with reasonable measures to address the dangers to the community posed by synthetic drugs that are not regulated by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 051-2016, § 1, 3-24-16)  
9.16.020 - Incorporation by reference. 
Pursuant to Government Code Sections 50022.1 et seq., Ordinance No. G-8602 of the board of supervisors of the county of Kern, state of California which adds Chapter 9.44 to Title 9 of the Kern County Ordinance Code concerning psychoactive bath salts, psychoactive herbal incense (spice) and other synthetic drugs and each and every term, provision, rule, and regulation therein is hereby incorporated by this reference as if fully set forth herein verbatim. Provided, however, that all references to "unincorporated areas of the county of Kern" are hereby replaced with "the county of Kern" and this chapter shall apply within the city's boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 051-2016, § 1, 3-24-16)  
9.16.030. - Enforcement and penalties. 
9.44.070 Declaration of Public Nuisance 
 (a) It is a public nuisance for any person to provide, display for sale, sell, distribute, or possess with the intent to sell, any synthetic drug within the County of Kern. 
 (b) It is a public nuisance for any person to allow the provision, display for sale, sell, distribution, or possession with the intent to sell, of any synthetic drug on property owned, controlled or managed by such person within the County of Kern. 
 (c) It is a public nuisance for any person to provide, display for sale, sell, distribute, or possess with the intent to sell, any substance claimed or represented to be a synthetic drug within the County of Kern. 
 (d) It is a public nuisance for any person to allow the provision, display for sale, sell, distribution, or possession with the intent to sell, of any substance claimed or represented to be a synthetic drug on property owned, controlled or managed by such person within the unincorporated areas of the County of Kern. 
 (e) To determine if a person is claiming or representing that a substance or product is a synthetic drug, an enforcing officer may consider any of the evidentiary factors set forth in section 9.44.050. 
 (f) Possession that is not described in subdivisions (a) through (d) of this section is declared to be a public nuisance when such possession injuriously affects any person or persons, other than the person in possession, in such other person's or persons' health, safety, welfare, or comfortable enjoyment of life or property. 
9.44.080 Abatement Authority and Procedures; Summary Abatement; Other Remedies 
 (a) If a public nuisance exists pursuant to this Chapter, any of the persons identified in section 9.44.120 may proceed under Title 8, Chapter 8.44, Public Nuisances, sections 8.44.010 et seq. 
 (b) Because the use of synthetic drugs has been documented to cause hallucinations, agitation, psychosis, aggression, suicidal and homicidal thoughts, and death, any violation of this Chapter may present an immediate threat and grave and imminent danger not only to the person consuming the synthetic drug, but also to the public at large. If any of the persons identified in section 9.44.120, based on the facts then known, determines that a violation of this Chapter presents an immediate threat, imminent danger or hazard, or is imminently injurious to the public health or safety, then that violation is punishable by the summary abatement procedures set forth in section 8.44.070 or other law. 
 (c) Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent the County of Kern from pursuing any and all other legal remedies that may be available, including, but not limited to, civil actions filed by County Counsel seeking any and all appropriate relief such as civil injunctions, penalties and forfeiture. 
9.44.090 Modification, Suspension, or Revocation of Permit, License, or Other Grant of Authority 
 (a) If a person violates any provision of this Chapter, such violation shall be grounds for, in addition to any other enforcement action or remedy authorized by this Code or other law, modification, suspension, or revocation of any permit, license, or other grant of authority by the County issued to the person, or issued to any business, firm, company, corporation, public corporation, club, trust, partnership, association, and/or similar organization owned, controlled, or managed by such person (hereafter "Entity"), in accordance with the procedure of this Code or other law applicable to the respective permit, license, or other grant of authority. 
 (b) Upon determination that a violation of this Chapter exists, the Director of Public Health Services will impose the following sanction: 
  (1) For the first violation, any and all licenses or permits issued by the Kern County Public Health Services Department for the Entity found to be in violation will be suspended for thirty (30) days. 
  (2) For the second violation, any and all licenses or permits issued by the Kern County Public Health Services Department for the Entity found to be in violation will be revoked. 
9.44.100 Seizure of Evidence 
 Any product or substance provided, distributed, sold or possessed for the purpose of providing, distributing or selling the product or substance, in violation of any provision of this Chapter, may be seized by any County official or officer who issues a criminal citation under this Chapter and removed and stored as evidence in accordance with the law. 
9.44.110 Enforcement, Remedies, and Penalties 
 (a) In addition to any enforcement action and remedy authorized by this Chapter, a violation of any provision of this Chapter may be subject to the enforcement and remedy provisions of Title 1, Chapter 1.12, General Penalty, sections 1.12.010 through 1.12.030 and any other applicable enforcement and remedy provisions provided under the law. 
 (b) Any person identified in section 9.44.120 may, based on the facts then known, determine that, in the interest of justice, a violation of this Chapter constitutes an infraction. 
9.44.120 Authority to Administer and Enforce 
 This Chapter may be administered and enforced by the Director of Public Health or his/her designee(s), or any other County official or officer so designated. 
(Ord. No. 051-2016, § 1, 3-24-16)  
Chapter 9.18 - LOITERING 
Sections: 
 
9.18.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Activity related to illegal drugs" includes, but is not limited to, selling, purchasing, transporting, manufacturing, distributing, or using of any drug declared illegal under state or federal law or any drug paraphernalia, or the soliciting of advertising for sale, purchase, transportation, manufacture, distribution or use of any drug declared illegal under state or federal law or any drug paraphernalia. 
B.  "Business establishment" shall mean any entity, other than the state or a local governmental entity, however organized, which furnishes goods or services to the general public. An otherwise qualifying establishment which has membership requirements is considered to furnish services to the general public if its membership requirements: Consist only of payment of fees. 
C.  "Intentionally" or "with intent" shall mean all offenses defined in this chapter in which the mental culpability requirement is expressed as "intentionally" or "with intent" are declared to be specific intent offenses. A person acts "intentionally" or "with intent" when a person's conscious objective is to cause the specific result proscribed by the ordinance, regardless of whether or not the result actually occurred. Intent must be determined based on an evaluation of the particular circumstances of each case, and no specific circumstance or combination of specific circumstances are necessary in determining whether a person has the requisite intent. 
D.  "Loiter" shall mean to delay, linger, sit, lie, or stand without a lawful purpose for remaining on the property and: 
1.  With the intent of committing a crime as opportunity may be discovered; or 
2.  With the intent to use public property in a manner for which it is not intended. 
E.  "Parking lot" shall mean any area, either publicly or privately owned which is set aside for and/or used for the parking of vehicle required to be registered under the Vehicle Code of the state of California. Parking lot as thus defined shall not include those areas in residential zones used for off-street parking at a private residence. 
F.  "Public place" shall mean an area open to the public or exposed to public view, including but not limited to highways, streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, paths, parking lots, and public buildings, including the grounds enclosing those buildings. 
G.  "Sidewalk" shall mean that portion of a highway, other than the roadway, set apart by curbs, barriers, markings or other delineation for pedestrian travel. 
(Ord. No. 003-2018, § 1, 4-26-18)  
9.18.020 - Prohibitions. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to loiter in or upon any car wash, parking lot, public street, street, sidewalk, alley, parking lot open to the general public, highway, or business establishment or otherwise occupy any portion thereof in such a manner as to unreasonably annoy or molest any pedestrian thereon or as to obstruct or unreasonably interfere with the free passage pedestrians in the city of McFarland. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to loiter in any public place or business establishment with the intent to commit any activity related to illegal drugs or any offense specified in the California Health and Safety Code. 
C.  Each and every day and any portion of any day during which a violation of this section is committed, continued or permitted shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 003-2018, § 1, 4-26-18)  
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC  
Chapter 10.04 - DEFINITIONS 
 
10.04.010 - Definitions generally. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this title, for the purpose of this title, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter. 
(Ord. 206 §1(part), 1987)  
10.04.020 - Alley. 
"Alley" means a public highway which does not exceed twenty feet between property lines. 
(Ord. 206 §1(part), 1987)  
10.04.030 - Business district. 
"Business district" means the territory contiguous to a street when fifty percent of more of the frontage thereon for a distance of three hundred feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for retail or wholesale business; also any territory contiguous to a street which is adjacent to or a continuation of a street within a business district when such territory is so designated by the city council. 
(Ord. 206 §1(part), 1987)  
10.04.040 - Chief of police. 
"Chief of police" means the chief of the city's police department. 
(Ord. 206 §1(part), 1987)  
10.04.050 - Crosswalk. 
"Crosswalk" means that portion of the roadway included within the prolongation of curb and property lines at street intersections. 
(Ord. 206 §1(part), 1987)  
10.04.060 - Highway. 
"Highway" means every way set apart for public travel, except alleyways, bridle paths and footpaths. 
(Ord. 206 §1(part), 1987)  
10.04.070 - Intersection. 
"Intersection" means the area embraced within the prolongation of the property lines of two or more streets which join at an angle, whether or not one such street crosses the other. 
(Ord. 206 §1(part), 1987)  
10.04.080 - Loading zone. 
"Loading zone" means that space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading and unloading of passengers or materials. 
(Ord. 206 §1(part), 1987)  
10.04.090 - Official warning and direction signs and signals. 
"Official warning signs," "direction signs" and "signals" mean all warning and direction signs and signals not inconsistent with this title heretofore or hereafter placed or erected under this title or by authority of the city council. 
(Ord. 206 §1(part), 1987)  
10.04.100 - Operator. 
"Operator" means any person who is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
(Ord. 206 §1(part), 1987)  
10.04.110 - Overheight load. 
"Overheight load" means a load exceeding the legal height limit as set forth in the Vehicle Code of the state. 
(Ord. 206 §1(part), 1987)  
10.04.120 - Overlength load. 
"Overlength load" means any load exceeding the legal length limit as set forth in the Vehicle Code of the state. 
(Ord. 206 §1(part), 1987)  
10.04.130 - Overweight load. 
"Overweight load" means any load exceeding the legal load limits as set forth in the Vehicle Code of the state. 
(Ord. 206 §1(part), 1987)  
10.04.140 - Overwidth load. 
"Overwidth load" means any load exceeding the legal width limit as set forth in the Vehicle Code of the state. 
(Ord. 206 §1(part), 1987)  
10.04.150 - Park. 
"Park" means to stand a vehicle for a period of time than is reasonably necessary for the actual loading and unloading or persons or materials. 
(Ord. 206 §1(part), 1987)  
10.04.160 - Pedestrian. 
"Pedestrian" means any person afoot. 
(Ord. 206 §1(part), 1987)  
10.04.170 - Right-of-way. 
"Right-of-way" means the privilege of the immediate use of the street. 
(Ord. 206 §1(part), 1987)  
10.04.180 - Roadway. 
"Roadway" means that portion of the street between the regularly established curb lines. 
(Ord. 206 §1(part), 1987)  
10.04.190 - Safety zone. 
"Safety zone" means that marked portion of the roadway reserved for the exclusive use of pedestrians. 
(Ord. 206 §1(part), 1987)  
10.04.200 - Sidewalk. 
"Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curb lines and the adjacent property lines. 
(Ord. 206 §1(part), 1987)  
10.04.210 - Street. 
"Street" means every way set apart for public travel, except alleyways, bridle paths and footpaths. 
(Ord. 206 §1(part), 1987)  
10.04.220 - Traffic. 
"Traffic" means pedestrians and vehicles, either singly or together, while using any street for the purpose of travel. 
(Ord. 206 §1(part), 1987)  
10.04.230 - Vehicle. 
"Vehicle" means every device or animal by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon rails. For the purpose of this title, a bicycle shall be deemed a vehicle. 
(Ord. 206 §1(part), 1987)  
10.04.240 - Vehicle Code applicability. 
Whenever any words or phrases used in Title 10 herein are not defined but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state of California and amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply. To the extent words or phrases defined in Title 10 are inconsistent with the same or similar words or phrases defined in the Vehicle Code, the definitions in the Vehicle Code shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(a), 2-28-13)  
Chapter 10.06 - TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
10.06.010 - Traffic engineer—Office established. 
The office of the traffic engineer is established. The chief of police shall serve as traffic engineer in addition to his other functions, and shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this title. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(b), 2-28-13)  
10.06.020 - Traffic engineer—Duties. 
It shall be the general duty of the traffic engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices and signals, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering and traffic investigations of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by the provisions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(b), 2-28-13)  
10.06.030 - Direction—Police and fire department authority. 
Officers of the police department and such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, except that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department or members of the fire department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions to the contrary contained in this title or the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(b), 2-28-13)  
10.06.040 - Direction—Obedience required. 
No person shall fail or refuse to comply with nor shall any person perform any act forbidden by any lawful order, signal or direction of a traffic or police officer, or a member of the fire department, or a person authorized by the chief of police or by law. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(b), 2-28-13)  
10.06.050 - Interference with prohibited. 
No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of this city in their enforcement of the provisions of this title. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of this city in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this title shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this title constitute such interference or obstruction. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(b), 2-28-13)  
10.06.060 - Regulations—Obedience required. 
It is a misdemeanor for any person driving any vehicle or other conveyance upon any street or any pedestrian, to do any act forbidden, or fail to perform any act required as applicable to any such person under this title. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(b), 2-28-13)  
10.06.070 - Applicability of provisions—Government vehicles. 
The provisions of this title shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, this state, any county or city, and it is unlawful for any operator to violate any of the provisions of this title except as otherwise permitted in this title or by the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(b), 2-28-13)  
10.06.080 - Exemptions. 
A.  The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the police or fire department, any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified by the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call. 
B.  The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, relieve the operator of any such vehicle from obligation to exercise due care for the safety of others or the consequences of his willful disregard of the safety of others. 
C.  The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or any vehicle owned or operated by the United States Post Office Department while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(b), 2-28-13)  
10.06.090 - Removal of vehicles from streets—When authorized. 
Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the police department may remove or cause to be removed: 
A.  Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway for seventy-two or more consecutive hours as set forth in Vehicle Code Section 22651(k). 
B.  Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m. when such parking or standing is prohibited by chapter or resolution of the city and signs are posted giving notice of such removal. 
C.  Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or for the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four hours prior to the removal. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(b), 2-28-13)  
10.06.100 - Motor vehicle—Private and public property use restrictions. 
No person operating a motor vehicle on a public roadway shall cause his or her vehicle to exit that roadway onto private or public property, re-enter a public roadway, for the purpose of avoiding a traffic control devise, or the intersection of two roadways. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of an "infraction." 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(b), 2-28-13)  
Chapter 10.08 - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
Sections: 
 
10.08.010 - Parking for seventy-two or more consecutive hours prohibited. 
No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for seventy-two or more consecutive hours. 
(Ord. 206 §2, 1987)  
10.08.020 - Removal of illegally parked vehicles. 
Any legally employed and salaried officer of the police department may remove a vehicle from a street or alley within the city under the following circumstances: 
A.  When the vehicle is parked or left standing on a street or alley for seventy-two or more consecutive hours in violation of this chapter. 
B.  When a vehicle is illegally parked on a street or alley in violation of any provision of this chapter forbidding standing or parking, and the use of such street, or portion thereof, is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or alley, or for the installation of underground utilities, and signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed by authorities of the city at least twenty-four hours prior to the removal. 
C.  When the use of the street or alley, or any portion thereof, is authorized by authorities of the city for the purpose other than the normal flow of traffic for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size and parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement, and signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected twenty-four hours prior to the removal. 
D.  When any vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street or alley when the city council has, by provisions of this chapter or by resolution, prohibited such parking or standing, and signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed by authorities of the city at least twenty-four hours prior to the removal. 
(Ord. 206 §3, 1987)  
10.08.030 - Procedure to remove and store vehicles. 
In the event any vehicle is removed from a street or alley pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of Article 2, Chapter 10, Division 11 of the Vehicle Code of the state, commencing with Section 22850 thereof, shall govern with respect to storage, liens and notices. 
(Ord. 206 §4, 1987)  
10.08.040 - Limited or prohibited parking—Designation and signing of streets. 
A.  The city council shall by resolution designate those streets upon which parking shall be prohibited at all times or during certain hours or upon which parking shall be limited to a limited period of time and the chief of police shall designate such streets or portions of streets by appropriate signs. 
B.  When authorized signs are in place giving notice of such prohibition or limitation, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in violation of such sign. 
(Ord. 206 §5, 1987)  
10.08.050 - Stopping, standing or parking a vehicle on the property of another. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to stop, stand or park any vehicle on the private property of another without the consent of the owner or lessee of the property. 
(Ord. 206 §6, 1987)  
10.08.060 - Parking of commercial vehicles in residential districts. 
A.  No person shall park any heavy-duty commercial vehicle for a period of more than three hours on any street in or adjacent to any residential district except: 
1.  While loading or unloading property and time in addition to such three-hour period is necessary to complete such work; or 
2.  While such vehicle is parked in connection with, and in aid of, the performance of a service to or on a property in the block in which such vehicle is parked and time in addition to such three-hour period is reasonably necessary to complete such service; or 
3.  While a construction or maintenance vehicle is parked in connection with, or in aid of, work upon a street or utilities of a street. 
B.  For the purposes of this section, the term "residential district" shall be deemed to include any property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, M-P and M-S. 
C.  For the purposes of this section, the term "heavy-duty commercial vehicle" shall mean a single vehicle or combination of vehicles having more than two axles, a single vehicle or combination of vehicles twenty or more feet in length, or a single vehicle or a combination of vehicles six feet eight inches or more in width, and shall include, but shall not be limited to, dump trucks, moving vans, tractors, pole or pipe dollies, or trailers. However, nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to include house trailers or motor homes within the definition of heavy-duty commercial vehicle. 
D.  The motorized section of a heavy-duty commercial vehicle, typically referred to as the "tractor," may be parked in residential districts provided a permit is first obtained from the city setting forth regulations for same and the terms and conditions upon which such vehicles may be parked. 
(Ord. 206 §7, 1987) 
(Ord. No. 294-2005, § 1, 2-10-05; Ord. No. 311-2006, § 1, 6-8-06)  
10.08.070 - Standing and parking on city property other than dedicated streets or public parking lots. 
Whenever the city manager shall determine that the orderly or efficient conduct of the city's business requires that parking or standing or vehicles on city property other than dedicated streets or public parking lots be prohibited, limited or restricted, the city manager is, and shall be, authorized to order signs to be erected or posted indicating that the standing or parking of vehicles is thus prohibited, limited or restricted, either as to location, duration of time, or class of person, or otherwise. When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place, giving notice thereof, no person shall park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions or provisions of such signs. 
(Ord. 206 §8, 1987) 
(Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
10.08.080 - Repairing or greasing vehicles on public streets. 
No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased, dismantle or cause to be dismantled any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street. 
(Ord. 206 §9, 1987)  
10.08.090 - Streets less than twenty-seven feet wide—Authority to prohibit parking. 
The city council may, by resolution, prohibit the parking of vehicles on one side of a street in any block where the width of the street in the block does not exceed twenty-seven feet, provided that appropriate signs are placed and maintained to give notice thereof; and provided further, that this section shall not require the placing or maintaining of any signs with respect to the prohibition of stopping, standing parking in any alley within the city. 
(Ord. 206 §10, 1987)  
10.08.100 - Stopping prohibited in specific places. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic signal or sign: 
1.  In an intersection; 
2.  In a crosswalk; 
3.  Within thirty feet of an intersecting roadway, except buses or taxis at a designated bus or taxi stop; 
4.  In an alley, or at any entrance or exit thereof; provided, however, that the vehicles are authorized to stop or stand in any alley for the purpose of loading or unloading persons or materials, which authority to stop or stand shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event exceed a total time of twenty minutes; 
5.  In front of a theater during a performance, except when loading or unloading passengers; 
6.  In front of a mortuary during funeral services, except when loading or unloading passengers; 
7.  In front of a church when a religious ceremony, wedding or a funeral is in session, except when loading or unloading passengers. 
B.  The chief of police shall determine the space in front of a theater, mortuary or church that shall not be used for parking and appropriate signs shall maintained at each terminus of such space during the periods of time of a performance at a theater, a funeral at a mortuary, and a service at a church. 
(Ord. 206 §11, 1987)  
10.08.110 - Certain overnight parking prohibited. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any street in front of or within one hundred feet of any business establishment in the city between the hours of four a.m. and six a.m. of any day. This section shall not apply to parking in front of or near a doctor's office while utilizing the services of the doctor or his facilities, or for funerals, weddings, church meetings or similar purposes. 
(Ord. 206 §12, 1987)  
10.08.120 - Curb markings to indicate stopping, standing and parking regulations. 
The director of public works of the city is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this title to place, and when required herein shall place, the following curb markings, as defined in this section, as follows: 
A.  Red shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the California Vehicle Code, and except that a bus or taxi may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus or taxi zone. 
B.  Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time between six a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sunday for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials, provided that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes, nor the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty minutes. 
C.  White shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, which shall not exceed three minutes, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent box. Such restrictions shall apply between eight a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sunday, and except as follows: When such zone is in front of a hotel or mail box, the restrictions shall apply at all times. 
D.  Green shall mean no standing or parking for longer than twenty minutes, at any time between eight a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sunday. 
E.  Blue shall mean the parking space is for the exclusive use of vehicles which display a distinguishing license plate or placard issued pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 22511.5 or to disabled veterans, as specified in California Vehicle Code Section 9105. In addition to blue paint, the space may also be indicated by signs or other suitable means if deemed necessary to do so by either the chief of police or the director of public works. 
(Ord. 206 §13, 1987)  
10.08.130 - Parking in violation of curb markings. 
When the director of public works, as authorized under this chapter, has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb markings in violation of the provisions of Section 10.08.120. 
(Ord. 206 §14, 1987)  
10.08.140 - Parking spaces for disabled persons—City-owned parking lots. 
A.  In order to provide parking for physically handicapped persons, the city manager, or his authorized representative, is authorized to designate spaces in city-owned public parking lots for the exclusive use of vehicles which display a distinguishing license plate or a placard issued pursuant to Section 22511.5 of the California Vehicle Code or to disabled veterans, as specified in Section 9105 of the California Vehicle Code. 
B.  Such designation shall be made by posting immediately adjacent to, and visible from, each space a sign consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant in white on a blue background. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle which does not display the distinguishing license plate or placard specified in this section in any space designated for physically handicapped persons in a city-owned public parking lot. 
D.  The chief of police, or his authorized representative, may cause the removal from any space in a city-owned parking lot which has been designated for physically handicapped persons to the nearest garage of any vehicle not displaying one of the distinguishing placards or license plates specified in this section; provided, there is posted immediately and adjacent thereto, and visible from, such space, or in a conspicuous place at each entrance to such parking lot, a sign, not less than seventeen inches by twenty-two inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height, which clearly and conspicuously states the following: 
Unauthorized vehicles not displaying distinguishing placards or license plates issued for physically handicapped persons will be towed away at owner's expense and/or issued citations. Towed vehicles may be reclaimed by telephoning the McFarland Police Department at 792-2121. 
(Ord. 206 §15, 1987) 
(Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
10.08.150 - Parking spaces for disabled persons—Privately financed facilities. 
A.  Designation of "blue curb" parking stalls in privately financed off-street parking facilities shall be made by posting immediately adjacent thereto, and visible therefrom, a sign consisting of the international symbol of access. In addition, a sign not less than seventeen inches by twenty-two inches in size shall be posted with lettering not less than one inch in height, which clearly states: 
Unauthorized vehicles not displaying distinguishing placards or license plates issued for physically handicapped persons will be towed away at owner's expense and/or issued citations. Towed vehicles may be reclaimed at 401 W. Kern Avenue or by telephoning 792-2121. 
B.  Signs shall be posted at the entrance to all off- street parking facilities to the effect that the facility is subject to public traffic regulations and control. All signs shall be posted at a height of eighty inches from the ground. The person in lawful possession of the parking facility may cause the removal of a vehicle parked in violation of this section from the stall to the nearest public garage only after notifying the chief of police or his designated representative. 
(Ord. 206 §16, 1987)  
10.08.160 - Civil penalties for violation. 
In addition to all other penalties for violations of the regulations described in this chapter 10.28, the city council may establish civil penalties for such violations and may do so by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 324-2007, § 1, 11-11-07) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 324-2007, § 1, adopted November 11, 2007, set out provisions intended for use as § 10.28.120. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 10.08.160.  
Chapter 10.10 - PARKING  
ARTICLE I. - GENERALLY 
 
10.10.010 - Application of provisions. 
A.  The provisions of this article prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device. 
B.  The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or the provisions of this code prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), 2-28-13)  
10.10.020 - Prohibited—Areas designated. 
No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park or leave standing such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or other authorized officer, or traffic sign or signal: 
A.  Within any median unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings; 
B.  On either side of any street between the projected property line of any public walk, public steps, street or thoroughfare terminating at such street, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
C.  In any area where the traffic engineer determines that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
D.  In any area established by a resolution of the council as a no parking area, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
E.  Upon, along or across any railway track in such manner as to hinder, delay or obstruct the movement of any car traveling upon such track; 
F.  In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property; 
G.  On any street or highway, or portion of any street or highway, as designated by the public works director, where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or reconstruction of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice of such no parking are erected or placed at least twenty-four hours prior to the effective time of such no parking. The public works director, or his designee, may cause vehicles to be towed which are parked on streets or highways to be cleaned where signs have been erected. Any vehicles towed may be reclaimed after the reclaiming party pays towing and/or storage fees; 
H.  At any place within twenty feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the midblock end of a safety zone, when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
I.  At any place within twenty feet of a crosswalk at an intersection or in any business district when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop; 
J.  Within twenty feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign or official electric flashing device. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), 2-28-13)  
10.10.030 - Adjacent to school property. 
A.  The traffic engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in the traffic engineer's opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
B.  When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), 2-28-13)  
10.10.040 - Narrow streets. 
A.  The traffic engineer is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty feet. 
B.  When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), 2-28-13)  
10.10.050 - Vehicles for sale. 
No operator of any vehicle shall park the vehicle upon any street in this city for the principal purpose of advertising or displaying it for sale, unless authorized by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), 2-28-13)  
10.10.060 - Pushcarts and lunch wagons. 
Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 5.44 of the McFarland Municipal Code, no person shall stand or park any vehicle, wagon or pushcart from which goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables or food stuffs are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for sale or bartered or exchanged or any lunch wagon or eating car or vehicle, on any portion of any street within this city except that such vehicles, wagons or pushcarts may stand or park only at the request of a bona fide purchaser for a period of time not to exceed ten minutes at any one place. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons delivering such articles upon order of, or by agreement with a customer from a store or other fixed place of business of distribution. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), 2-28-13)  
10.10.070 - Vehicles in excess of seventy-two hours. 
A.  No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall leave such vehicle standing upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two hours. 
B.  The driving or moving of a vehicle from one parking space to another in the same time-restricted street, alley or portion thereof, or other street or alley in the city within two thousand feet of where the vehicle had been parked, shall not be deemed a defense to the time limitations imposed by this code. This section is intended to prevent persons who own or have possession, custody, or control of any vehicle from periodically moving the vehicle from space to space on the same street or alley, or a space on a street or alley within a two thousand foot radius of where the vehicle had been standing, thus defeating the intent of the timed parking restrictions in this code. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), 2-28-13)  
10.10.080 - Vehicle repair or maintenance. 
No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased, any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), 2-28-13)  
10.10.090 - Washing or polishing vehicles. 
No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be polished, any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city, when a charge is made for such service. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), 2-28-13)  
10.10.100 - Emergency parking restrictions. 
A.  Whenever the traffic engineer shall determine that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings, or functions, or for other reasons, the traffic engineer shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the traffic engineer shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the traffic engineer shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter. 
B.  When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), 2-28-13)  
10.10.110 - No parking areas—Signs and curb markings. 
A.  The traffic engineer is authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking areas, and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this article. 
B.  When the curb markings or signs are in place, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), 2-28-13)  
10.10.120 - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS 
 
10.10.130 - Twenty-four minute parking. 
A.  Green curb marking shall mean no standing or parking for a period of time longer than twenty-four minutes at any time. 
B.  When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), 2-28-13)  
10.10.140 - Forty-minute parking. 
When authorized signs, or curb markings have been determined by the traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle for a period of time longer than forty minutes. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), 2-28-13)  
10.10.150 - One-hour parking. 
When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle for a period of time longer than one hour. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), 2-28-13)  
10.10.160 - Two-hour parking. 
When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle for a period of time longer than two hours. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), 2-28-13)  
10.10.170 - Diagonal parking. 
A.  On any of the streets or portions of streets established by resolution of the council as diagonal parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such diagonal parking, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park the vehicle except: 
1.  At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of the allotted space; 
2.  With the front wheel nearest the curb within six inches of the curb. 
B.  The provisions of this section shall not apply when such vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight or goods, in which event the provisions applicable in Section 10.40.170 shall be complied with. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), 2-28-13)  
10.10.180 - Parking in alleys. 
No person shall park any vehicle at any time in any alley. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), 2-28-13)  
10.10.190 - Overnight truck parking. 
Except as otherwise authorized in the McFarland Municipal Code, no person shall park any motor truck in excess of eighteen feet in length, or any truck tractor, or any road tractor, or any trailer or semitrailer, on any street in any residential area between the hours of eight p.m. of any day and eight a.m. of the day immediately following. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), 2-28-13)  
10.10.200 - Parking space markings—Installation and maintenance authority—Obedience required. 
A.  The traffic engineer is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where authorized parking is permitted. 
B.  When such parking space markings are placed on the highway, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), 2-28-13)  
10.10.210 - No stopping zones. 
A.  The traffic engineer shall designate established no stopping zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that stopping of vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and days when stopping is prohibited. 
B.  During the hours and on the days designated on the signs, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop the vehicle on any of the streets or parts of streets established by resolution of the council as no stopping zones. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), 2-28-13)  
ARTICLE III. - PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES 
 
10.10.220 - Prohibition. 
No person shall park or leave standing any commercial vehicle, having a gross vehicle weight rating of eleven thousand five hundred pounds or more, except in those areas established by the city council through resolution. The city council shall establish, by resolution, commercial vehicle parking areas in the city. The provisions of this article shall not be effective with respect to those vehicles making a pickup or delivery of goods, wares or merchandise from or to any building or structure or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure. The provisions of this article shall not be effective with respect to motor homes. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), 2-28-13)  
10.10.230 - Parking of trailers or semi-trailers prohibited. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a trailer or semi-trailer which is uncoupled from a motor vehicle, except in those areas established by the city council through resolution. The city council shall establish, by resolution, commercial vehicle parking areas in the city. The provisions of this article shall not be effective with respect to those vehicles that are actively loading or unloading the trailer, and the unloading requires uncoupling of the motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), 2-28-13)  
10.10.240 - Private property. 
No person shall park or leave standing any commercial vehicle having a gross vehicle weight rating of eleven thousand five hundred pounds or more, on any private property in the city that is vacant or abandoned, except on those properties that have a bonafide business that is in operation and is approved to be in operation on the property by the city. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), 2-28-13)  
10.10.250 - Special permit issued by chief of police. 
The chief of police, at his sole discretion, may issue a special twenty-four hour parking permit to allow for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle at any location deemed necessary in the city. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), 2-28-13)  
10.10.260 - Appeals—Generally. 
Any person who is aggrieved by any decision of the chief of police with respect to the issuance, rejection of an application, failure to issue, suspension or revocation of a letter of authorization may appeal such decision to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days following the issuance of the written decision of the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), 2-28-13)  
10.10.270 - Appeals—Hearing. 
Upon receiving an appeal authorized under Section 10.10.300, the council shall set a time and place for the hearing of such appeal. The time for such appeal shall be within a reasonable time after the filing of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), 2-28-13)  
10.10.280 - Appeals—Hearing—Notice. 
The city clerk shall provide notice of the hearing to the persons who filed the appeal, to the applicant for issuance of an off-street truck parking letter of authorization and to occupants of adjacent residences. The notice of hearing shall specify the time, date and place of the hearing on the appeal. The city clerk shall complete such notice by depositing the notice to such parties in the United States mail. The determination of the city clerk as to which residences are adjacent residences shall be final, and the failure of any one or more persons to receive notice of the hearing shall not invalidate any hearing or findings and determinations made by the city council concerning the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), 2-28-13)  
Chapter 10.12 - MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
 
10.12.010 - Driving on city property. 
Whenever the city manager shall determine that the orderly and efficient conduct of the city's business requires the driving or operating of vehicles on city property other than dedicated streets or public parking lots be prohibited, limited or restricted, the city manager is, and shall be, authorized to order signs to be erected or posted indicating that the driving or operation of vehicles is thus prohibited, limited or restricted, either as to location, duration of time, or class of person, or otherwise. When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place, giving notice thereof, no person shall drive or operate any vehicle contrary to the directions or provisions of such signs. 
(Ord. 206 §17, 1987) 
(Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
10.12.020 - Erection and obedience to signs and signals. 
It is unlawful for any operator or pedestrian to disobey the instructions of any mechanical or electrical traffic signal, traffic sign or marks upon the street placed in accordance with the provisions of this title. No public utility or department in this city shall erect or place any barrier or sign unless of a type first approved by the chief of police. It is unlawful for any operator or pedestrian to disobey the instructions of any barrier or sign approved as above provided, erected or placed on a public utility or by any department of the city. 
(Ord. 206 §18, 1987)  
10.12.030 - One-way streets and alleys. 
A.  It is unlawful to operate any vehicle on any street or alley designated in the manner provided in this section as a one-way street or alley in any direction other than that so designated and so marked with signs. 
B.  Whenever any resolution of the city designates any one-way street or alley, the director of public works shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Ord. 206 §19, 1987)  
Chapter 10.14 - PARKING VIOLATIONS—FINES, PENALTIES AND ADMINISTRATIVE FEES 
 
10.14.010 - Purpose. 
The California Legislature through Vehicle Code, Section 40200 et seq. has made effective July 1, 1993, violations of local, state and federal regulations with respect to the standing or parking of vehicles. This chapter is to set forth penalties and administrative fees and provide procedural standards for the administrative collection, investigation and review process to insure that the collection of any fines, penalties or administrative fees regarding standing or parking violations shall be consistent with and pursuant to state law. This chapter shall establish fines, penalties, and administrative fees for all violations of chapter. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(d), 2-28-13)  
10.14.020 - Penalties. 
A.  Fines and penalties for violations of the California Vehicle Code are as follows: 
Section 	Nature of 
Offense 	Parking 
Penalty 	Sign Off 	Late 
Payment/ 
Penalty 
4000(A)1 	Registration required 	$39.50 	$10.00 	$ 7.90 
4152.5 	Failure to apply for foreign vehicle registration 	39.50 	10.00 	7.90 
4461(A) 	Improper use of proof of registration 	39.50 	10.00 	7.90 
4462(B) 	Evidence of registration wrong vehicle 	39.50 	10.00 	7.90 
4464 	Altered license plate 	105.00 	10.00 	21.00 
5200 	Display of license plate 	39.50 	10.00 	7.90 
5201 	Position of plate 	39.50 	10.00 	7.90 
5202 	License plate vehicle without proper display 	35.50 	10.00 	7.90 
5204(A) 	Tabs 	80.00 	10.00 	13.90 
9400 	Commercial weight fees due 	35.50 	10.00 	6.90 
22500(A-K) 	Improper parking 	35.50 	10.00 	6.90 
22500.1 	Parking in a fire lane 	100.00 	10.00 	6.90 
22500(1) 	Parking in a handicap curb cut out 	285.00 	10.00 	57.00 
22500(F) 	Parking on sidewalk 	35.50 	10.00 	6.90 
22502(A)(E) 	Parking more than 18" away from right hand curb 	35.50 	10.00 	6.90 
22505(A) 	Posted no parking on State Highway 	34.50 	10.00 	6.90 
22507.8AB 	Parking in handicap space 	313.00 	N/A 	62.50 
22513(A) 	Tow cars-parking on freeway 	39.50 	10.00 	7.90 
22514 	Unattended vehicle requirements 15 ft. of fire hydrant 	105.00 	10.00 	21.00 
22515A 	Unattended vehicle 	35.50 	10.00 	6.90 
22515B 	Vehicle left standing on highway w/out setting brake or blocking wheels 	35.50 	10.00 	6.90 
22516 	Locking vehicle with person inside the vehicle 	105.00 	10.00 	21.00 
22517 	Opening door on traffic side 	49.50 	10.00 	9.90 
22519 	Regulation of off-street parking 	35.50 	10.00 	6.90 
22521 	Illegal to park on railroad tracks 	105.00 	10.00 	21.00 
22522 	Parking near sidewalk access ramp 	286.00 	10.00 	57.20 
22523(A) 	Abandon vehicle on highway 	104.50 	10.00 	20.90 
22523(B) 	Abandon vehicle on public/private property w/out consent 	105.50 	10.00 	21.10 
22526(A) 	Blocking intersection prohibited 	109.50 	10.00 	21.90 
22951 	Parking blocking the alley 	54.50 	10.00 	10.90 
23333 	Stopping or parking on a bridge 	35.50 	10.00 	6.90 
23336 	Violation of posted signs regulations 	39.50 	10.00 	7.90 
26700(B) 	Windshields 	39.50 	10.00 	7.90 
26708(A) 1, 2 	Application of material to windows 	39.50 	10.00 	7.90 
26708.5 	Application of transparent to windows 	39.50 	10.00 	7.90 
26710 	Defective windshield or rear window 	39.50 	10.00 	7.90 
 
B.  Fines and penalties for McFarland Municipal Code parking violations: 
McFarland MC Section 	Nature of 
Offense 	Parking 
Penalty 	Sign Off 	Late 
Payment/ 
Penalty 
10.08.010 	Parking for 72 or more consecutive hours 	$50.00 	$10.00 	$10.00 
10.08.040 	Limited or prohibited parking 	45.50 	9.50 	10.00 
10.08.050 	Stop/stand/park on private property 	45.50 	10.00 	10.00 
10.08.060 	Commercial vehicle parking/residential 	150.00 	10.00 	10.00 
10.08.070 	Prohibited parking/posted City property 	45.50 	10.00 	10.00 
10.08.080 	Repairing vehicles/public streets 	45.50 	10.00 	10.00 
10.08.090 	Parked on street less than 27' wide 	45.50 	10.00 	10.00 
10.08.100(a) 	Prohibited parking 	75.00 	10.00 	10.00 
10.08.120 	Parking/colored curb marking 	50.00 	10.00 	10.00 
10.08.140(c) 	Disabled placard displayed 	285.00 	N/A 	10.00 
10.08.150 	Disabled parking 	300.00 	N/A 	10.00 
10.08.160 	Parking vehicles on lawn 	50.00 	10.00 	10.00 
10.12.010 	Abandoned/neglected vehicle 	115.00 	10.00 	10.00 
10.12.020 	Parked in violation of posted sign 	75.00 	10.00 	10.00 
10.12.040 	Posted parking blocking street sweeper 	50.00 	10.00 	10.00 
 
C.  In the event fines and penalties are amended by the state of California, the chief of police, or his designee, shall be authorized to amend such fines and penalties contained within this section as may be required to comply with such changes by the state of California, without approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(d), 2-28-13)  
10.14.030 - Administrative fee. 
If the parking penalty is not paid within twenty-one days from the notice of parking violation or fourteen days of the first notice of delinquent parking violation or if the parking violation has not been successfully contested, a ten-dollar administrative fee and late payment penalty will be added to, and included in the parking penalty. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(d), 2-28-13)  
10.14.040 - Late payment penalty. 
If the fine is not paid within ten days of the second notice of delinquent parking violation, an additional late payment penalty equaling twenty percent of the total of the fine, penalties and administrative fees already assessed will be added to the fine. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(d), 2-28-13)  
10.14.050 - Enforcement. 
The enforcement of the penalties described herein shall be governed by the civil administrative procedures set forth in Article 3, Chapter 1, Division 17 of the California Vehicle Code commencing with Section 40200. 
(Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(d), 2-28-13)  
Chapter 10.16 - DISABLED, DISMANTLED, WRECKED AND JUNKED VEHICLES 
Sections:  
ARTICLE I. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT REGULATIONS 
 
10.16.010 - Declared nuisance—Abatement required. 
A.  In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city council makes the findings and declarations set out in subsection B of this section. 
B.  The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property not including highways is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects, and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof on private or public property not including highways, except as expressly permitted in this article, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. 148 §1, 1976)  
10.16.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following definitions apply: 
A.  "City council" means the city council of the city. 
B.  "Highway" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. "Highway" includes "street." 
C.  "Public property" does not include "highway." 
D.  "Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. 148 §2, 1976)  
10.16.030 - Article application—Exclusions. 
A.  This article shall not apply to: 
1.  A vehicle or parts thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property. 
2.  A vehicle or parts thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise. 
3.  Vehicles or parts thereof which are located behind a solid fence six feet in height or which is not plainly visible from a highway. 
B.  Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division II of the Vehicle Code and this article. 
(Ord. 148 §3, 1976)  
10.16.040 - Article application—Not to exclude other provisions. 
This article is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. The administration of this article shall be by regularly salaried, full- time employees of the city, except the city council may cause the removal of vehicles or parts thereof from property by other persons. 
(Ord. 210 §14, 1987: Ord. 148 §4, 1976)  
10.16.050 - Enforcement—Right of entry granted. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this article, the provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the chief of police, or whomever else the city council so designates. In the enforcement of this article the persons responsible for enforcement or their agents may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle, and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this article. 
B.  Any person who accumulates or stores abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property not including highways and who does not remove such abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof from that person's property within thirty days after receipt of a written notice from the city to remove such vehicles or parts thereof shall by guilty of an infraction and punishable pursuant to the terms set forth in Section 1.20.010 of this code. 
(Ord. 220 §1, 1989: Ord. 148 §5, 1976)  
10.16.060 - Removal of vehicles-Right of entry. 
When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. 148 §6, 1976)  
10.16.070 - Administrative cost assessment. 
A.  The city council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs, excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or parts thereof, under this article. 
B.  If the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located appears in person at the public hearing provided in Section 10.16.090 or presents a sworn statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land, along with his reasons for such denial, and if the city council determines that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the land owner and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence upon his land, then the city council shall not assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or in any way attempt to collect such costs from the landowner. 
(Ord. 148 §7, 1976)  
10.16.080 - Abatement and removal-Notice. 
Not less than a ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance shall be mailed, by registered mail, to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owners of record, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership or unless the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof. Such notice shall contain a statement of the hearing rights of the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located and the owner of the vehicle. The statement shall include notice to the property owner that he may appear in person at a hearing or may present a sworn statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial, in lieu of appearing. However, for those inoperable vehicles located upon a parcel that is (1) zoned for agricultural use or (2) not improved with a residential stucture containing one or more dwelling units, the notice of intention is not required for removal of a vehicle or part thereof which is inoperable due to the absence of a motor, transmission, or wheels and incapable of being towed, is valued at less than two hundred dollars by a person specified in Section 22855 of the California Vehicle Code, and is determined by the city council to be a public nuisance presenting an immediate threat to public health or safety, provided that the property owner has signed a release authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof. Prior to final disposition under Section 22662 of the California Vehicle Code of such a low-valued vehicle or part for which evidence of registration was recovered, the city shall provide notice to the registered and legal owners of intent to dispose of the vehicle or part, and if the vehicle or part is not claimed and removed within twelve days after the notice is mailed, from the location specified in Section 22662, final disposition may proceed. 
(Ord. 215 §1, 1988: Ord. 148 §8, 1976)  
10.16.090 - Public hearing-Submission of statement. 
A public hearing shall be held before the city council on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or part thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or part thereof against the property on which it is located upon request for such hearing by the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the land on which such vehicle is located. This request for a hearing shall be made to the city council within ten days after the mailing of notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle. If the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located submits a sworn statement to the city council denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such time period, the statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require the presence of the owner submitting such request. If such a request for a public hearing is not received within such period, the chief of police or whomever else the city council shall so designate shall have the authority to remove the vehicle without a public hearing. 
(Ord. 148 §9, 1976)  
10.16.100 - Public hearing. 
A.  All hearings under this article shall be held before the city council which shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. Said facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or part thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the private property or public property. The city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial. 
B.  The city council may impose such conditions and take such other action as its deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this article. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or part thereof if, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council may find that a vehicle or part thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this article, and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or part thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
C.  If an interested party makes a written presentation to the city council but does not appear, he shall be notified in writing of the decision. 
(Ord. 148 §10, 1976)  
10.16.110 - Disposition of vehicles. 
Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, five days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision if such notice is required by Section 10.16.100, or fifteen days after such action of the governing body authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard, automobile dismantler's yard or any suitable site operated by the city for processing as scrap or other disposition provided by the laws of the state. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable, unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates pursuant to Section 5004 of the California Vehicle Code in which case it may be reconstructed or made operable. 
(Ord. 148 §11, 1976)  
10.16.120 - Notice to Department of Motor Vehicles. 
Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or part thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or part thereof removed. At the same time, there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. 
(Ord. 148 §12, 1976)  
10.16.130 - Lien against land. 
If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to Section 10.16.100 are not paid within thirty days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. Said assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. 
(Ord. 148 §13, 1976)  
ARTICLE II. - STORAGE REGULATIONS 
 
10.16.140 - Finding of necessity. 
The city council finds that the practice of accumulating, parking or storing of disabled, dismantled or junked automobiles in any number on any lot, place or area in the city, other than when being repaired when temporarily disabled, is hazardous, unsafe and unhealthy for the city residents and is a detriment to the public health, welfare and safety and contributes to the deterioration of neighborhoods and should be regulated. 
(Ord. 94 §1, 1966)  
10.16.150 - Unlawful acts. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park, stand, leave parked, leave standing or accumulate one or more disabled, dismantled or junked automobiles, or parts thereof on any lot, place or area in the city, unless the lot, place or area is completely surrounded by a solid fence at least eight feet high which substantially eliminates from view the disabled, dismantled or junked automobiles, or unless the automobiles or parts thereof are completley enclosed in a building. 
B.  The fence referred to in subsection A of this section shall be constructed from any of the following materials: wood, metal, concrete or synthetic compositions. A reasonable regulation for the construction of the fence will be established by the building inspector, upon approval of the city council, and the construction must meet with his approval. The premises shall be kept at all times in a sanitary condition. 
(Ord. 94 §2, 1966)  
10.16.160 - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to any automobile temporarily disabled while the same is being repaired provided the repairs are completed within sixty days after the automobile is disabled. 
(Ord. 94 §3, 1966)  
10.16.170 - Article to be deemed complementary to other regulations. 
The ordinance codified in this article shall not be construed to repeal any ordinance or any part thereof, but shall be deemed complementary to all other ordinances and parts thereof. 
(Ord. 94 §4, 1966)  
10.16.180 - Violation-Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding six months in the county jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 94 §5, 1966)  
Chapter 10.20 - BICYCLES 
Sections: 
 
10.20.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the word "bicycle" means a device upon which a person may ride, which is propelled by human power through a system of belts, chains and gears and which has wheels at least twenty inches in diameter and a frame size of at least fourteen inches. 
(Ord. 138 §1, 1975)  
10.20.020 - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle upon any street, road, highway or other public property in the city without first obtaining from the city police department a license therefor. 
(Ord. 138 §2, 1975)  
10.20.030 - Issuance of licenses. 
The city police department is authorized and directed to issue upon written application, bicycle licenses which shall be effective from the date of registration to and including the thirty-first day of December of the second year following the year of registration. All license renewals shall be on January 1st of the third year following the year of registration. The licenses when issued shall entitle the licensee to operate such bicycles for which the license has been issued upon all the streets, roads, highways or other public property, exclusive of the sidewalks thereof, in the city. 
(Ord. 210 §13(part), 1987: Ord. 138 §3, 1975)  
10.20.040 - License plates. 
The city shall provide each year license plates, together with registration cards with the license plates and registration cards that conform to state law; such license plates shall be suitable for attachment upon the frames of the bicycles, and it shall be the duty of the police department to attach one such license plate to the frame of each bicycle and to issue a corresponding registration card to the licensee upon the licensing herein provided for. Such license plates shall remain attached during the existence of such license. The police department shall also keep a record of the date of issue of each license, the license number, the serial number of the bicycle, the make, type and model of the bicycle, and the name and address of the licensee. 
(Ord. 138 §4, 1975)  
10.20.050 - Report of sale or transfer. 
It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership of any bicycle, to report such sale or transfer by returning to the city police department the registration card issued to such person as licensee thereof, together with the name and address of the person to whom the bicycle was sold or transferred, and such report shall be made within ten days of the date of the sale or transfer. It shall be the duty of the purchaser or transferee of such bicycle to apply for a transfer of registration thereof within ten days of taking possession thereof. Whenever the owner of a bicycle licensed pursuant to this chapter changes his or her address, he or she shall within ten days notify the city police department of his or her old and new address. 
(Ord. 210 §13(part), 1987: Ord. 138 §5, 1975)  
10.20.060 - Retailers and dealers-Duties. 
A.  Each bicycle retailer and each bicycle dealer shall supply to each purchaser a preregistration form provided by the city and shall include, on the sales check or receipt given to the purchaser, a record of the following information: name of retailer, address of retailer, year and make of the bicycle, serial number of the bicycle if delivered to the purchaser in an assembled state, general description of the bicycle, name of the purchaser and address of the purchaser. A copy of the preregistration form shall be filled out and forwarded by the purchaser to the city clerk within ten days from the date of sale. 
B.  For the purposes of this chapter, a "bicycle dealer" is any person who sells, gives away, buys or takes in trade for the purpose of resale, more than five bicycles in any one calendar year, whether or not such bicycles are owned by such person. "Bicycle dealer" also includes agents and employees of such person. No bicycle retailer shall sell any new bicycle in the city unless such bicycle has permanently stamped or cast on its frame a serial number unique to the particular bicycle of each manufacturer. Serial numbers shall be cast in the head of the frame, either side of the seat down post tube, or the bottom sprocket bracket. 
(Ord. 210 §13(part), 1987: Ord. 138 §6, 1975)  
10.20.070 - Lost, stolen or mutilated license indicia or registration forms. 
In the event that any bicycle license indicia or registration form issued pursuant to this chapter is lost, stolen or mutilated, the licensee of such bicycle shall immediately notify the city clerk, and, within ten days after such notification, shall apply to the city for a duplicate license indicia or registration form. Thereupon, the city shall issue to such licensee a replacement indicia or registration form upon payment to the city of the appropriate fee. 
(Ord. 210 §13(part), 1987: Ord. 138 §12, 1975)  
10.20.080 - Violation—Alteration or removal of serial numbers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the number of any bicycle frame serial number pursuant to this chapter. It shall also be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license plate, seal or registration card during the time in which such license plate, seal or registration card is operative. Provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city police department from stamping numbers on the frames of bicycles on which no serial number can be found, or on which the number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes. 
(Ord. 138 §7, 1975)  
10.20.090 - Violation—Penalty. 
Every person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five dollars. In addition to the penalty set forth in this section, the city police department or any member thereof, may impound and retain possession of any bicycle operated in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and may retain possession of the same until the license provided for in this chapter is obtained by the owner of the bicycle. 
(Ord. 138 §8, 1975)  
Chapter 10.24 - PARKING CHEMICAL TOILETS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 025-2013, § 1(c), adopted February 28, 2013, renumbered Chapter 10.10, §§ 10.10.010—10.10.030 as Chapter 10.24, §§ 10.24.010—10.24.030. 
 
10.24.010 - Chemical toilets. 
A person shall not park any chemical toilet of the type normally transported by semitrailer upon any highway, street, alley, public way or public place except when otherwise required by law. 
(Ord. 274 §1(B)(part), 1995)  
10.24.020 - Removal of chemical toilets. 
Any legally employed and salaried officer of the police department may remove a chemical toilet from any highway, street, alley, public way or public place within the city which is in violation of Section 10.24.010. 
(Ord. 274 §1(B)(part), 1995)  
10.24.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding six months in the county jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 274 §1(B)(part), 1995)  
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES  
Chapter 12.04 - SIDEWALK AND DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION 
 
12.04.010 - Purpose. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted and established to serve the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. 170 § 1.00, 1978)  
12.04.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter certain terms and words are defined as provided in this section: 
A.  "Council" means the city council of the city. 
B.  "Inspector" means the city manager of the city or his appointed representative. 
(Ord. 170 §§ 2.00— 2.02, 1978) 
(Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
12.04.030 - Limitations of responsibility. 
A.  Neither an approval nor a permit granted by the city shall constitute permission or authority, or be interpreted as a waiver, for the violation of any statute, ordinance or regulation. 
B.  Neither the city nor its officers or employees shall assume any liability for structural or construction defects through the administration or enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. 170 §§ 3.00, 3.01, 1978)  
12.04.040 - Permits and inspection. 
A.  Permits. No person as principal, servant, agent or employee shall construct any sidewalk, driveway or driveway approach without having a valid permit from the city. 
B.  Permit Procedure. The city clerk shall provide an informational document covering permits required by this chapter. 
C.  Application for Permit. Every person proposing to construct any sidewalk, driveway or driveway approach shall, before commencing, apply to the city clerk for a permit to do so. If the application shows compliance with this chapter, zoning regulations and other applicable laws to the proposed work, including conformance with applicable contractors' licensing regulations, the city clerk shall issue the permit. A permit issued under this subsection shall expire on the ninetieth calendar day after the date of issuance if work has not been started and reasonable progress toward completion is not maintained, except that the city clerk may extend the permit when warranted. 
D.  Permit Fee. A permit fee shall be established by the city council by resolution and shall accompany the application. 
E.  Inspections. The inspector may conduct inspections at any time to ensure compliance with the regulations of this chapter. 
F.  Mandatory Inspections. The city manager may prescribe mandatory inspections of projects on which he deems necessary. The stage at which each inspection is required shall be set forth in the permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to continue work on a project past the stage at which inspection has been prescribed pursuant to this subsection until such inspection by the inspector has been completed or waived. 
G.  Stop Work Order. Whenever the construction or reconstruction is being carried out contrary to the requirements of this chapter, the inspector shall order work to stop by posting a notice to desist at the construction site. No further work shall be done until the inspector determines that the necessary corrections have been made. 
(Ord. 170 §§ 4.00—4.06, 1978) 
(Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
12.04.050 - Standards. 
A.  Standards shall be those standards adopted by the city council, and any amendments to those standards as may be adopted from time to time. 
B.  The city clerk shall make these standards available to the public. Copies of these standards may be obtained at City Hall, 401 Kern Avenue, during normal business hours. 
(Ord. 170 §§ 5.00, 5.01, 1978)  
12.04.060 - Appeal from denial, revocation or suspension of permit. 
Any person whose application for a permit has been denied or whose permit, once issued, has been revoked or suspended may within ten days following the receipt of the notice of the denial, suspension or revocation, file an appeal in writing to the city clerk. The appeal shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is taken. The city clerk shall then proceed to set the matter for hearing, not later than thirty days after receipt of the notice to appeal. Such appeal shall stay the effect of any order or action until the city council hears the appeal and issues its order to either affirm, overrule or modify the action of the inspector. Notice of the day, time and place of the hearing shall be given to the general public and mailed to the appealing party at least two weeks prior to the hearing. The decision of the council shall be final. 
(Ord. 170 §6.02, 1978)  
12.04.070 - Enforcement. 
The inspector may at any reasonable time enter the construction site for the purpose of making examinations and investigations to determine whether any provision of this chapter is being violated. 
(Ord. 170 §6.00, 1978)  
12.04.080 - Violation-Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, which is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 170 §6.01, 1978)  
Chapter 12.08 - STREET EXCAVATIONS 
Sections: 
 
12.08.010 - Short title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "street excavation regulations." 
(Ord. 150 §1, 1976)  
12.08.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given in this section: 
A.  "City" means the city of McFarland. 
B.  "City manager" means the city manager of the city. 
C.  "Excavation" means any opening in the surface of a public place made in any manner whatsoever, except an opening into a lawful structure below the surface of a public place, the top of which is flush with the adjoining surface and so constructed as to permit frequent openings without injury or damage to the public place. 
D.  "Facility" means pipe, pipeline, tube, main, service, trap, vent, vault, manhole, meter, gauge, regulator, valve, conduit, wire, tower, pole, pole line, anchor, cable, junction box, transformer or object of any kind or character, whether enumerated herein or not, which is or may be lawfully constructed, let, placed or maintained in, upon, along, across, under or over any public place. 
E.  "Public place" means any public street, way, place, alley, sidewalk, park, right-of-way, or any other public property owned or controlled by the city. 
F.  "Substructure" means any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, manhole, vault, buried cable or wire, or any other structure located below the surface of any public place. 
(Ord. 150 §2, 1976)  
12.08.030 - Permit required. 
No person shall make any excavation, fill any excavation or make any cut in any public place without first obtaining a permit to do so from the city manager. No permit to make an excavation in any public place shall be issued except as provided in this chapter. The city manager may issue an annual permit for the purpose of placing, replacing or repairing any facility within a public place in the city, where the opening does not exceed three feet in width and five feet in length, to the following persons and/or entities upon payment of the fees and deposits required in this chapter, provided the city manager is notified in writing at least twenty- four hours in advance of any such work and the permittee does not replace, restore and/or repair such excavation without first securing the city manager's inspection thereof and consent thereto: 
A.  A public utility regulated by the Public Utilities Commission; or 
B.  A person holding a franchise from the city; or 
C.  The McFarland Mutual Water Company. 
(Ord. 150 §3, 1976)  
12.08.040 - Application for permit. 
No excavation permit shall be issued unless a written application on a form provided by the city for the issuance of an excavation permit is submitted to the city manager. The written application shall state the name and address and principal place of business of the applicant, the authority of the applicant to occupy the public place for which the permit is sought, the location and dimensions of the installation or removal for which excavation is to be made, the purpose of the facility and its location within the excavation and the length of time which will be required to complete such work, including backfilling and closing the excavation and removing all obstructions, materials and debris. The application, when approved and signed by the city manager, shall constitute a permit. 
(Ord. 150 §4, 1976)  
12.08.050 - Permit fees. 
A permit fee shall be charged by the city manager for the issuance of an excavation permit. The fee for a single permit shall be ten dollars and for an annual permit, fifty dollars. 
(Ord. 150 §5, 1976)  
12.08.060 - Insurance policy. 
Before an excavation permit is issued, as provided in this chapter, the applicant shall deposit with the city a public liability and property damage insurance policy naming the city, its officers, employees and agents as additional insureds. The policy shall provide: 
A.  Limits of one hundred thousand dollars for the injury or death of one person and three hundred thousand dollars for the death or injury of more than one person in any one accident; and 
B.  Property damage liability in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars; and 
C.  The policy shall remain in force until all work authorized under an excavation permit has been completed by the applicant and has been approved by the city; and 
D.  That prior to the cancellation of the policy, the insurance carrier shall provide the city with thirty days' written notice thereof. 
(Ord. 156 §3, 1977: Ord. 150 §6, 1976)  
12.08.070 - Cash deposits. 
A.  The application for an excavation permit to perform excavation work under this chapter shall be accompanied by a cash deposit, made payable to the city for deposit with the city treasurer, as follows: A sum equal to three dollars per square foot of surface area of each excavation made in a public place. No deposit shall be less than three hundred dollars. Any person applying for an annual permit shall deposit the sum of one thousand dollars with the city treasurer. Such deposit shall cover only those excavations permitted under an annual permit. 
B.  Any special or general deposit made under this chapter shall serve as security for the repair and performance of work necessary to put the public place in as good a condition as it was prior to the excavation. Upon the permittee's completion of the work covered by the permit in conformity with this chapter as determined by the city manager, two-thirds of such cash deposit, except in the case of any annual deposit, shall be promptly refunded by the city to the permittee and the balance shall be refunded by the city to the permittee upon the expiration of a twelve-month period where the city manager finds that the work completed remains satisfactory. In the case of an annual deposit, two-thirds of such cash deposit shall be refunded by the city at the end of the one-year period for which the deposit is made or the satisfactory completion of all excavation work undertaken during such period, whichever is later, and the balance of the annual deposit shall be refunded at the end of a twelve-month period following the completion of the excavation work where the city manager finds that the work completed remains satisfactory. The city may use any or all of any deposit under this section to pay the cost of any work the city performs to restore or maintain the public place as provided in this chapter in the event the permittee fails to perform such work to the satisfaction of the city manager. In such case, the amount refunded to the permittee shall be reduced by the amount expended by the city. 
(Ord. 150 §7, 1976)  
12.08.080 - Cash deposits-Exemptions. 
A.  A public utility company regulated by the Public Utilities Commission of the state and holding a franchise from the city may be exempted from the provisions of Sections 12.08.060 and 12.08.070 upon the execution of a hold harmless agreement between the city and the public utility, the form of the agreement to be approved by the city manager. 
B.  The public utility shall agree to hold harmless, indemnify and defend the city, its officers, employees and agents, from any and all liability claims, losses or damages, including attorneys' fees, arising or alleged to arise from the performance of the work undertaken by the public utility under an excavation permit issued under the regulations of this chapter. 
C.  The public utility shall also indemnify and save the city, its officers, employees and agents harmless from all such costs, losses, expenses, damages, attorneys' fees, and all other costs, including all costs of defense, which any of them incur with respect to the failure, neglect or refusal of the public utility company to faithfully perform the work authorized under an excavation permit issued under the regulations of this chapter, including all conditions of approval, to the satisfaction of the city. 
(Ord. 156 §1, 1977: Ord. 150 §7(A), 1976)  
12.08.090 - Cash deposits-Waivers. 
The city manager may waive the requirements of Sections 12.08.060 and 12.08.070 where he finds that the excavation permit is issued pursuant to the following conditions: 
A.  The applicant is a property owner of the city and the work to be undertaken is for the benefit of the applicant's principal residence; 
B.  The work to be performed consists solely of placing a new driveway approach where the only material to be excavated is dirt; 
C.  There will be no placement, removal or alteration of curb and gutter; 
D.  All work will be commenced and completed within twenty-four hours. 
(Ord. 156 §2, 1977: Ord. 150 §7(B), 1976)  
12.08.100 - Renewal of annual permit. 
Upon written application of the holder of an annual permit, the city manager may renew an annual permit without payment of the application fee required in Section 12.08.050; provided, however, that the requirements of Sections 12.08.060 and 12.08.070 shall be fully complied with in respect to the renewed permit. 
(Ord. 150 §8, 1976)  
12.08.110 - Conditions of approval. 
The city manager shall condition the approval of an excavation permit upon the faithful performance of the permittee. Such conditions may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  Routing of traffic; 
B.  Protection of traffic; 
C.  Clearance for vital structures; 
D.  Relocation and protection of utilities; 
E.  Abandonment of substructures; 
F.  Protection of adjoining property; 
G.  Protective devices and measures; 
H.  Care of excavation materials; 
I.  Clean up; 
J.  Protection of watercourses; 
K.  Breaking through pavement; 
L.  Depth and/or location of facilities; 
M.  Backfilling; 
N.  Restoration of surface; 
O.  Completion time of all excavation work; 
P.  Health and safety of the surrounding community. 
(Ord. 150 §9, 1976)  
12.08.120 - Urgent work. 
If in his judgment, the traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the traveling public or the public interest require that the excavation work be performed as emergency work, the city manager shall have full power to order, at the time the permit is issued, that a crew of men and adequate facilities be employed by the permittee twenty-four hours a day to the end that such excavation work be completed as soon as possible. 
(Ord. 150 §10, 1976)  
12.08.130 - Emergency action. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the making of any excavation as may be necessary to make emergency repairs for the preservation of life or property, provided that the person making the excavation shall notify the police department immediately upon making the excavation and shall apply to the city manager for a permit on the first working day after such work is commenced. 
B.  No excavation undertaken under this section shall be closed until such permit is secured. 
(Ord. 150 §11, 1976)  
12.08.140 - Inspections. 
The city manager shall make such inspections as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of this chapter. The city manager shall have the authority to promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be reasonably necessary to enforce and carry out the intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. 150 §12, 1976)  
12.08.150 - Preservation of monuments. 
Any monument set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any street or property subdivision, or a precise survey reference point, or a permanent survey bench mark within the city, shall not be removed or disturbed or caused to be removed or disturbed without first obtaining permission in writing from the city manager to do so. Permission to remove or disturb such monuments, reference point or bench marks shall only be granted upon condition that the person applying for such permission shall pay all expenses incident to the proper replacement of the monument by the city. 
(Ord. 150 §13, 1976)  
12.08.160 - Revocation of permit. 
A.  If, in the opinion of the city manager, after an inspection of any work in progress and reviewing all relevant information, the permittee has violated any provisions of this chapter or any condition which was made a part of the excavation permit pursuant to Section 12.08.110, the permit shall be revoked and no further work shall be undertaken by the permittee except to restore the public place to its original condition or such condition as required in the permit. The permittee shall be notified by mail at the address given on the permit in the event that the permit is revoked. The notice shall inform the permittee of his right of appeal under Section 12.08.170. 
B.  In the event the permittee fails to restore the public place as required in the permit when so notified by the city manager, the city manager shall cause the same to be done and shall deduct the amount necessary to restore the public place from the deposit required in Section 12.08.070. 
(Ord. 150 §14, 1976) 
(Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 4-11-11)  
12.08.170 - Appeals. 
Any person applying for a permit or any permittee shall have the right to appeal any decision or condition imposed by the city manager in the exercise of his responsibility under this chapter; however, there shall be no right of appeal to those provisions of this chapter specifically provided for. An appeal under this section shall be upon a written form provided by the city and shall be accompanied by a filing fee of twenty-five dollars. The city council shall hear the appeal at its next regular meeting and shall make a determination thereon. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. 150 §15, 1976) 
(Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 4-11-11)  
12.08.180 - Maintenance of drawings. 
Every person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in substructures, under the surface of any public place used for the purpose of supplying or conveying gas, electricity, cable television signals, communication impulse, water, steam, ammonia or oil in the city, shall file with the city manager, within one hundred twenty days after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, a map or set of maps, each drawn to a scale of not less than one inch to two hundred feet, showing in detail the location, size, description and date of installation, if known, of all substructures, except a service line designed to serve a single property owner, beneath the surface of the public place belonging to, used by or under the control of such person having any interest, and shall file with the city manager within fifteen days after the first day of January of each and every year a corrected map or set of maps, each drawn to said scale including all installations made during the previous year, to and including the last day of such year; provided, however, that a public utility owner may, at its option, provide corrected atlas sheets at more frequent intervals. 
(Ord. 150 §16, 1976) 
(Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 4-11-11)  
12.08.190 - Liability of city. 
This chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the city or any official, employee or agent of the city any liability or responsibility for any damages or injury to any person by the performance of any excavation work for which an excavation permit is issued under this chapter, nor shall the city, its officers, employees or agents be deemed to have assumed such liability or any responsibility by reason of inspections authorized under this chapter or the issuance of any permit or the approval of any excavation work. 
(Ord. 150 §17, 1976)  
12.08.200 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 150 §19, 1976)  
Chapter 12.10 - WATER CONSERVATION MEASURES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 040-2014, § 1, adopted November 13, 2014, set out provisions intended for use as Chapter 12.12. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Chapter 12.10. 
 
12.10.010 - Purpose. 
The state of California faces persistent water supply problems. Accordingly, it is the purpose and intent of this chapter to implement measures to conserve water resources, to reduce outdoor water use, and to mitigate unnecessary consumption of available water supplies in the city. 
(Ord. No. 040-2014, § 1, 11-13-14)  
12.10.020 - Drought restrictions. 
The following restrictions shall be imposed upon declaration by the city of McFarland of a water shortage: 
A.  Stage 1 Water Shortage. When the city of McFarland implements its Stage 1 water shortage allocation reduction, the following restrictions on the use of water from the McFarland water system shall be in effect: 
1.  The use of water which allows substantial and unreasonable amounts of water to run into a gutter, ditch, or drain. Every water user is deemed to have his water distribution lines and facilities under his control at all times and to know the manner and extent of his water use and excess runoff. 
2.  The excessive use, loss, or escape of water through breaks, leaks, or malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or distribution facilities for any period of time after such escape of water should reasonably have been discovered and corrected. It shall be presumed that a period of forty-eight hours after discovery is a reasonable time within which to correct such leak or break. 
3.  The washing of vehicles, building exteriors, sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios or other paved areas without the use of a positive shut-off nozzle on the hose, which results in excessive runoff, except where necessary to dispose of liquids or substances that could endanger the public's health, welfare and safety. 
B.  Stage 2 Water Shortage. When the city of McFarland implements its Stage 2 water shortage allocation reduction, the following restrictions on the use of water from the McFarland water system shall be in effect in addition to all Stage 1 water shortage restrictions: 
1.  Irrigation utilizing individual sprinklers or sprinkler systems of lawns, gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs or other plants is permitted on the "odd/even" protocol (based on last digit of street address), between the hours of eight p.m. and five a.m. on designated days. Irrigation of lawns, gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs, or other plants is permitted at any time if: 
a.  A hand-held hose with positive shut-off nozzle is used; or 
b.  A hand-held, faucet-filled bucket of five gallons or less is used; or 
c.  A drip irrigation system is used. 
3.  Irrigation Overspray and Runoff. Water shall not spray or flow to any impermeable private or public surface, including but not limited to, walkways, driveways, sidewalks, alleys, streets, or storm drains. 
4.  Exception: Commercial nurseries, farmers, and similar establishments are exempt from Stage 2 irrigation restrictions, but will be requested to curtail all nonessential water use. 
3.  The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, and other types of mobile equipment is permitted only on designated irrigation days based on the "odd/even" protocol (based on last digit of street address), between the hours of eight a.m. and six p.m. on designated days. Such washing, when allowed, shall be done with a hand-held bucket, or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive shut-off nozzle for quick rinses. 
4.  Exception: Washing may be done at any time on the immediate premises of a commercial car wash or commercial service station. Further, the aforementioned washing is exempt from these regulations if the health, safety, and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleanings, such as in the cases of garbage trucks and vehicles to transport food and perishables. 
5.  The emptying and refilling of water to swimming pools and/or spas is permitted only on designated irrigation days between the hours of seven p.m. and ten a.m. 
6.  The operation of any ornamental fountain or other structure making similar use of water is prohibited unless the fountain uses a recycling system, such as an electric pump. 
7.  The washing of sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, courts, patios, or other paved areas is absolutely prohibited, unless it is necessary for the health and safety, and welfare of the public. 
8.  Eating and Drinking Establishments. 
a.  All new or substantially re-modeled eating and drinking establishments of any kind whatsoever including, but not limited to, any restaurant, hotel, cafe, cafeteria, bar or club, whether public or private, shall only provide drinking water to any person upon receipt of an express request. 
b.  All new or substantially re-modeled all food service businesses shall install water conserving pre-rinse nozzles. 
9.  Hotels, Motels, Bed and Breakfast. 
a.  All new or substantially re-modeled hotels, motels and bed and breakfast establishments shall provide customers the option of choosing not to have towels laundered daily. Each establishment shall prominently display notice of this option in each bathroom and sleeping room using clear easily understood language. 
b.  All new or substantially re-modeled guest room toilets shall be the best available technology low flow toilets. 
10.  Carwashes. 
a.  All new or substantially re-modeled new carwash system shall have a water recirculation system. 
11.  Hoses. No person shall allow water to flow freely from a hose that is not equipped with a positive action quick release shutoff valve or nozzle. 
C.  Stage 3 Water Shortage. When the city of McFarland implements its Stage 3 water shortage allocation reduction, the following restrictions on the use of water from the McFarland water system shall be in effect in addition to the Stage 1 and 2 water shortage restrictions: 
1.  Washing of vehicles is prohibited except at commercial car washes or by mobile high pressure/low volume commercial services. 
2.  Landscape watering with potable water shall be limited to one time per week for not more than fifteen minutes per watering zone from 6:00 p.m. on Wednesday and 9:00 a.m. the following Thursday. 
3.  This subsection shall not apply to any drip irrigation system, irrigation system maintenance, leak repair or new planting of low water usage plants or if reclaimed water is utilized as permitted by law. 
D.  Stage 4 Water Shortage. When the city of McFarland implements its Stage 4 water shortage allocation reduction, the following restrictions on the use of water from the McFarland water system shall be in effect in addition to all Stage 1, 2 and 3 water shortage restrictions: 
1.  Home reverse osmosis treatment units and water softeners shall be disconnected or turned off. 
2.  Watering of nonpublic playing fields with potable water is prohibited. 
3.  Landscape watering with potable water shall be limited to one time per week from 6:00 p.m. on Wednesday and 9:00 a.m. the following Thursday by only drip irrigation, hand held hoses, or if reclaimed water is utilized as permitted by law. 
4.  This subsection shall not apply to any drip irrigation system, irrigation system maintenance, leak repair or new planting of low water usage plants or if reclaimed water is utilized as permitted by law. 
E.  Stage 5 Water Shortage or Above. When the city of McFarland implements its Stage 5 through 10 water shortage allocation reduction the following restrictions on the use of water from the McFarland water system shall be in effect in addition to all Stage 1, 2, 3, and 4 water shortage restrictions: 
1.  Filling of residential swimming pools or spas with potable water is prohibited. 
2.  Landscape irrigation with potable water is prohibited except with a watering can using water captured from indoor use. 
3.  Any additional water conservation measures adopted by the director of public works or his or her designee deemed necessary for the preservation of public health, safety and welfare. 
4.  This subsection shall not apply to any drip irrigation system, irrigation system maintenance, leak repair or new planting of low water usage plants or if reclaimed water is utilized as permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 040-2014, § 1, 11-13-14)  
12.10.030 - Relief from compliance. 
A customer may file an application for relief from any provision of this chapter. The city manager's consideration of written applications for exceptions regarding regulations and restrictions on water use not otherwise set forth in previous sections of this chapter shall be as follows: 
A.  Written application for exception may be granted by the city manager; 
B.  Exceptions may be granted if: 
1.  Compliance with this chapter would cause an unnecessary and undue hardship to the applicant, including, but not limited to, adverse economic impacts, such as loss of production or jobs; or 
2.  Compliance with this chapter would cause a condition affecting the health, sanitation, fire protection, or safety of the applicant or the public. 
(Ord. No. 040-2014, § 1, 11-13-14)  
Chapter 12.12 - WATER RUNOFF INTO STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 
Sections: 
 
12.12.010 - Prohibited. 
No person, firm or corporation having in his or its possession or under his or its control any water pipe, hose, sprinkler, drain or similar article shall permit the water therefrom to run on or across any sidewalk, public way or public street so as to injure the same or obstruct the free travel thereon. 
(Ord. 30 §1, 1958)  
12.12.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 30 §2, 1958)  
Chapter 12.16 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC PLACES 
Sections:  
ARTICLE I. - PUBLIC PARKS 
 
12.16.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
A.  "City" means the city of McFarland. 
B.  "Public park" means any area set aside and/or established in the city, whether such area is owned, operated and/or maintained by the city, the county, the state, the McFarland recreation and park district, any public school district, and/or any other person or entity for the purposes of people congregating for relaxation, picnicking, recreational or competitive games and sporting events, or for any other lawful activity without first having secured a consent therefor. 
(Ord. 158 §1, 1977)  
12.16.020 - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage as the same is defined in Section 23004 of the Business and Professions Code of the state, or as hereafter amended, while in or upon any public park in the city, unless a permit therefor is first secured from the McFarland city clerk or the superintendent of the McFarland recreation and park district, as the case may be. 
(Ord. 263 §1(part), 1993: Ord. 158 §2, 1977)  
12.16.030 - Application for permit. 
A.  Any person desirous of consuming alcoholic beverages in a public park owned or managed by the McFarland recreation and park district shall apply to the superintendent of the McFarland recreation and park district for a permit therefor at least ten days in advance thereof. Any person desirous of consuming alcoholic beverages in any other park in the city shall apply to the city clerk of the city for a permit therefor at least ten days in advance thereof. The application for such permit shall be made in writing on a form approved by the city clerk. In order that adequate arrangements may be made for the proper policing of such activity, the application shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the person requesting the permit. If the request is made on behalf of or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the principal office of the organization, and of the authorized head of such organization; 
2.  The name, address and telephone number of the person(s) who will be responsible for the conduct of the person and/or organization who will be consuming such alcoholic beverages; 
3.  The date (dates) when the consumption of alcoholic beverages will occur; 
4.  The approximate number of persons who will participate; 
5.  The location of the proposed activity; 
6.  Such other information as the city clerk or superintendent of the McFarland recreation and park district may require. 
B.  If there has been no prior application for a permit to consume alcoholic beverages at the same park, the city clerk or superintendent of the McFarland recreation and park district, as the case may be, shall issue a permit granting the application, subject to the provisions of Section 12.16.040. In the event that there has been a prior application for a permit to consume alcoholic beverages to be held at the same time and place, the city clerk or superintendent of the McFarland recreation and park district, as the case may be, may deny the permit. The applicant for the permit shall be notified in writing of the action of the city clerk or superintendent of the McFarland recreation and park district, as the case may be, in granting or denying the permit at least five days prior to the date of the proposed event. In the event the application is denied, the written notice of such denial shall set forth the reasons therefor. 
(Ord. 263 §1(part), 1993: Ord. 158 §3, 1977)  
12.16.040 - Refusal of permit. 
The city clerk or superintendent of the McFarland recreation and park district, as the case may be, may refuse a permit to consume alcoholic beverages in or upon any public park in the city when in his/her judgment the conditions of vehicular and pedestrian traffic or the effect upon stores, offices and other places of business, or upon the residences, churches, institutions reserved for the sick, schools or educational institutions in the vicinity, all considered in relation to the safety, comfort and convenience of the public generally, shall so warrant. 
(Ord. 263 §1(part), 1993: Ord. 158 §4, 1977)  
12.16.050 - Appeal. 
Upon a denial by the city clerk or superintendent of the McFarland recreation and park district of an application made pursuant to Section 12.16.030, the applicant may appeal from the determination of the city clerk or superintendent of the McFarland recreation and park district within two days thereafter to the city council of the city by filing the application with the city clerk who shall set the appeal for hearing by the council at its next meeting. Upon such appeal, the council may reverse, affirm or modify in any regard the determination of the city clerk or superintendent of the McFarland recreation and park district, as the case may be. To carry out the judgment of the council upon appeal, the city clerk or superintendent of the McFarland recreation and park district, as the case may be, shall be directed to act in conformity with the judgment of the council. 
(Ord. 263 §1(part), 1993: Ord. 158 §5, 1977)  
12.16.060 - Violation-Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not exceeding six months, or by both fine and imprisonment. Every day upon which violation of this chapter shall exist, or continue, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 158 §6, 1977)  
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC AREAS 
 
12.16.070 - Definitions. 
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise indicates: 
A.  "Business establishment" means any entity, other than the state or a local governmental entity, however organized, which furnishes goods or services to the general public. An otherwise qualifying establishment which has membership requirements is considered to furnish services to the general public if its membership requirements: Consist only of payment of fees. 
B.  "City" means the city of McFarland. 
C.  "Car wash" means any business enterprise or entity, of either a permanent or temporary nature, which charges a fee for the washing, waxing, polishing and any and all other forms of cleaning vehicles required to be registered under the Vehicle Code of the state, regardless if the cleaning is done by automated, mechanical or manual means. 
D.  "Parking lot" means any area, either publicly or privately owned which is set aside for and/or used for the parking of vehicle required to be registered under the Vehicle Code of the state of California excluding those areas in residential zones used for off-street parking at a private residence. 
E.  "Posted premises" means those premises which must obtain any retail alcoholic beverage license of the California Business and Professions Code in order to operate lawfully, any parking lot immediately adjacent to such licensed premises or on any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensed premises on which visible notices have been posted indicating that the provisions of this section are applicable to such premises. 
F.  "Public streets" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel including, without limitation, alleys and ways. 
G.  "Sidewalk" means that portion of a highway, other than the roadway, set apart by curbs, barriers, markings or other delineation for pedestrian travel. 
(Ord. 177 §1, 1979) 
(Ord. No. 002-2018, § 1, 4-12-18)  
12.16.080 - Drinking prohibited. 
A.  No person who has in his or her possession any bottle, can or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, shall enter, be or remain on the posted premises of any business establishment, retail alcoholic beverage licensee, including the posted parking lot immediately adjacent to or on any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensed and posted premises, while in, about or upon any car wash, parking lot, public street, sidewalk, alley, parking lot open to the general public, highway, or business establishment in the city of McFarland. This section does not apply to a private residential parking lot which is adjacent to the posted premises. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage as the same is defined in Section 23004 of the Business and Professions Code of the state of California, or as hereafter amended, while in, about or upon any car wash, parking lot, public street, sidewalk, alley, parking lot open to the general public, highway, or business establishment in the city of McFarland. 
(Ord. 177 §2, 1979) 
(Ord. No. 002-2018, § 1, 4-12-18)  
12.16.090 - Violation-Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not exceeding six months, or by both fine and imprisonment. Every day upon which violation of this chapter exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 177 §4, 1979)  
Chapter 12.20 - PARADES, MEETINGS AND ASSEMBLIES ON PUBLIC STREETS 
Sections: 
 
12.20.010 - Permit required. 
No person shall conduct a meeting, assembly or parade in or upon the public streets or highways of the city, or participate in any such meeting, assembly or parade unless and until a permit to conduct such meeting, assembly or parade has been obtained from the chief of police or, as provided in this chapter, from the council of the city. 
(Ord. 105 §1, 1968)  
12.20.020 - Parade permit application. 
A.  Any person desirous of conducting a parade shall apply to the chief of police for a permit therefor a period of time in advance of such proposed parade which will permit the chief of police to promptly take administrative action thereon after taking into consideration his other duties as chief of police. The application for such permit shall be made in writing on a form approved by the chief of police. In order that adequate arrangements may be made for the proper policing of the parade, the application shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the person requesting the permit. If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized head of such organization. 
2.  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and will be responsible for its conduct. 
3.  The purpose of the parade. 
4.  The date when the parade is to be conducted. 
5.  The hours when the parade will start and terminate. 
6.  The route of the parade. 
7.  The approximate number of persons who, and the number and kind of vehicles and animals which will constitute the parade. 
8.  The location of the assembly area of the parade. 
9.  The location of the dispersal area of the parade. 
10.  The plans for the assembly and dispersal of the parade, including the times thereof. 
11.  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the streets proposed to be traversed. 
12.  Such other information as the chief of police may require. 
B.  If there has been no prior application for a parade at said time and place, the chief of police shall issue a permit granting the application, subject to the provisions of Section 12.20.040. In the event that there has been a prior application for a parade to be held at said time, the chief of police may deny the permit. The applicant for the parade permit shall be notified in writing of the action of the chief of police in granting or denying the permit at least ten days prior to the date of the proposed parade. In the event the application is denied, the written notice of such denial shall set forth the reasons therefor. 
(Ord. 210 §8, 1987; Ord. 105 §2, 1968)  
12.20.030 - Meeting and assembly permit application. 
A.  Applications may be made by any person to hold a meeting or assembly, and the application for such meeting or assembly must be filed with the chief of police at least forty-eight hours in advance of the date of the proposed meeting or assembly, specifying the time and place thereof, the name of the person or organization desiring the permit and such other information as may be required by the chief of police in order to enable him to make adequate arrangements, as circumstances may require, for the proper policing of the proposed meeting or assembly. 
B.  The chief of police shall forthwith issue the permit granting the application unless prior application for said time and place has been made, in which event another time and place may be selected, and upon the selection of the alternative time and place by the applicant, the chief of police shall forthwith grant a permit therefor, subject to the provisions of Section 12.20.040. 
(Ord. 105 §3, 1968)  
12.20.040 - Refusal of permit. 
The chief of police may refuse a permit for either a meeting, assembly or parade when in his judgment the conditions of vehicular and pedestrian traffic or the effect upon stores, offices and other public places of business, or upon the residences, hospitals, churches, institutions reserved for the sick, schools or educational institutions in the vicinity, all considered in relation to the safety, comfort and convenience of the public generally, shall so warrant. 
(Ord. 105 §4, 1968)  
12.20.050 - Appeal. 
Upon a denial by the chief of police of an application made in pursuance of Sections 12.20.020 or 12.20.030, the applicant may appeal from the determination of the chief of police within two days thereafter to the city council of the city by filing the application with the city clerk who shall set the appeal for hearing by the council at its next meeting. Upon such appeal, the council may reverse, affirm or modify in any regard the determination of the chief of police. To carry out the judgment of the council upon appeal, the chief of police shall be directed to act in conformity with the judgment of the council. 
(Ord. 105 §5, 1968)  
12.20.060 - Violation-Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 105 §6, 1968)  
Chapter 12.24 - SOUND DEVICES IN PUBLIC PLACES 
Sections: 
 
12.24.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and meanings shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "City" means the city of McFarland. 
B.  "Person" means all foreign and domestic corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock companies and/or corporations, partnerships of every kind, Massachusetts, business or common law trusts, and individuals. 
C.  "Sound device or apparatus" means any radio device or apparatus, or any device or apparatus for the amplification of any sounds from any radio, phonograph or other sound-making or sound-producing device, or any device or apparatus for the reproduction or amplification of the human voice or other sounds. 
D.  "To use or operate any sound device in, on, near or adjacent to any public street, park or place" means to use or operate or cause to be used or operated any sound device or apparatus in front or outside of any building, place or premises, or in or through any window of any building, place or premises, or doorway or opening of such building, place or premises, abutting on or within one hundred fifty feet of a public street, park or place, or in or upon any vehicle operated, standing or being in or on any public street, park or place, where the sounds therefrom may be heard upon any public street, park or place, or from any stand, platform or other structure, or from any airplane or other device used for flying, flying over the city, or anywhere on the public streets, parks or places. 
(Ord. 12 §1, 1957)  
12.24.020 - Unlawful to operate-Hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate any sound device or apparatus in, on, near or adjacent to any public street, park or place, for commercial or business purposes in the city between the hours of ten p.m. and nine a.m. of the following day. 
(Ord. 12 §2, 1957)  
12.24.030 - Exception. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the operation of any sound device or apparatus by any school district or by any religious or veteran organization. 
(Ord. 12 §3, 1957)  
12.24.040 - Violation-Penalty. 
Any persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each and every day's continuance of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 12 §4, 1957)  
Chapter 12.28 - MAINTENANCE OF SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND GUTTERS 
Sections: 
 
12.28.010 - Sidewalks, curbs and gutters. 
It is unlawful for the owner, lessee, or operator of any business establishment in the city from which any alcoholic beverage is sold for consumption on the premises to do any of the following: 
A.  To fail to keep closed the door or doors of any entrance or exit located on the exterior walls of any such business establishment except when persons are entering or leaving therefrom; or 
B.  To fail to keep the sidewalk, curb and gutter in front of the business establishment facing any street or alley clean and free and clear of any foreign objects left, placed or located thereon, including but not limited to, all debris, paper, glass, metal, wood, sticks, plastic, bottles, cans, chairs, boxes, food products, and any and all other forms of personal property. 
(Ord. 232 §1, 1989)  
12.28.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
The violation of any part of this chapter shall be an infraction as defined by Section 1.20.010. 
(Ord. 232 §1, 1989)  
Chapter 12.32 - SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR 
 
12.32.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the repair and maintenance of sidewalks and assess the liability for failure to repair and maintain the sidewalk should any person suffer injury or damage to person or property resulting from same. 
(Ord. No. 016-2011, § 1, 12-8-11)  
12.32.020 - Right of entry—Interference with authorized persons prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to refuse to allow the public works director or his employees to enter upon any premises at any time during the daylight hours to remove any material or objects which it has become the duty of the city to remove under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 016-2011, § 1, 12-8-11)  
12.32.030 - Permit required for planting. 
It is unlawful for any person to plant or cause to be planted any tree or shrub in or upon property adjacent to any public street, sidewalk or other public place in the city without first having obtained a written permit from the city. The permit shall specify the location and species of trees or shrubs to be planted. 
(Ord. No. 016-2011, § 1, 12-8-11)  
12.32.040 - Duty to repair, liability. 
A.  It shall be the duty of every property owner to trim or remove all trees, shrubs or plants or any part or parts thereof growing or standing on the property which may constitute a hazard or an impediment to persons using the sidewalk. Any tree, shrub or plant constituting a hazard or impediment is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the city shall notify the owner or persons in possession of the property in the same manner as described in Section 12.32.070 hereinafter. Failure to correct the hazard or impediment shall be enforceable as allowed by law or equity to abate a public nuisance and, in addition thereto, by the procedures described in Sections 12.32.070 and 12.32.090. 
B.  If any property owner fails to maintain the trees, shrubs, or other plantings in a nondangerous condition as required by this section and any person suffers damage or injury to person or property, the property owner shall be liable for all damages or injuries caused by the failure of the owner to maintain the trees, shrubs, or plantings. 
(Ord. No. 016-2011, § 1, 12-8-11)  
12.32.050 - Maintenance and repair of sidewalks. 
The owner of property adjacent to or fronting on any portion of a sidewalk and persons in possession of such property shall maintain the sidewalk areas and pay the costs and expenses therefore, and shall repair the sidewalk if damaged by trees, shrubs, or other plantings on the property where such damage constitutes a hazard to persons using the sidewalk or an impediment to its use as determined by the city. For the purposes of this chapter, maintenance and repair of sidewalk areas shall include, but not be limited to, maintenance or removal of trees, shrubs, or other plantings on the property adjacent to or fronting on a sidewalk, maintenance and repair of surfaces including grinding, removal and replacement of sidewalks and of curbs and gutters, removal of weeds and/or debris, tree root pruning and installing root barriers, trimming of trees, shrubs and ground cover so that the sidewalk area will remain in a condition that is not dangerous to property or to persons using the sidewalk and will be in a condition which will not interfere with the public convenience in the use of the sidewalk area. 
(Ord. No. 016-2011, § 1, 12-8-11)  
12.32.060 - Liability for injuries to public. 
The property owners required by this chapter to maintain and repair the sidewalk areas shall owe a duty to members of the public to keep and maintain the sidewalk areas in a safe and nondangerous condition. If, as a result of the failure of any property owner to maintain the sidewalk areas in a nondangerous condition, any person suffers injury or damage to person or property, the property owner shall be liable to such person for the resulting damages or injury. 
(Ord. No. 016-2011, § 1, 12-8-11)  
12.32.070 - Assessment of repair cost. 
A.  When any portion of the sidewalk is out of repair and in condition to endanger persons or property or to interfere with the public convenience in use of the sidewalk, the city shall notify the owner or persons in possession of the property to repair the sidewalk. Notice may be given by delivering a written notice personally to the owner or to the person in possession or by mailing it to the foregoing either at the last known address that appears on the last equalized assessment role or as shown in the records of the city clerk (the "repair notice"). If served by mailing, the repair notice shall also be posted in a conspicuous place on the property or, alternatively, the city may mail an additional notice to the person to whom the repair notice was sent. The city's determination of a public nuisance may be appealed by the property owner in the manner described in Section 8.20.070. 
1.  The repair notice shall specify what work is required to be done, how it is to be done, and what material shall be used. The repair notice shall further state that if the repair is not commenced within two weeks after notice is given and diligently and without interruption prosecuted to completion, the city shall make the repair and the cost of same shall be a lien on the property. If the city completes the repair, the city shall cause notice of the cost of the repair to be given in the same manner as the repair notice (the "cost notice"). The cost notice shall specify the day, time, and place when the city council will hear and pass upon a report by city staff of the cost of the repair. During the hearing, city staff shall file a report specifying the repairs, the cost of same, a description of the property responsible for the repairs, and the assessment against same. The city may recover all costs of repair as well as all administrative costs including, without limitation, the cost of inspecting the property, preparing and serving the repair notice, inspecting and administering repair by the property owner, tracking and maintaining all administrative and repair costs, all costs of collection, drafting a certificate of lien and recording same, recovering the costs on the property tax rolls, and all other similar costs. At the hearing, the city council will hear any objections or protests to same. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the city council may make such revision, correction or modifications in city staffs report as it deems just, after which, by motion or resolution, the report, as corrected or modified, shall be confirmed. The city council may adjourn the hearing from time-to-time. The city council's decision shall be final and conclusive. 
2.  The property owner shall be given written notice of the city council's decision and shall be billed therewith or thereafter the cost approved by the city council. The property owner shall have thirty days to make full and complete payment to the city. Simultaneously, the city may pursue the remedies described in Sections 12.32.080 and 12.32.090. 
(Ord. No. 016-2011, § 1, 12-8-11)  
12.32.080 - Recordation of lien. 
The city may file in the office of the county recorder a certificate of lien on the property or properties responsible for the repair and for repayment to the city. The certificate of lien shall reflect the cost of the repair and the amount of interest on same approved by the city council, which shall accrue until the full amount of the cost is repaid. The effect of the certificate of lien shall be as described in California Streets and Highways Code Section 5627. 
(Ord. No. 016-2011, § 1, 12-8-11)  
12.32.090 - Collection with regular taxes. 
As an alternative method of collection of the cost of repair, the city council may order the certificate of lien to be filed with the county assessor and the tax collector to add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the property. The amount of the lien shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and interest and to the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of taxes are hereby made applicable to such special assessments. 
(Ord. No. 016-2011, § 1, 12-8-11)  
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 13.04 - WATER WELLS AND WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS 
Sections:  
ARTICLE I. - PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS. 
 
13.04.010 - Purpose. 
A.  It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the design, construction, reconstruction, abandonment, and destruction of: 
1.  Wells defined herein as air conditioning, domestic, agricultural, cathodic protection, industrial, hazardous material monitoring, monitoring and observation, and grounding; 
2.  Geophysical test holes; and 
3.  Test wells; 
in such a manner that the ground water of this city will not be degraded, contaminated or polluted, and that water obtained for beneficial uses will not jeopardize the health, safety, or welfare of the people of this city. 
B.  In addition, it is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the design, construction, and modifications of public and nonpublic water systems, and the permitting of the same, to assure an adequate supply of pure, wholesome and potable water for the users. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as abrogating any more restrictive requirements of other governmental agencies or state law. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.020 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions set forth in the following sections shall apply throughout this chapter. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.022 - Abandoned well. 
"Abandoned well" means a well not equipped with operable pumping equipment, which has not been used for a period of one year and which has not been declared to be an out of service well. Such well must be destroyed in accordance with Section 13.04.360. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.023 - Agency. 
"Agency" means the Kern County water agency or any other public agency or city department designated by the board of supervisors as the city's authorized representative and delegated the responsibility of administering any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.024 - Agricultural well. 
"Agricultural well" means a well used primarily to supply water for irrigation, livestock or other agricultural purposes. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.026 - Air conditioning well. 
"Air conditioning well" means a well used to return to the ground water which has been used in a closed system as a coolant in air conditioning processes, or as a heating agent. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.028 - Annular seal. 
"Annular seal" means the placement of impervious material in the annular space to prevent the flow of water across or along the annular space. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.030 - Annular Space. 
"Annular space" means the void between the wall of the well bore and the conductor casing, and between the conductor casing and the well casing, and between the well bore and the well casing. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.032 - Aquifer. 
"Aquifer" means a geologic formation that transmits water in sufficient quantity to supply pumping wells or springs. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.036 - Bulletin 74-81. 
"Bulletin 74-81" means the Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74-81. "Water Well Standards: State of California." 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.038 - Bulletin 74-1. 
"Bulletin 74-1" means the Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74-1, Cathodic Protection Well Standards: State of California." 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.040 - Cathodic protection sell. 
"Cathodic protection well" means any artificial excavation in excess of fifty feet deep constructed by any method for the purpose of installing equipment or facilities for the reduction of corrosion of metallic structures and equipment in contact with the ground, commonly referred to as "cathodic protection." 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.041 - City council or council. 
"City council" or "council" means the McFarland city council. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.042 - Contamination. 
"Contamination" means an impairment of the quality of the waters of the state to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. Contamination shall include any equivalent effect resulting from the disposal of waste. Contamination may include "pollution." 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.044 - Construction. 
"Construction" means the excavation by digging, drilling or other means of the bore of a well and includes, but is not limited to, excavation, installation of casing, placement of gravel, perforation of casing in place, installation of annular seals and sealing off strata. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.046 - Degradation. 
"Degradation" means the unreasonable impairment of the quality of water by contaminants, pollutants or natural phenomena which adversely affects the beneficial uses of such water. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.048 - Department. 
"Department" means the Kern County environmental health services department unless otherwise specified. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.050 - Destroyed well. 
"Destroyed well" means a well that has been destroyed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter (Section 13.04.060). 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.052 - Disposal well. 
"Disposal well" means a well used for the disposal of unusable liquids. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.054 - Distribution system. 
"Distribution system" means all facilities used by a domestic water supplier to deliver water from the source or related treatment facilities to the user connections. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.056 - Domestic water. 
"Domestic water" means that water plumbed to a dwelling or structure which is intended to be used for, but not limited to, drinking, food preparation, dish washing and bathing. Domestic water must also be potable as defined in Section 13.04.090. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.058 - Furnish. 
"Furnish" means to supply. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.060 - Geophysical test hole. 
"Geophysical test hole" means any artificial excavation in excess of fifty feet deep constructed by any method for the purpose of determining subsurface geologic conditions. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.062 - Grounding well or terminal. 
"Grounding well or terminal well" means any artificial excavation in excess of fifty feet deep constructed by any method for the purpose of installing grounding anodes or grounding terminals for any surface or subsurface equipment which is operated by or influenced by electricity, or for any other grounding purposes. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.063 - Hardrock. 
"Hardrock" means consolidated formation (crystalline or metamorphic rock). 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.064 - Hazardous materials. 
"Hazardous materials" means all the following liquid and solid substances: 
A.  Substances on the list prepared by the director of the department of industrial relations pursuant to Section 6382 of the Labor Code of the state. 
B.  Hazardous substances, as defined in Section 25316 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California. 
C.  Any substance or material which is classified by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) as a flammable liquid, a class II combustible liquid or a class III-A combustible liquid. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.066 - Hazardous material monitoring well. 
"Hazardous material monitoring well" means any artificial excavation constructed by any method to extract water or vapor samples, or to install instruments or equipment to detect, measure, record or otherwise monitor or observe the level, chemical constituency or similar characteristics of the ground water beneath or within two hundred feet of a hazardous material site as defined in Section 13.04.068. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.068 - Hazardous material site. 
"Hazardous material site" means a location where hazardous materials are, or have been, handled, treated, stored, or disposed. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.070 - Health officer. 
"Health officer" means the health officer of the county or his duly authorized representatives. Such authorized representatives may include the agency or any other public agency designated by the county board of supervisors or the city council as the county or city's authorized representative and delegated the responsibility of implementing and administering any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.072 - Industrial well. 
"Industrial well" means a well whose primary purpose is to supply water to industry on an individual basis. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.074 - Monitoring and observation well. 
"Monitoring and observation well" means any artificial excavation constructed by any method to extract water or vapor samples, or to install instruments or equipment to detect, measure, record or otherwise monitor or observe the level, chemical constituency or similar characteristics of the ground water. "Monitoring and observation well" does not mean wells constructed for the purpose of monitoring the presence of ground water which has adversely affected, or threatens to adversely affect, crop root zones (perched water). 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.076 - Nonpublic domestic well or water system. 
A "nonpublic domestic well or water system" means a well or system used to supply domestic water to more than one and less than five service connections. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.078 - Nuisance. 
"Nuisance" means any use or condition of property or portion thereof, including structures, wells, etc. located thereon, which is unsafe, injurious to health, or which can contribute to ground water degradation. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.080 - Out of service well. 
"Out of service well" means a well that has not been used for a period of one year and which complies with the provisions of Section 13.04.370. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.082 - Owner. 
"Owner" means the person(s) who is listed on the last equalized property tax assessment role as the owner of the land on which the well is located, or the person(s) who has a legal possessory interest in such land, whether by lease, easement or other legal claim. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.084 - Perched water. 
"Perched water" means water in a local zone of saturation held above the main body of ground water by a relatively impermeable stratum. (Water in this zone is generally unpotable.) 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.086 - Person. 
"Person" means any individual, company, firm, corporation or partnership, municipality, public entity or other public body or institution or association of persons. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.088 - Pollution. 
"Pollution" means degradation of the quality of waters of the state by contaminants, pollutants or natural phenomena to a degree which unreasonably affects: (1) such water for beneficial uses, or (2) facilities which serve such beneficial uses. "Pollution" may include "contamination." 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.090 - Potable water. 
"Potable water" means water which is safe for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes and meets all requirements of the health officer. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.092 - Private domestic well. 
"Private domestic well" means a well used to supply water for the domestic needs of an individual residence or structure. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.094 - Public domestic well or water system. 
"Public domestic well or water system" means any well or system used to supply or convey water for domestic needs to five or more service connections or regularly serves an average of at least twenty-five individuals daily at least sixty days out of the year. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.096 - Purveyor. 
"Purveyor" means any person that furnishes or supplies domestic water to users from any source. This includes serving a minimum of two connections and a maximum of one hundred ninety-nine connections. "Purveyor" also includes those persons that supply domestic water for public use or use a private domestic water supply in the operation of a business. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.098 - Recharge well. 
"Recharge well" means a well used to introduce water into the ground as a means of replenishing ground water aquifers or basins or impeding the migration of poor quality water within the ground water basin. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.100 - Reconstruction. 
"Reconstruction" means any alteration, repair, restoration, addition, or subtraction of a well bore, the casing gravel pack, annular seals, surface seals, conductor casing or well casing, or perforations. (This shall not include merely "blowing out" of the perforations.) 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.102 - Service connection. 
A "service connection" means a connection between a domestic water main and a user connection. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.104 - Source facilities. 
"Source facilities" means all components of the facilities used in the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to a domestic water distribution system. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.106 - Test well. 
"Test well" means a well constructed for the purpose of obtaining the information needed to design a well prior to its construction, or to determine the availability of water in an area. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.108 - Substandard water system or well. 
A "substandard water system or well" means any water system or well which is constructed or operated in an unsafe manner, or in violation of any law, ordinance, regulation, department or city rule or order. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.110 - User connection. 
"User connection" means the connection of a user's piping to the water purveyor's facilities. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.112 - User. 
A "user" means any person, as defined herein, using water for domestic purposes. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.114 - Water quality. 
"Water quality" means the chemical, physical, biological, bacteriological, radiological and other properties and characteristics of water affecting its beneficial use. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.116 - Well. 
A "well" means any artificial excavation constructed by any method for the purpose of extracting water from or injecting water into the underground, or used for the purpose of observation or monitoring of the ground water basin, or for cathodic protection, or as a grounding terminal. This definition shall not include: 
A.  Any well constructed or converted under the jurisdiction of the Department of Conservation of the state of California, (Division of Oil and Gas) except those wells converted for use as water wells; 
B.  Wells used for the purpose of: 
1.  Dewatering excavations during construction, or 
2.  Stabilizing hillsides or earth embankments; 
C.  Springs; 
D.  Disposal and injection wells constructed or converted under the jurisdiction of the California Water Quality Control Board or the Environmental Protection Agency underground injection control program. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS, REGISTRATION, REPORTS AND FEES. 
 
13.04.120 - Permit required. 
Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person or contractor acting on his behalf to construct, reconstruct, deepen or destroy any well, described in Section 13.04.116 or cause any of these acts to be done without first having filed a valid application for a permit with the Department and having received approval to begin work. 
Every permit shall be deemed to be conditioned upon compliance with the requirements of Article III of this chapter, except that permits issued to construct, reconstruct, deepen or destroy cathodic protection wells and hazardous material monitoring wells shall be deemed to be conditioned on compliance with the respective reference documents specified in Sections 13.04.220 and 13.04.230. 
The health officer may prescribe additional permit conditions if the health officer determines that they are required to prevent degradation of underground waters as provided for in Section 13.04.010. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.130 - Registration. 
All persons as defined herein (hereinafter referred to as "well contractors") who intend to engage in the construction, deepening, reconstruction or destruction of wells as defined in Section 13.04.116 which are located within the city must first register with the department and the city and furnish a copy of their current California water well contractor's license (Class C-57) and a certificate of insurance covering both workers' compensation, public liability and property damage. Well contractors must give the department written notice within fifteen (15) days of any suspension, or revocation of either their license or appropriate insurance coverage. No permits will be issued to any well contractor who fails to meet both license and insurance requirements as set forth above. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.140 - Expiration of permit application. 
A permit application issued pursuant to this article shall expire on the ninetieth calendar day after date of issuance if the work has not been started and reasonable progress toward completion is not maintained, except that the health officer may extend the expiration date of a permit when warranted. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.150 - Fees. 
The department has adopted a published schedule of fees (nonrefundable) to be paid by the permit applicant to cover the cost of processing the permit application and field inspections or tests incidental to issuance of any permit pursuant to this article. Such fees are subject to the approval of and modification by the city council or county board of supervisors. All fees must be submitted to the department with the application for a permit. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.160 - Report of excavation. 
Any person who has drilled, dug or bored a well for which a permit was issued shall within thirty days after completion of drilling, digging or boring of such excavation, furnish the health officer with a report of such excavation. A copy of the report providing such information submitted to state agencies shall satisfy this requirement. The report shall include soil/lithologic log, E-log (if made), information concerning the type of casing, the depth of the excavation, the number and location of the perforations in the casing, the location, depth and type of materials used in the sealing off strata, chemicals used in drilling, and any other data required by the health officer. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.170 - Application for permit. 
A.  Application for a permit required by Section 13.04.170 of this article shall be made to the department. Such application shall be on forms furnished by the department and shall provide all information required by the department pertaining to the project. Every application shall be signed by the owner, or the authorized agent of the owner. 
B.  The following information shall be furnished: 
1.  Owner's name, address and telephone number; 
2.  Whether the intended use of the well is for domestic purposes, agricultural, grounding, observation, cathodic protection, monitoring, or for any other purpose or combination of purposes regulated by this chapter; 
3.  Location of well by reference to street address, nearest streets or crossroads or other significant features and by reference to lot and tract or to section, township, and range. The quarter of the quarter section to contain the well shall also be identified. An example would be the SW 1/4 of the NE 1/4 of Section 24, T27S, R24E, or using the California Department of Water Resources letter location system, 27S/24E-24G; 
4.  The Assessor's Parcel Number (APN); 
5.  Dimensioned plot plan indicating north direction, distances and locations of existing and proposed structures, sewers or sewage disposal systems, other potential source of contamination or degradation on the property or adjacent properties within two hundred feet of the well or proposed well; 
6.  Well drilling contractor's or subcontractor's name, address, and their contractor's C-57 license number and telephone number; 
7.  Nature of the work to be done, whether construction, reconstruction, destruction or other work, and, in the case of construction or reconstruction, the method to be used, whether cable tool, rotary, reverse flow, or other method; 
8.  Estimated depth of well when completed; 
9.  Diameter, thickness and type of casing; 
10.  Significant feature of well (e.g., conductor casing, gravel pack, sealing, or perforation locations). 
C.  In addition to the foregoing, the department may require such other and further information relevant to the project as it may deem necessary to determine, whether the public purposes expressed in Section 13.04.010 of this chapter requires the denial of the permit or the imposition of further conditions. 
D.  If the well is to be located on a lot less than 2.5 acres (net) in size, the applicant must submit with the application, a predevelopment plan. This plan must delineate the proposed location of all structures and improvements, sewage disposal facilities, area reserved for alternate sewage disposal system, and all potential sources of contamination even on adjacent lots within two hundred feet of the proposed well site. It shall be the responsibility of the permit applicant to prepare a plan that demonstrates the proposed well will not prohibit the free and equal use of the adjacent properties. 
E.  Copies of an issued permit shall be forwarded by the department to the applicant, the county building inspection department, the county assessor's department, the county water agency and the city. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.180 - Permit denial. 
A permit may be denied for any of the following: 
A.  Failure to supply any information required by or requested pursuant to Section 13.04.170 which is known to, or by the exercise of reasonable diligence, can be acquired by, the applicant; 
B.  Failure to obtain required approvals from the county planning and development services department; 
C.  Failure to submit fees with application; 
D.  Failure to meet requirements of Section 13.04.130 governing registration; 
E.  Failure to comply with Section 13.04.190 governing setbacks from pollution sources, except if a variance has been granted by the health officer pursuant to Section 13.04.380. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
ARTICLE III. - WELL STANDARDS. 
 
13.04.190 - General location of well. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to drill, dig, excavate or bore any well in any location in which sources of pollution or contamination are known to exist at such location whereby ground water may become contaminated or polluted even when the well is properly constructed and maintained. 
B.  It is unlawful to locate a domestic well on a lot or premises when a connection with a public water supply system willing and able to serve such lot or premises, is available within three hundred feet or when a connection already exists. 
C.  All wells shall be located an adequate horizontal distance from potential sources of contamination and pollution, with due consideration given to local geological conditions and soil permeability. In any event, as a minimum, the following set back distances shall apply: 
septic tank or sewer line c50 feet 
surface sewage leaching field or pit privy 	100 feet 
cesspool or seepage pit 	150 feet 
hazardous material site 	200 feet 
animal enclosures 	100 feet 
storm water runoff sump or agricultural drainage sump 	100 feet 
front property line (not including easements) 	25 feet 
other property line (not including easements) 	5 feet 
agricultural or industrial well 200 feet another well (except hard rock) 	100 feet 
Class I, II, III waste disposal well 	200 feet 
 
D.  The effect on surrounding properties must be considered when measuring set back distances. No approval by the department should limit or hinder the free and equal use of property by adjacent property owners, except where they have given their approval in writing to the applicant. Such written approval shall be in a form satisfactory to the department and may be required to be recorded with the county recorder. 
E.  Where extraordinary danger of degradation exists or special hazards are involved, the above distances shall be increased, or special means or protection particularly in the construction of the well, shall be provided as determined by the health officer. All wells shall be located upgradient from the specified source of contamination. 
F.  All wells drilled within an A-1 or A-2 Zone must be set back a distance of seventy feet from midsection lines and eighty feet from section lines, except that where circumstances justify, an administrative variance may be granted pursuant to Section 13.04.380. 
G.  The top of the well casing shall extend a minimum of one foot above the 100-year base flood elevation as determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), county planning and development services department or by any special flood study approved by representatives of the city. The proposed well site shall meet the minimum standards as provided in Chapter 17.48. 
H.  Where the proposed well is to be located near a building, such well shall be located far enough from the building so that it will be accessible for repair, maintenance, etc. 
I.  The proposed well may not be moved more than five feet from the originally approved site location without a reinspection of the new site being performed by the health officer. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.200 - Well casing material and installation. 
Well casing shall be new with a minimum thickness of three-sixteenths inch (0.188"). All other requirements for casing materials and installation shall be as outlined in Chapter II, Part II, Section 12 of Bulletin 74-81 "Water Well Standards - State of California." Provided, however, that the use of fiberglass casing is not approved. PVC well casing must display the letters NSF-wc. (National Sanitation Foundation - well casing.) 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.210 - Well construction. 
A well shall be constructed in accordance with the standards contained in Chapter II, Part II of Bulletin 74-81, "Water Well Standards - State of California," including the latest revisions thereof. 
A.  Drilling Fluids or Additives. The use of any used drilling fluids or additives for any purpose in the construction of a well is prohibited. 
B.  The use of any polluted contaminated water in the actual drilling process or for flushing the well hole is prohibited.' 
C.  It is unlawful to inject any pesticide or chemical into the discharge pipe of a well which is not equipped with an approved backflow protection device or method as described in Section 13.04.280. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.220 - Cathodic protection wells. 
Cathodic protection wells shall be constructed and sealed in conformance with the cathodic well standards set forth in Bulletin 74-1, "Cathodic Protection Well Standards," including the latest revisions thereof, with the exception that the depth of the annular seal shall be as required in Section 13.04.240. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.230 - Hazardous material monitoring well. 
Hazardous material monitoring wells shall be constructed and sealed in conformance with the standards set forth in the county health department publication UT-50. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.240 - Sealing the upper annular space. 
A.  The area between the wall of the well bore and the well casing of the drilled hole (the annular space) shall be effectively sealed to protect it against contamination or pollution by entrance of surface and/or shallow, subsurface waters. The minimum depth of the upper annular seal shall be as specified in subsection B of this section. 
B.  The minimum depth of the upper annular seal shall be as follows: 
Private domestic wells 	50 feet 
Nonpublic domestic wells 	50 feet 
Public domestic wells 	50 feet 
Industrial wells 	50 feet 
Observation and monitoring wells 	20 feet 
Cathodic protection wells 	50 feet 
Air-conditioning wells 	50 feet 
Agricultural wells 	50 feet 
 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.250 - Sealing conditions. 
The requirements for sealing a well shall be as specified in Part II, Chapter II, Section 9B of Bulletin 74-81. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.260 - Annular seal-Sealing off strata. 
A.  When any well is to be constructed or reconstructed in such a manner that it will penetrate two or more water bearing strata, one or more of which has been determined by the health officer to contain ground water of a quality which will cause the degradation of ground water in the other strata if the waters are allowed to intermingle, the undesirable stratum shall be sealed off to prevent the flow of the poor quality water through the well casing or the annular space from degrading water in the strata containing water of an acceptable quality. 
B.  Whenever an aquifer containing poor quality water is required to be sealed off as provided in subsection A of this section, a minimum of a twenty foot annular seal shall be placed in the confining formation separating the aquifer containing poor quality water from the aquifers containing acceptable quality water. An electrical geophysical log of the well shall be run to assist in the placement of the annular seal, and a copy made available to the department. The strata producing the undesirable quality water shall be sealed off by pumping an impervious material opposite the strata no less than twenty feet, even when the confining formation is less than twenty feet in thickness. The sealing material shall fill the annular space in the interval to be sealed, and the surrounding void spaces which might absorb the sealing material. The sealing material shall be placed from the bottom to the top of the interval to be sealed. 
C.  Gravel chute shall extend through the annular seal at least two feet into the gravel pack. 
D.  Sealing materials shall consist of neat cement, cement grout or cement. In areas of subsidence or under special conditions, the use of other approved sealing materials may be allowed with prior approval of the health officer. 
E.  In areas where deep subsidence may occur (as, for example, portions of the San Joaquin Valley), provision shall be made for maintaining the integrity of the annular seal in the event of subsidence. Such preventive measures may include the installation of a "sleeve" or "slip joint" in the casing, which will allow vertical movement in the casing without its collapse. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.270 - Well development or redevelopment. 
A.  Developing, redeveloping, or conditioning of a well shall be done with care and by methods which will not cause damage to the well or cause adverse subsurface conditions that may destroy barriers to the vertical movement of water between aquifers. The following methods used in the developing, redeveloping, or conditioning of a well when done with care are acceptable: 
1.  Overpumping; 
2.  Surging by use of a plunger; 
3.  Surging with compressed air; 
4.  Backwashing or surging by alternately starting and stopping the pump; 
5.  Jetting with water; 
6.  Introduction of chemicals designed for this purpose; 
7.  Bailing. 
8.  A combination of the above. 
B.  The use of explosives for development shall be only by persons licensed for that purpose. Special care shall be exercised when such explosives are employed in development of a well which penetrates two or more distinct aquifers separated by a natural barrier. 
C.  The use of any chemicals for the purpose of development of a well, or any other purpose(s), shall be included on the well drillers log, or if performed by other than the driller on a separate report. Where chemicals or explosives have been used, the well shall be pumped to remove residue from such chemicals and/or explosives to restore the water quality or any affected aquifer to the water quality conditions which existed prior to the use of such chemicals and/or explosives. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.280 - Surface construction features. 
Wells drilled for the purpose of producing water for any beneficial use shall be equipped with the following features, installed as outlined in Chapter II, Part II, Section 10 of Bulletin 74-81: 
A.  Disinfection access/sounding tube; 
B.  Screened air vent (optional for flowing artesian wells); 
C.  A backflow protection device or method approved by the department; 
D.  Unthreaded sample spigot. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.290 - Responsibility for compliance. 
A.  It is the responsibility of the well contractor to construct the well in accordance with Article III of this chapter, except for surface construction features. 
B.  It is the responsibility of the owner of the well to supply all surface construction features (i.e., slab, watertight sanitary seal, backflow protection device, vent, sounding tube and sample tap) and all required water quality analyses. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.300 - Surface sealing. 
A.  All wells hereafter constructed, deepened or reconstructed shall, prior to being placed into service, be provided with: A watertight reinforced monolithic concrete slab a minimum thickness of six inches, set a minimum of four inches above ground level at the well site, and extending horizontally at least three feet from the edge of the well casing in all directions, and covering the unsealed portion of the well excavation, except that monitoring wells, as defined in Section 13.04.074, shall have a minimum concrete slab two foot by two foot with a minimum thickness of six inches. The concrete slab shall be constructed so as to adequately drain water away from the well casing. Where deviation from this pattern or construction would serve a practical purpose without lessening well protection, the health officer may approve such deviation. All wells shall be provided with a sanitary seal so as to prevent surface water from entering the well. Each slab (or well) shall be identified by the name of the owner on the well permit, or APN number, or other approved method. 
B.  In those cases where it is not possible to meet the horizontal set back distances from pollution sources described in Section 13.04.190, an alternative means of protection for the well may be to increase the depth of the upper annular seal. Where horizontal set back distance cannot be met or adverse or special hazards exist (such as perched water), the depth of the upper annular seal shall be increased as required by the health officer. 
C.  In hard rock formations, the minimum depth of seal shall be twenty feet or one foot into hard rock if encountered first. Sampled hard rock cuttings shall be collected and held at the site for inspection of the health officer. 
D.  Annular seals of one hundred feet or less in dry formations may be poured. All other seals shall be positively placed from the bottom upward using a pump or by air pressure. 
E.  All seals shall set forty-eight hours after placement if an accelerator is not used. A twenty-four hour set time may be allowed if the sealing material contains an accelerator. 
F.  During the pumping of sealing material for the annular seal, all standing water must be allowed to drain off and not incorporate into the annular seal nor into the slab. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.310 - Disinfection of wells. 
Every new, deepened, repaired or reconstructed individual domestic or community water supply well, after completion of construction, deepening, repair or reconstruction, and before being placed in service, shall be disinfected by a method approved by the health officer to produce water meeting bacteriological standards as set forth in applicable state laws and regulations. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.320 - Other sanitary requirements. 
The gravel used in gravel-packed wells, and lubricant mud shall meet the sanitary requirements of Bulletin 74-81, Part II, Section 11. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.330 - Water quality testing. 
A.  Water from all wells which provide water for any beneficial use shall be tested radiologically, bacteriologically and chemically by a state certified laboratory. The results of all such laboratory water testing shall be submitted to the health officer within ninety days of drilling or reconstructing the well. 
B.  Water from all wells that will be used in food processing or public domestic water systems shall comply with the Domestic Water Quality Standards contained in California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Domestic Water Quality Monitoring Regulations, Sections 64401 et seq. or the latest revision thereof, and adequate treatment facilities to remove the constituents that is in noncompliance shall be installed. 
C.  Water from reconstructed wells shall be tested bacteriologically and meet the same standards as new wells. When deemed necessary by the health officer, they shall meet the same chemical standards as new wells. 
D.  Chemical, radiological, and bacteriological tests shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
E.  Water from agricultural wells shall have, as a minimum, a standard agricultural analysis by a state certified laboratory. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.340 - Approval by health officer. 
No water from a new or reconstructed domestic well shall be used for domestic purposes until the well is given final approval by the health officer. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.350 - Well conversion. 
Before any nondomestic well can be converted to domestic use, it must first have department inspection and be brought into compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.360 - Well-Destruction. 
All abandoned wells shall be destroyed in such a way that they will not produce water or act as a channel for the interchange of water, when such interchange will result in significant deterioration of the quality of water in any water-bearing formations penetrated, or will present a hazard to the safety and well-being of people or animals. Destruction of a well shall consist of the complete filling of the well in accordance with the procedures prescribed in Section 23 of Chapter II of the California State Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74-81. Provided however, that the top fifty feet shall be sealed with concrete or other approved sealing material. All abandoned wells shall be destroyed within ninety days of abandonment. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.370 - Out of service wells. 
Any newly constructed well that has not been completed and given final approval of water quality and surface construction features within ninety days of the cessation of drilling shall be declared out of service or properly destroyed. Any existing well that has not been Used for a period of one year shall be properly destroyed unless the owner has filed a notice of intent with the health officer declaring the well out of service, and declaring his intention to use the well again. As evidence of his intentions for future use, the owner shall properly maintain the well in such a way that: 
A.  The well has no defects which will impair quality of water in the well or in the water-bearing formations penetrated. 
B.  If the pump has been removed, the well shall be covered with a watertight seal to prevent injury to persons and the entrance of undesirable water, rodents or foreign matter. 
C.  The well is marked so that it can be clearly seen. 
D.  The area surrounding the well is kept clear of brush or debris. 
E.  Redeclaration of intent shall be made upon request of the health officer. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.380 - Administrative variance. 
The health officer may grant an administrative variance to the provisions of this chapter where a determination has been made upon the basis of evidence submitted by the owner or his representative demonstrating that a modification of the well standards as provided herein will not endanger the health or safety of the consumer or the water, or the public generally, or contribute to ground water degradation, and strict compliance would be unreasonable in view of all the circumstances. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
ARTICLE IV. - DOMESTIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS. 
 
13.04.390 - Permits. 
No person shall constrict or operate a nonpublic or public water system unless a petition and plans and specifications are first filed with the department, a permit is issued as provided in this article and such permit is not thereafter revoked, suspended or otherwise becomes invalid. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.400 - Application. 
The provisions for permit and application issuance are as provided for in the Safe Drinking Water Act, California Health and Safety Code Division 5, Part 1, Chapter 7, Water and Water Systems, Sections 4010 through 4039.5, including the latest revisions thereof. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.410 - Design and construction. 
A.  The design and construction of a new public system and the design and construction of changes in the distribution system of an existing public water system shall meet the minimum standards specified in the California Waterworks Standards, Title 22, California Code of Regulations, Articles I through 5, Sections 64553 through 64644, including the latest revisions thereof. 
B.  Public water systems not having multiple sources shall provide a minimum of two days storage. (Two hundred fifty (250) gallons/connection/day.) 
C.  All facilities of the distribution system shall be designed and constructed to withstand ample safety factors, the physical stresses to which they will be subjected and shall be free from structural or sanitary hazards. All water supply systems shall be so designed and constructed that they have an adequate capacity to continuously supply pure, wholesome, safe and potable water. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.420 - Modifications. 
No person shall make major modifications or changes in their water supply system until they first file a petition to do so, and receive an amended permit, if required, from the county health department and the city authorizing the modification. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.430 - Source approval. 
All water sources used for domestic water supply must have the approval of the health officer. Water which is not obtained from an approved source, free from pollution, shall not be used for domestic purposes unless it is adequately purified and disinfected by artificial treatment to insure compliance with the Domestic Water Quality Monitoring Regulations contained in California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Chapter 15, Articles 1 through 9, Sections 64401 through 64501, including the latest revisions thereof. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.440 - Certification of design. 
All new public water systems shall be designed and installed under the direction of a qualified civil engineer, duly registered in the state. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.450 - Domestic water quality and monitoring. 
Water from public domestic water systems shall meet the requirements of, and be monitored in accordance with, the regulations established in the California Domestic Water Quality and Monitoring Regulations, Title 22, California Code of Regulations, Chapter 15, Articles 1 through 9, Sections 64401 to 64501, including the latest revisions thereof. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.460 - Backflow prevention. 
The protection of the public water supply against actual or potential cross connections shall be as provided for in Cross Connection Regulations, Title 17, California Code of Regulations, Sections 7583, et seq., including the latest revisions thereof, or in any applicable city or county ordinance which is enacted after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.470 - Nonpublic systems. 
A water system intended to serve more than one and less than five connections shall be installed according to the requirements of the health department as outlined in "Guidelines for the Permitting of Non-Public Water Systems." Application for a permit shall be made prior to construction of the system as provided for in Section 13.04.400. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.480 - Operation and maintenance. 
A.  All water systems shall be operated so as to continuously provide an adequate supply of pure, wholesome, safe and potable water. 
B.  All personnel responsible for operation and maintenance of a water system shall have sufficient experience and training to qualify them to properly perform their duties. Specially designated personnel shall be available for call during nights, weekends and holidays to meet emergencies. 
C.  All water systems shall maintain complete and up-to-date maps of the utility system as well as results of bacteriological and chemical analyses of water, and such other data as may be required by the health officer. 
D.  All structures, facilities and equipment of the water system shall be operated and maintained in a safe and sanitary manner and kept in good working condition. 
E.  Facilities and equipment of the utility shall be kept clean and in good working condition. 
F.  Repairs shall be made without undue delay. 
G.  Proper equipment, tools and repair parts shall be available and in good condition for use in emergency repairs. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.490 - User connection moratorium. 
The department may file a notice with the local building inspection authority requesting that future user connections to a substandard water system be denied. This notice shall remain in effect until such time as the person responsible for the water system corrects the deficiencies and demonstrates the ability to reliably and safely serve existing and/or additional customers. This notice may be filed within thirty days after the water system has been notified of the proposed action. It is the responsibility of the water system to notify each customer (active or inactive) of the pending moratorium. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
ARTICLE V. - INSPECTIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND APPEALS. 
 
13.04.500 - Inspections. 
A.  The health officer or his duly authorized representatives, including the agency, may conduct inspections at any time to insure compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The health officer may prescribe mandatory inspection of domestic well projects, and of projects on which he deems it necessary. The stage at which each inspection is required shall be set forth in the permit. 
B.  It is unlawful for ally person to continue to work on a project past the stage at which an inspection has been prescribed pursuant to this section or the permit until such inspection by the health officer has been completed or waived. A permittee, or one acting on his behalf, shall make an inspection appointment with the health officer at least twenty-four hours prior to the estimated inspection time. However, the failure of the health officer to make any inspection shall not be deemed a waiver of any future inspections, or any of the enforcement provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Unless otherwise specified or required, each well under construction shall receive a minimum of three inspections: 
1.  Site; 
2.  Annular seal; 
3.  Final. 
D.  After the work on a well has been completed, the health officer shall be so notified by the person performing the work and the health officer shall conduct a final inspection thereof, unless inspection has been waived by the health officer. 
E.  The health officer may request receipts, and/or affidavits to be submitted when certain inspections are waived. 
F.  No water from a new, deepened or reconstructed well shall be used for domestic purposes until a final inspection is made and the well and water quality are approved by the health officer. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.510 - Emergency work. 
Should persons or property or a well be threatened by a sudden, unforeseen impairment in the quantity or quality of ground water so that it becomes necessary to continue work, or to replace or modify or increase the existing supply, and a permit or inspection cannot be obtained because the department's offices are not open, the well may be constructed or reconstructed without a permit or without an inspection, provided no other property is served by the well than was served before the emergency work became necessary. All work done under such emergency conditions shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. In all such cases, the person who caused the work to be done shall file a statement with the department during the next regular business day following the emergency work, indicating the reasons for the emergency work. The department shall inspect the well and order the person who caused the emergency work to be done to perform such other and further work, if any, as may be necessary to bring the well into conformity with the requirements of Articles II and III of this chapter. The terms of such an order shall be deemed permit conditions within the meaning of Section 13.04.120 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.520 - Permit not required. 
No permit is required to install, replace or repair a pump on an existing well or to redevelop an existing well. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.530 - Delay in processing permit. 
If an application for construction or reconstruction of a well has not been granted or denied within ten business days of the filing of the application with the department, the department shall mail to the applicant, before the close of such day, a written status report of the application. If during such time period the department has not requested from the applicant additional information relevant to the processing of the application, the applicant shall be entitled to appeal such delay in processing the permit application to the city council in the manner provided in Section 13.04.590 of this article. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.540 - Stop work order. 
Whenever the construction, deepening, reconstruction or destruction of any well is being carried out contrary to the requirements of this chapter, the health officer shall order work to stop by posting a notice to desist at the well site. It shall be unlawful to do further work until the health officer determines that the necessary corrections have been made. It is unlawful to perform any work for which a permit has been granted pursuant to this chapter without complying with the conditions of such permit. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.550 - Disposal wells. 
It is unlawful to dispose of any material into a domestic well or any abandoned well unless approval is first obtained from the agency having jurisdiction over such matters. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.560 - Declaration of nuisance. 
All wells, constructed, reconstructed, deepened, destroyed or placed out of service after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, not in accordance with the terms of this chapter, are declared public nuisances which may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this article. Any existing wells which the health officer declares to be a pollution hazard, contamination hazard or a safety hazard may be declared a nuisance. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.570 - Abatement order. 
Whenever the health officer determines that a nuisance as defined in Section 13.04.078 of this chapter exists, he may issue the landowner a written order to abate such a nuisance. The order shall state the conditions productive of the nuisance and the time determined by the health officer to be reasonable to accomplish such abatement, but not less than two weeks from the date of such notice. It shall also state that unless the nuisance is abated or a notice of appeal filed with the city clerk, the health officer will abate the nuisance and the cost of such abatement may be added to the tax roll as a special assessment against the property. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.580 - Notice-Personal delivery-Mailing-Posting. 
The order of abatement shall be mailed to the owner or owners of the premises as their names and addresses appear upon the last equalized property tax assessment roll and either personally served upon an adult person occupying the premises, or if such person cannot be served, by posting such order of abatement in a conspicuous place on the premises. In the event that a nuisance is not abated in accordance with the order of abatement, the health officer may proceed to abate the nuisance. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.590 - Appeal of denial or conditions or order of abatement. 
If the department denies an application for a permit, or issues a permit subject to conditions which the applicant believes to be unreasonable, or gives an order of abatement, the applicant may appeal the decision of the department to the city council. The notice of appeal shall set forth each and all grounds of objection to the decision appealed. The city council shall forthwith file a copy of the notice of appeal with the department. The city council shall, within thirty days after the receipt of a written appeal, hold a hearing to determine whether the permit shall be issued to the applicant, and if a permit is to be issued, the terms and conditions under which it shall be issued. Such a hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Section 13.04.610 and may be continued from time to time by the council. The decision of the city council shall be rendered within seven days after the conclusion of the hearing and the decision shall be final as to all matters determined. Notice of the decision shall be given as provided in Section 13.04.620. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.600 - Judicial review of decision. 
Judicial review of a decision of the city council made after a hearing pursuant to this article, if the decision is to deny the permit or to issue the permit subject to conditions asserted to be inappropriate, shall be made pursuant to Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state. The method of judicial review, the time limits for judicial review and all of the other provisions of the section 1094.6 shall govern each judicial review. The city council shall give written notice to the applicant that the time within which judicial review must be sought is governed by Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.610 - Hearing-Conduct. 
At the date and time set, a public hearing shall be held before the city council. The owner and any other person requesting such hearing may be represented by counsel. The city council shall hear all pertinent evidence offered by all interested persons. The technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing. All persons giving evidence shall be sworn before testifying. The owner and any other person requesting such hearing may employ a certified stenographic reporter to report the hearing. The council may continue said hearing from time to time. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.620 - Hearing-Decision. 
At the conclusion of the hearing, if the city council determines that a public nuisance exists, it shall thereupon order the nuisance abated no sooner than thirty (30) days following the mailing by the clerk of the notice of the council's decision. The council shall determine the manner in which the nuisance shall be abated. Such notice shall be sent by regular mail to the person requesting the hearing at the address set forth in such request, and to any other person who files a request therefor with the city clerk. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.630 - Abatement. 
If a nuisance is not abated or a hearing sought within the time specified in this article, or if after a hearing, a nuisance is not abated, the health officer may proceed to abate the nuisance by force account contract. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.640 - Accounting. 
The health officer shall file with the city clerk a report specifying the work performed, the itemized and total cost of the work, a description of the real property upon which the well is or was located, and the names and addresses of the owners as their names appear in the latest equalized property tax assessment roll. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.650 - Hearing-Accounting. 
A hearing before the city council shall be held on the report described in Section 13.04.640 at which time any protests or objections thereto will be heard. The city clerk shall mail notice of the hearing to the owner or owners of record at least ten days prior to the hearing. The city council shall determine at the hearing the correct charge to be made for the work. The owner or owners of record shall be given notice by mail of the determination of the city council, which notice shall inform the owner or owners that the costs may become a lien against the property as provided herein. If such costs are not paid within thirty days of mailing of the notice of determination by the city council, the costs shall be assessed upon the property involved forthwith as a special assessment and shall be a lien on the property for the amount thereof from the time of the mailing of the notice of determination. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
13.04.660 - Punishment. 
Violation of any section of this chapter is a misdemeanor and is punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars nor more than one thousand dollars or by punishment of both a fine and imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed six months. 
(Ord. 223 §1(part), 1990)  
Chapter 13.08 - MUNICIPAL SEWER SYSTEM CONNECTIONS 
Sections: 
 
13.08.010 - Definitions. 
The following terms when used in this chapter shall have the following respective meanings: 
A.  "City" means the city of McFarland. 
B.  "Municipal sewer system" means the sewer system acquired by the city on dissolution of the McFarland Sanitation District or any additions, replacements, changes or extension of the sewer system. 
C.  "Person" means any person, firm, company, corporation, partnership, association, any public corporation, political subdivision, city, county, district, the state or the United States of America, or any department or agency thereof. The singular in each case shall include the plural. 
D.  "Plumbing regulations" mean the regulations of the city established by any plumbing code now or hereafter adopted by the city, the State Housing Act, and such other regulations as may from time to time be adopted by the city by resolution concerning regulation of the work of connection to the sewer system. 
(Ord. 69 §1, 1962)  
13.08.020 - Duty to connect. 
No person owning any premises within the city limits (i) on which the nearest outlet of the plumbing system of such premises is located within two hundred feet from the point at which a connection can be made to the municipal sewer system, or (ii) having no plumbing system but in which plumbing could be installed with the nearest outlet located within two hundred feet from the point at which connection could be made to the municipal sewer system, and upon which any sewage is produced, shall use any means of sewage disposal other than through the municipal sewer system. Every person owning any premises so located and required to use the municipal sewer system shall connect the premises to the municipal sewer system within sixty days from the date when a main sewer or lateral sewer located within the distance specified above is completed and available for connection to the premises. The city declares that further maintenance or use of cesspools, septic tanks or other local means of sewage disposal on any premises so located shall constitute a public nuisance and may invoke any legal means or the police power to abate the same. 
(Ord. 69 §2, 1962)  
13.08.030 - Permit to connect. 
A.  No person whose premises are not now connected with the municipal sewer system shall connect any premises or cause any premises to be connected with the municipal sewer system without first obtaining a permit to do so from the city clerk and paying a connection fee before the permit is issued, the connection fee to be as follows: 
1.  For each single-family dwelling, and for each family unit of a multiple-family dwelling (other than units described in subdivision 2 of this subsection) and for each business or industrial building on the same lot, premises or contiguous lots, two thousand four hundred dollars per unit; 
2.  For each dwelling unit of a hotel, motel, apartment house or similar establishment, two thousand four hundred dollars per connection plus fifty dollars per dwelling unit; 
3.  For connection of any premises not covered in subdivisions 1 and 2 of this subsection, two thousand four hundred dollars per unit. 
B.  The above fee shall apply to, and be charged for, each and every connection made to the municipal sewer system. 
(Ord. 271 §1(part), 1995: Ord. 197 §1, 1985: Ord. 157 §1, 1977: Ord. 118 §1, 1970: Ord. 69 §3, 1962)  
13.08.040 - Inspection of work. 
All connections to the municipal sewer system shall be inspected by the building inspector and all work of connection shall be done in accordance with the plumbing regulations. 
(Ord. 69 §4, 1962)  
13.08.045 - Drainage fees. 
Drainage fees shall be charged upon issuance of a building permit payable at the time of issuance or the date of request for utility service. The drainage fee shall be four hundred dollars per lot. 
(Ord. 271 §1(part), 1995)  
13.08.050 - Violation-Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months in the county jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 69 §5, 1962)  
Chapter 13.12 - SEWER USE REGULATIONS AND CHARGES 
Sections:  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
13.12.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the maximum possible beneficial public use of the city's facilities through adequate regulation of sewer construction, sewer use and industrial wastewater discharges, to provide equitable distribution of the city's costs, to provide for the setting of sewer use charges for various classifications of sewer users, and to provide procedures for complying with requirements placed upon the city by other regulatory agencies. 
(Ord. 174 §101, 1978)  
13.12.020 - Definitions. 
The definitions given in this section shall be used in the interpretation of this chapter, the issuance of permits, the making of charges for service and all other operations of this chapter unless another meaning for the word is apparent from the context. "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. 
A.  "Council" or "city council" means the city council of the city of McFarland. 
B.  "City manager" means the city manager of the city as duly appointed by the city council. 
C.  "City engineer" means the city engineer of the city. 
D.  "City sewer" means the public sewer usually eight inches or larger in diameter used to collect wastewater from house connections and transport it to the city's wastewater treatment plant. 
E.  "Discharger" means any person that discharges or causes discharge to a public sewer. 
F.  "Domestic wastewater" means the water-carried waste produced from noncommercial or nonindustrial activities and which result from normal human living processes. 
G.  "House connection" means the sewer connecting any building sewer or building waste drainage system to the public sewer for the purpose of conveying domestic wastewater. 
H.  "Industrial wastewater" means all water-carried wastes and wastewater of the community excluding domestic wastewater and uncontaminated water, and includes all wastewater from any producing, manufacturing, processing, institutional, commercial, agricultural or other operation where wastewater discharged includes significant quantities of wastes of nonhuman origin. 
I.  "Inspector" means a person authorized by the city to inspect wastewater generation, conveyance, processing and disposal facilities. 
J.  "Person" means any individual, partnership, committee, association, corporation, public agency, and any other organization or group of persons, public or private. 
K.  "Sewage" means all wastewater. 
L.  "Sewerage" means any and all facilities used for the collection, conveyance, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater. 
M.  "Sewerage system" means a network of wastewater collection, conveyance, treatment and disposal facilities interconnected by sewers, and owned by the city. 
N.  "User" means discharger. 
O.  "Wastewater" means the water-carried wastes of the community derived from human or industrial sources including domestic wastewater and industrial wastewater. Rainwater, groundwater or drainage of uncontaminated water is not wastewater. 
(Ord. 174 Appx. A, 1978)  
13.12.030 - Scope. 
A.  This chapter shall be interpreted in accordance with the definitions set forth in Section 13.12.020. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all direct or indirect discharges to any part of the sewerage system of the city including the discharge of all liquid- carried wastes. This chapter, among other things, regulates sewer construction in areas within the city, quantity and quality of discharged wastes and the degree of water pretreatment required; provides for the setting of waste discharge fees to assure equitable distribution of costs, the approval of plans for sewer construction, the issuance of permits for industrial wastewater discharge and other miscellaneous permits; and establishes criminal and civil liability for violations of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 174 §102, 1978)  
13.12.040 - Liquid waste disposal policy. 
A.  Generally, liquid wastes originating within the city's boundaries will be removed by the city sewerage system provided the wastes will not: 
1.  Damage structures; 
2.  Create nuisances such as odors; 
3.  Menace public health; 
4.  Impose unreasonable collection, treatment or disposal costs on the city; 
5.  Interfere with wastewater treatment processes; 
6.  Exceed quality requirements set by regulatory governmental agencies; or 
7.  Detrimentally affect the local environment. 
B.  The highest and best use of the city's sewerage system is the conveyance, treatment and disposal of domestic wastewater. The use of the city's sewerage systems for industrial wastewater discharges is subject to additional regulation by the city. 
(Ord. 174 §103, 1978)  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 
 
13.12.050 - Administration of provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the city manager shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the city manager may be delegated by the city manager to persons acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the city. 
(Ord. 174 §201, 1978)  
13.12.060 - Notice. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any notice required to be given by the city manager under this chapter shall be in writing and served in person or by registered or certified mail. If served by mail, the notice shall be sent to the last address known to the city manager. Where the address is unknown, service may be made upon the owner of record of the property upon which the alleged violation occurred. 
B.  Notice shall be deemed to have been given at the time of deposit, postage prepaid, in a facility regularly serviced by the United States Postal Service. 
(Ord. 174 §203, 1978)  
13.12.070 - Time limits. 
Any time limit provided in any written notice or in any provision of this chapter may be extended only by a written directive of the city manager. 
(Ord. 174 §204, 1978)  
13.12.080 - Inspections. 
A.  Adequate identification shall be provided by the city manager for all inspectors and other authorized personnel and these persons shall identify themselves when entering any property for inspection purposes or when inspecting the work of any contractor. 
B.  Inspection of every facility that is involved directly or indirectly with the discharge of wastewater to the city's sewerage system may be made by the city manager as he deems necessary. These facilities shall include but not be limited to sewers; sewage pumping plants; pollution control plants; all industrial processes; industrial wastewater generation, conveyance and pretreatment facilities, devices and connecting sewers; and all similar sewerage facilities. Inspections may be made to determine that such facilities are maintained and operated properly and are adequate to meet the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Authorized personnel of the city shall be provided immediate access to all of the above facilities or to other facilities directly or indirectly connected to the city's sewerage system at all reasonable times including those occasioned by emergency conditions. A requirement for the issuance of an industrial waste permit as set forth in Sections 13.12.200 and 13.12.210 is that the permit holder consents to inspection of the discharger's facilities at reasonable times by the city's personnel or representatives. Any permanent or temporary obstruction to easy access to the sewerage facility to be inspected shall be promptly removed by the facility user or owner at the written or verbal request of the city manager and shall not be replaced. 
D.  No person shall interfere with, delay, resist or refuse entrance to an authorized city inspector attempting to inspect any facility involved directly or indirectly with a discharge of wastewater to the city's sewerage system. 
(Ord. 174 §205, 1978)  
13.12.090 - Recording of fees and charges. 
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, whenever the fees and charges required by this chapter are based on estimated values or estimated quantities, the city manager shall make such determinations. 
(Ord. 174 §206, 1978)  
13.12.100 - Approval of plans-Issuance of permits- Certification of final inspection. 
A.  The city manager will approve plans for sewerage construction, issue a permit for industrial wastewater discharge or any other permit under this chapter only if it appears that the sewerage construction, sewer connection, industrial discharge or other procedure conforms to the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  If requested to do so, the city manager will issue a certificate indicating satisfactory completion of the required work when all work required by the approved plans or permit has been completed and approved by the city's inspector. 
C.  All required fees and charges shall be paid before approval of plans and issuance of a permit or inspection certificate. 
D.  The approval of plans or the issuance of a permit shall not relieve the discharger of any duty imposed upon him pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 174 §208, 1978)  
13.12.110 - Distribution of revenue. 
Revenues derived under the provisions of this chapter shall be used for the acquisition, construction, maintenance and operation of sewerage facilities, to repay principal and interest on bonds issued for the construction or reconstruction of such sanitation or sewerage facilities and to repay federal and state loans or advances made to the city for construction or reconstruction of sewerage facilities. Excess revenues derived under the provisions of this chapter, not restricted by state or federal regulations, may be used for other municipal purposes. 
(Ord. 174 §209, 1978)  
13.12.120 - Reconstruction and appeal procedures. 
A.  Any permit applicant, permit holder, authorized industrial wastewater discharger or other discharger adversely affected by any decision, action or determination made by or on behalf of the city manager in interpreting or implementing the provisions of this chapter or any permit issued hereto, may file with the city a written request for reconsideration. Such requests shall be received within one year of the date of the occurrence of the action in dispute. Such request shall be acted upon by the city manager within forty-five days from the date of filing. If the city manager fails to act within forty-five days the request shall be deemed to be denied. 
B.  If the ruling made by the city manager is unsatisfactory to the person requesting consideration, the person may make a written appeal to the city council within forty-five days after the notice of the action taken by the city manager by filing the same with the city council. 
C.  The written appeal shall state all the pertinent aspects of the matter. Within forty-five days after the written appeal is filed, the city council shall hold a hearing on the appeal. At this hearing, the discharger may appeal personally or through counsel, cross-examine witnesses and present evidence in his own behalf. Notice of the hearing shall be given in accordance with Section 13.12.060 at least fifteen days prior to the date of hearing. 
(Ord. 174 §210, 1978)  
13.12.130 - Damage to city's facilities. 
Any unauthorized entering, breaking, damaging, destroying, uncovering, defacing or tampering with any structure, equipment or appurtenance which is a part of the city's sewerage system shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 174 §211, 1978)  
ARTICLE III. - SEWERAGE CONSTRUCTION 
 
13.12.140 - Approval of plans for sewerage construction. 
A.  No person, other than employees of the city, persons contracting to do work for the city or maintenance workers of the local sewering agency, shall construct or cause to be constructed, or alter or cause to be altered any public sewer, lateral sewer, house connection or industrial connection sewer, sewage pumping plant, pollution control plant, or other sewerage facility within the city where existing or proposed wastewater flows will discharge directly or indirectly to the facilities of the city without first obtaining approval of sewerage construction plans from the city manager. 
B.  The applicant shall submit to the city manager for approval construction plans and such specifications and other details as required to describe fully a proposed sewerage facility. The plans shall have been prepared under the supervision of and shall be signed by an engineer of suitable training registered in the state. 
C.  Plans for sewerage construction for any facility which will convey industrial wastewater will not be approved until the discharger has first obtained a permit for industrial wastewater discharge from the city. (See Section 13.12.020 for the definition of industrial wastewater.) 
D.  Plans for sewerage construction shall meet all design requirements of the city and shall also meet all design requirements as established from time to time by the city engineer. 
E.  Inspection of all sewerage construction under this section shall be made by personnel of the city in the manner described in Section 13.12.150. 
F.  An approval of the plans for sewerage construction shall expire one year after the date of approval unless construction has been initiated by that time. 
(Ord. 174 §301, 1978)  
13.12.150 - Inspection of construction. 
A.  All facilities to be attached directly to a city sewer shall be inspected by personnel of the city during construction. At least twenty-four hours prior to cutting into a city sewer, or commencing construction of a manhole on a city sewer, the city shall be notified. In making a connection to a sewer, no physical alteration of the city's facilities shall commence until an inspector is present. 
B.  Sewerage facilities which will not be directly connected to a city sewer will not be inspected routinely by the city during construction. Upon completion of the construction and prior to removal of the downstream bulkhead and upon receiving twenty-four hours' notice, the city will inspect the work to determine if it has been constructed in a satisfactory manner and to determine if all facilities are cleaned of construction debris that could be flushed into the city's sewers. 
C.  No wastewater shall be discharged into any sewerage facility tributary to a city facility prior to obtaining inspection and approval of sewerage construction by the city. 
D.  Following satisfactory completion of construction, the city will issue a construction inspection certificate upon request. 
(Ord. 174 §302, 1978)  
13.12.160 - Plan approvals and permits not transferable. 
Approval of plans for sewerage construction are not transferable from one person to another person or from one location to another location. 
(Ord. 174 §303, 1978)  
13.12.170 - Discharge of rainwater or uncontaminated water prohibited. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any rainwater, stormwater, groundwater, street drainage, yard drainage, water from yard foundations, ponds or lawn sprays or any other uncontaminated water into any sewerage facility which directly or indirectly discharges to facilities owned by the city. 
(Ord. 174 §304, 1978)  
13.12.180 - Discharge of industrial wastewater prohibit ed. 
No industrial wastewater (as defined in Section 13.12.020) shall be discharged either directly or indirectly to a city sewer until a permit for industrial wastewater discharge has been approved by the city. 
(Ord. 174 §305, 1978)  
13.12.190 - Improper use of connected sewers. 
A.  The city reserves the right to inspect any existing house connection that discharges wastewater directly or indirectly to a city sewer. If it is found that the connection is improperly used or improperly maintained, thereby causing discharge of septic wastewater, groundwater, rainwater, stormwater, street drainage, subsurface drainage, roof drainage, water from yard fountains, ponds or lawn sprays or any other uncontaminated water, debris or any other objectionable substance to the city's sewers, the city will give notice to the offending discharge and shall direct the condition be corrected. 
B.  In cases of continued noncompliance with the city's directive, the city may disconnect the offending sewer from the city's sewerage system. 
(Ord. 174 §306, 1978)  
13.12.200 - Charge for excessive sewer maintenance. 
A.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to a trunk sewer, either directly or indirectly, any waste that creates a stoppage, plugging breakage, any reduction in sewer capacity or any other damage to sewers or sewerage facilities of the city. Any excessive sewer or sewerage maintenance expenses attributable thereto will be charged to the offending discharger by the city. 
B.  Any refusal to pay such charges for excessive maintenance expenses duly authorized by the city shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 174 §307, 1978)  
ARTICLE IV. - SEWER USE CHARGES 
 
13.12.210 - Purpose. 
One purpose of this chapter is to provide funds to supplement the general taxes in financing construction and maintenance of sewage collection, transportation and treatment facilities in and for the city. 
(Ord. 174 §401, 1978)  
13.12.220 - Charges. 
There shall be a sewer use charge for each sewer connection within the city which shall be set forth either in a separate ordinance or a resolution approved and adopted by the city. 
(Ord. 210 §17(part), 1987: Ord. 174 §402, 1978) 
(Ord. No. 333-2008, § 3, 9-11-08)  
13.12.230 - Payment. 
The sewer use charges provided for in this chapter shall be due and payable by the user, whether he be the occupant, tenant, lessee, person in possession or owner of the property to which a sewer connection is made, within thirty days after the mailing of the bill therefor, and if otherwise not paid when due, the owner of the property shall in any case be liable therefor. Sewer use charges for residential units paid in advance for one year may be granted a ten percent discount. 
Individual sewer service charges may, as an alternative to any other billing method utilized by the city including, without limitation, billing on the property tax rolls, be billed on the same statement as other city utilities including water, refuse, and recycling services and same shall be collected as one item, together with, and not separately from, the other utility service charges even if separately set forth and any delinquency in the payment of same shall be deemed a delinquency in payment for the water fees and city may, in addition to all other remedies available for the collection of same, terminate water service. The city council may, by order or resolution, establish one or more classes of persons as exempt in whole or in part from the foregoing provision. 
(Ord. 174 §403, 1978) 
(Ord. No. 328-2008, § 1(b), 6-12-08)  
13.12.240 - Penalty for failure to pay charges. 
A.  In the event that users connected to the city sewer system fail to pay any charge within thirty days after the mailing of the bill therefor, a penalty of ten percent shall be added thereto. If the bill, together with any penalties assessed thereon has not been paid within an additional fifteen-day period, then after ten days' notice to the users and owners of the premises the city shall commence a procedure to discontinue furnishing the right to the use of the sewer system to the user until the charge and penalties are paid in full, which procedure shall hereafter be established by resolution of the city council. If, after due notice and hearing it is then determined that certain unpaid charges and penalties are then owing to the city, the city may discontinue furnishing to the user the use of the city sewer system and shall not resume the same until the charges and all delinquent penalties thereon have been fully paid and/or a lien shall be placed upon and against the real property, and if not paid by the owner prior thereto, the amount shall be charged to the owner of such property on the next regular city property tax bill forwarded to the owner and shall be charged to the owner and shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as other city property taxes. 
B.  In addition or in the alternative, and at the option of the city, the city may file a civil action for the collection of any amounts due and unpaid. This remedy shall be cumulative and in addition to other remedies or means of enforcing payment of the sum required to be paid by this chapter. 
C.  The city will notify the owners of property in writing of delinquencies and that such delinquencies will further be subject to collection from the owner pursuant to Section 13.12.220 and this section. 
D.  Upon written application by the property owner of tenant-occupied property, billing and payment of sewer use charges may be made to and by such property owner. 
E.  Upon the adoption of the ordinance codified in this subsection, the council shall transfer the collection of all sewer use charges to the Kern County auditor-controller and tax collector for placement of such charges as assessments on the secured roll of the county to be collected in the same manner as ad valorem property taxes. 
(Ord. 214 §1, 1988: Ord. 210 §17(part), 1987; Ord. 174 §404, 1978)  
13.12.250 - Application for relief. 
In the event there are any inequities that arise because of the nature of certain businesses, commercial accommodations or otherwise, under this chapter, the city council shall be the authority to permit and establish variances to this chapter to alleviate any inequity that may arise regarding the application of this chapter. 
(Ord. 174 §405, 1978)  
13.12.260 - Service outside city limits. 
The city council must first approve any sewer connection outside the corporate limits of the city and if such connections are permitted shall further have the authority to establish charges in excess of those charged users within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. 174 §406, 1978)  
13.12.270 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Every day upon which violation of this chapter exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 174 §407, 1978)  
Chapter 13.16 - UNDERGROUND UTILITIES 
Sections: 
 
13.16.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases defined in this section are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions: 
A.  "Commission" means the public utilities commission of the state. 
B.  "Person" means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and their agents and employees. 
C.  "Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures" means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. 
D.  "Underground utility district" or "district" means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.16.030. 
E.  "Utility" means and includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. 
(Ord. 104 §1, 1968)  
13.16.020 - Hearings by council. 
A.  The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. 
B.  The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and all utilities concerned, by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
C.  Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At the hearing, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 104 §2, 1968)  
13.16.030 - Report on extent of utilities' participation and costs estimates. 
Prior to holding the public hearing, the city clerk shall consult with all affected utilities and prepare a report for the hearing by the city council containing, among other things, the extent of such utilities' participation and estimates of the total costs to the city and affected property owners. The report shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead facilities. 
(Ord. 104 §3, 1968)  
13.16.040 - Authority to designate underground district by resolution. 
If, after the public hearing the city council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and underground installation within a designated area, the city council shall, by resolution, declare the designated area an underground utility district and order removal and underground installation. The resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of the underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
(Ord. 104 §4, 1968)  
13.16.050 - Unlawful acts. 
Whenever the city council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures as provided in Section 13.16.040, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed by the resolution, except as the overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owners or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 13.16.100, and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 104 §5, 1968)  
13.16.060 - Exceptions-Emergency or unusual circum stances. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed sixty days, without authority of the city clerk in order to provide emergency service. The city clerk may grant special permission, on such terms as the city clerk may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. 
(Ord. 104 §6, 1968)  
13.16.070 - Exceptions-Nonapplicability to certain fa cilities. 
This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.16.040 shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities: 
A.  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer; 
B.  Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting; 
C.  Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which the poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited; 
D.  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred volts; 
E.  Overhead wires attached to the exterior of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street; 
F.  Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services; 
G.  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts; 
H.  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used in providing power or communications to construction projects. 
(Ord. 104 §7, 1968)  
13.16.080 - Notification of utility companies and property owners. 
A.  Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.16.040, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by the adoption of the resolution. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. B. Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.16.040, together with a copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. 
(Ord. 104 §8, 1968)  
13.16.090 - Utility companies' responsibility. 
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.16.040, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors, and associated equipment required under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. 
(Ord. 104 §9, 1968)  
13.16.100 - Property owners' responsibility. 
A.  Every person owning, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 13.16.090 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.16.040, the city clerk shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten days after receipt of such notice. 
B.  The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States Mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner's name appears, and must be addressed to such owner's last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of McFarland. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the city clerk shall, within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
C.  The notice given by the city clerk to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if the work is not completed within thirty days after receipt of such notice, the city clerk will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon such property. 
D.  If upon the expiration of the thirty-day period the required underground facilities have been provided, the city clerk shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if the premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the city clerk shall in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. Upon completion of the work by the city clerk, he shall file a written report with the city council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which time shall not be less than ten days thereafter. 
E.  The city clerk shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of the premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof, in the manner provided for in this chapter for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the city council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against the assessment. The notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment. 
F.  Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there are any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment. 
G.  If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the city clerk, and the city clerk is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of the properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which the assessment was not paid. The assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as the property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per annum. 
(Ord. 104 §10, 1968)  
13.16.110 - City's responsibility. 
The city shall remove at its own expense, all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed under this chapter in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.16.040. 
(Ord. 104 §11, 1968)  
13.16.120 - Extension of time when. 
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.16.040 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(Ord. 104 §12, 1968)  
13.16.130 - Violation-Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable therefor as provided in this section. 
(Ord. 104 §13, 1968)  
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapters:  
Chapter 15.04 - BUILDING CODES 
Sections:  
ARTICLE I. - FINDINGS 
 
15.04.010 - Findings. 
A.  The city council does expressly find and determine that changes and modifications in the editions of the Uniform Codes as adopted by the ordinance codified in this chapter pursuant to Sections 17922, 17958, 17958.5 and 19588.7 of the Health and Safety Code of the state are reasonably necessary because of local conditions. 
B.  The city clerk, upon enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall notify the Department of Housing and Community Development, by sending a copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter, along with a notice advising such department of the enactment of said ordinance and its effective date and of the expressed findings made in this section, that such changes and modifications to the codes adopted by reference in the ordinance codified in this chapter are reasonably necessary in the city because of local conditions. 
C.  The city council further finds and declares, pursuant to the provisions of Section 15002 of the Guidelines for Implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970 (California Administrative Code, Title 14, Division 6), that all of the provisions of the code of building regulations and the codes incorporated therein, and the projects and actions which may be considered or permitted thereunder, are "ministerial" within the meaning of said Section 15002 and Paragraph (b) of Section 21080 of said act. 
(Ord. 236 Art. 1, §1, 1990: Ord. 204 Art. 1, §1, 1987)  
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
15.04.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public safety and welfare by the adoption of minimum building standards to be required and enforced throughout the city. 
(Ord. 236 Art. 2, §1, 1990: Ord. 204 Art. 2, §1, 1987)  
15.04.030 - Short title. 
This chapter may be cited as the "Code of Building Regulations." The code is comprised of several secondary codes of regulations and standards adopted by the county, agencies of the state and by nationally recognized organizations which have existed for more than three years. Nothing in the code of building regulations shall be interpreted as abrogating any more restrictive requirements of other agencies, including, but not limited to, Title 19 of the California Administrative Code, known as the Regulations of the State Fire Marshal. 
(Ord. 236 Art. 2, §2, 1990: Ord. 204 Art. 2, §2, 1987)  
15.04.040 - Application. 
The code of building regulations applies to new building construction and to the installation of new mechanical, plumbing and electrical systems; it applies to existing construction and to existing mechanical, plumbing and electrical systems to the extent specifically defined by the secondary codes adopted by reference into this chapter. 
(Ord. 236 Art. 2, §3, 1990: Ord. 204 Art. 2, §3, 1987)  
15.04.050 - Interpretation. 
The code of building regulations shall be liberally construed to effect its purpose. If the code regulates one application with dissimilar limitations or requirements, the more restrictive regulation shall apply. 
(Ord. 236 Art. 2, §4, 1990: Ord. 204 Art. 2, §4, 1987)  
15.04.060 - Definitions. 
A.  As used in the code of building regulations: 
1.  "Building official," "administrative authority," "plumbing official" and "chief electrical inspector" mean the building inspector of the city. 
2.  "Board of appeals" means the city council of the city. 
3.  "Building department" and "department" mean the building inspection department of the city. 
4.  "Fire chief" means the chief of the city fire department. 
5.  "Director" means the city manager (or his designee) of the city. 
6.  "County" or "county of Kern" means the city. 
7.  "County clerk" means the city clerk. 
8.  "Board of supervisors" means the city council. 
9.  "Ordinance code" means the code of ordinances of the city. 
B.  Any other sentence, term or word that means, implies, or by its context indicates the county of Kern, shall be interpreted to mean and shall be the city. 
(Ord. 236 §5, 1990: Ord. 204 Art. 2, §5, 1987)  
15.04.070 - Enforcement. 
A.  The building inspector shall administer and enforce the code of building regulations. He may delegate administrative and enforcement powers to qualified personnel. 
B.  The building inspector may authorize reasonable modifications in the application of the code of building regulations to special, individual cases if he first reasonably determines that strict application of the regulations is impractical or invokes undue hardship and that the modification protects the public safety and conforms to the spirit and purpose of the code. 
(Ord. 236 Art. 2, §6, 1990: Ord. 204 Art. 2, §6, 1987)  
15.04.080 - Records-Reports-Disposition of fees. 
The building inspector shall cause to be made and filed a permanent record of each transaction of the building inspection department covered by the code of building regulations. He shall account monthly to the council for the permits issued and the fees collected by the building inspection department. 
(Ord. 236 Art. 2, §7, 1990: Ord. 204 Art. 2, §7, 1987)  
15.04.090 - Adoption of regulations and fees. 
A.  Subject to approval by the city council, the building inspector may adopt and charge a reasonable schedule of fees for permits, permit renewal, plan checking, processing applications, maintenance of records and for the performance of special services by the building inspection department in administering and enforcing the code of building regulations. The schedule may provide for the partial refund of permit fees to applicants. 
B.  Penalty fees specified in the code of building regulations for starting or proceeding without necessary permits shall be assessable against contractors except for emergency work for which permits must be procured within a reasonable time, not to exceed two working days. In cases involving other than contractors, penalty fees may be waived by the department if action is taken to apply for and take out all necessary permits without having referral to the investigative section of the police department for action. 
C.  Where the permittee desires occupancy or utilities energized before the final inspection can be completed, and the building inspector determines that all fire protection systems are operational and no unreasonable hazard to life or property exists, the permittee may deposit with the building inspector, security in the amount of the building inspector's estimate of the cost of completion plus fifty percent, for the purpose of insuring the completion of the work and the department overhead costs involved in the processing. The term "security," as used in this section, shall mean one of the following: 
1.  A bond by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties; or 
2.  A cash deposit made with the city; or 
3.  An instrument of credit from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the state or federal government pledging that funds necessary to meet the performance are on deposit and guaranteed for payment and agreeing that the funds designated by the instrument shall become trust funds for the purpose set forth in the instrument; or 
4.  Negotiable U.S. Treasury Certificates of the kind approved by law for security deposits of public money. 
The security sum is to be refunded to the permittee upon completion and may be released to the depositor in two payments during the progress of the work if the deposit exceeds one thousand dollars and the same ratio of security is maintained on deposit for all uncompleted work. Such special permit shall be granted for a specific time period mutually agreed upon, after which if the project remains uncompleted, the building inspector may declare the permit void, forfeit and utilize the security deposit to gain compliance under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 236 Art. 2, §8, 1990: Ord. 204 Art. 2, §8, 1987)  
15.04.100 - Unfinished structures and projects. 
Whenever the inspector determines by inspection that the work on any structure or project, authorized by permit and once commenced, has been suspended or abandoned for a period of one hundred twenty days, he shall give written notice to complete or demolish and remove the work, to the owner or other person in control of the property upon which the structure or project is situated. Thereafter the owner or other person in control of the property shall either obtain a new permit within one hundred twenty days from the notice date and diligently pursue the work to completion, or demolish and remove the structure or project within one hundred twenty days from the notice date. 
(Ord. 236 Art. 2, §9, 1990: Ord. 204 Art. 2, §9, 1987)  
15.04.110 - Limitation on responsibility. 
A.  Neither an approval nor a permit granted by the department of building inspection shall constitute permission or authority, or be interpreted as a waiver, for the violation of any statute, ordinance or regulation. 
B.  Neither the city nor its officers or employees shall assume liability for structural or construction defects through the administration or enforcement of the code of building regulations. 
C.  By accepting a permit for the performance of services by the building inspection department, an applicant consents to the limitations of this section. 
(Ord. 236 Art. 2, §10, 1990: Ord. 204 Art. 2, §10, 1987)  
15.04.120 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Any person who violates, or causes, permits or allows the violation of any provision of the code of building regulations (including codes which have been adopted by reference) is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion thereof he/she permits, causes or allows the violation to continue. The city building inspection department, in enforcing the code of building regulations, as set forth in the code of building regulations, may cause criminal complaints to be issued for the violation of any section of the code of building regulations, including any of the codes adopted by reference in this chapter. It is the intent of this section to make a violation of any section of this code of building regulations and any of the codes adopted by reference a misdemeanor. 
B.  Any structure, construction or installation that is undertaken or permitted to continue in violation of any portion of this code of building regulations is a public nuisance and may be abated by the building inspector. No person shall use or occupy a building declared to be a public nuisance. 
C.  Any act declared by the code of building regulations to be a misdemeanor shall be punishable, upon conviction thereof, by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 236 Art. 2, §11, 1990: Ord. 204 Art. 2, §11, 1987)  
ARTICLE III. - ADOPTION OF CODES 
 
15.04.130 - Short title. 
This article may be cited as the "city building code." 
(Ord. 236 Art. 3, §1, 1990: Ord. 204 Art. 3, §1, 1987)  
15.04.140 - Application. 
The city building code shall apply to the construction, erection, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, improvement, removing, conversion, demolition and use and occupancy of every building and structure in the incorporated territory of the city. 
(Ord. 236 Art. 3, §2, 1990: Ord. 204 Art. 3, §2, 1987)  
15.04.150 - Exempt buildings and structures. 
A.  The city building code shall not apply to any building or structures situated in an area zoned for agricultural use when intended and used to shelter livestock, poultry, farm implements, farm supplies or harvested crops. An exempt building or structure shall not be designed, constructed, intended or used for human occupancy or work situation nor shall it be attached to a dwelling. Building structures so exempt shall not be used for any other purpose unless qualified for a change of occupancy as prescribed in the building code. 
B.  An application for a permit to construct an agriculturally exempt building shall be filed with the building inspector for verification and certification of use which shall be subject to fees established for such purpose. Plot plans indicating size of buildings and location on property are required on application. 
C.  Location on property shall be in compliance with the building code and shall be subject to the requirements of the city zoning ordinance. 
D.  Before the building of a structure is commenced, a preliminary inspection shall be made to verify compliance with setback requirements. Inspection shall also be made to verify use of the building or structure. 
(Ord. 236 Art. 3, §3, 1990: Ord. 204 Art. 3, §3, 1987)  
15.04.160 - Adoption of Uniform Codes. 
Ordinance No. G-8670 of the board of supervisors of the county of Kern, state of California which amends Chapters 17.04, 17.06, 17.08, 17.10, 17.12, 17.16, 17.20, 17.24, 17.26, 17.28, 17.32, 17.34, 17.36, 17.40, 17.44, 17.48, and 17.56 of the Ordinance Code of the county of Kern adopting the following uniform codes (or portions of same) is hereby incorporated by this reference into the building code of the city of McFarland: Building Regulations—General, Residential Code, Building Code, Green Building Standards Code, Mechanical Code, Housing Code, Plumbing Code, Electrical Code, Existing Building Code, Grading Code, Fire Code, Wildland-Urban Interface Code, Dangerous Buildings Code, Building Relocation Code, Mobile Home and Accessory Structures, Floodplain Management Code, and Energy Code. All amendments and repealers of the foregoing chapters by the board of supervisors of the county of Kern hereinafter adopted by the board of supervisors shall be automatically incorporated herein without further action of the city council. 
(Ord. 275 §1, 1996: Ord. 240 §1, 1991: Ord. 236 Art. 3, §4, 1990: Ord. 204 Art. 3, §4, 1987) 
(Ord. No. 325-2007, § 1, 1-17-08; Ord. No. 011-2011, § 1, 5-12-11; Ord. No. 034-2014, § 2, 1-23-14; Ord. No. 035-2014, § 2, 1-23-14; Ord. No. 036-2014, § 1, 2-13-14; Ord. No. 062-2016, § 1, 12-22-16; Ord. No. 061-2016, § 1, 1-12-17)  
Chapter 15.08 - BUILDING RELOCATION 
Sections: 
 
15.08.010 - Definitions. 
The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Building inspector" means the building inspector of the city, or his authorized representative. 
B.  "Board of appeals" means the board of appeals created pursuant to the provisions of the city's Uniform Building Code. 
(Ord. 207 §1, 1987)  
15.08.020 - Relocation permit required. 
Within the city limits a person shall not relocate on or move onto any premises any building or structure, except a contractor's tool house, construction building or similar structure which is moved as construction requires, until he first obtains from the building inspector a relocation permit. 
(Ord. 207 §2, 1987)  
15.08.030 - Application for permit. 
Every application to the building inspector for a relocation permit shall be in writing upon a form furnished by the building inspector and shall set forth such information as the building inspector may reasonably require in order to carry out the purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. 207 §4, 1987)  
15.08.040 - Buildings prohibited from relocation. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the building inspector shall not issue a relocation permit for any building or structure which: 
A.  Is so constructed or in such a condition as to be dangerous; 
B.  Is infested with pests or is unsanitary; 
C.  If it is a dwelling or habitation is unfit for such use; 
D.  Is so dilapidated, defective, unsightly or in such a condition or deterioration or disrepair that its relocation at the proposed site would cause appreciable harm to or be materially detrimental to the property or improvements in the district within a radius of one thousand feet from the proposed site; 
E.  If the proposed use is prohibited under any zoning ordinance or other land use ordinance of the city; 
F.  If the structure is of a type prohibited at the proposed location by this or by any other law or ordinance. 
(Ord. 207 §5, 1987)  
15.08.050 - Conditional permit. 
A.  If the condition of the building or structure in the judgment of the building inspector admits of practicable and effective repair he may issue a relocation permit upon conditions provided in this chapter. 
B.  The building inspector, in granting any relocation permit, may impose thereon such terms and conditions as he may deem reasonable and proper, including, but not limited to, the requirement of changes, alterations, additions or repairs to be made in or upon the building or structure, to the end that the relocation thereof will not be materially detrimental or injurious to public safety or to public welfare or to the property and improvements, or either, in the district, as hereinabove limited, to which it is to be moved. 
(Ord. 207 §6, 1987)  
15.08.060 - Denial of permit. 
If the unlawful, dangerous or defective condition of the building or structure proposed to be relocated is such that remedy or correction cannot be practicably and effectively made, the building inspector shall deny the permit. 
(Ord. 207 §7, 1987)  
15.08.070 - Permit application processing. 
A.  In order to determine any of the matters presented by the application, the building inspector may cause to be made any investigation which he believes necessary or helpful and he may refer the matter for further investigation to the board of appeals. 
B.  If the board of appeals deems it necessary or expedient so to do, it may set any such application for hearing before a member of the board or representative thereof and cause such notice of the time and place and purpose thereof to be given as the board may deem appropriate. Thereafter the findings of the hearing shall be reported to the board for its consideration along with any other information before it. 
(Ord. 207 §8, 1987)  
15.08.080 - Conditions on permit. 
The terms and conditions upon which each permit is granted shall be written upon the application or appended thereto in writing. 
All fees deemed necessary or appropriate by the city council with regard to the subject matter in this Chapter 15.08 may be established or modified by a duly adopted resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 207 §9, 1987) 
(Ord. No. 287-2003, § 1(c), 5-13-04)  
15.08.090 - Posting of bond. 
The building inspector shall not issue a relocation permit unless the permittee, or authorized agent, first posts with the building inspector a bond executed by the permittee, as principal, and by a surety company authorized to do business in the state, as surety, or makes a cash deposit as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 207 §10, 1987)  
15.08.100 - Surety bond. 
The surety bond required by this chapter shall: 
A.  Be in form joint and several; 
B.  Name the city as obligee; and 
C.  Be in an amount of fifteen thousand dollars. 
(Ord. 207 §11, 1987)  
15.08.110 - Cash deposit. 
The cash deposit, if made in place of a surety bond, shall also be fifteen thousand dollars. 
(Ord. 207 §12, 1987)  
15.08.120 - Exemptions from posting cash deposit or surety bond. 
Neither a surety bond nor a cash deposit need be posted in the following cases: 
A.  In any case where the building inspector finds that the only relocation involved is that of moving a building temporarily to the regular occupied business premises of a house mover or that of moving a building to an adjacent property of the same owner, and that no such security is necessary in order to assure compliance with the requirements of this chapter; 
B.  Upon a written request by any nonprofit organization or any agency of the city, the county, the state or the United States government, the surety bond and/or the cash deposit may be waived by the city manager. 
(Ord. 207 §13, 1987) 
(Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
15.08.130 - Conditions of bond. 
Every surety bond posted and every cash deposit made pursuant to this chapter shall be conditioned as follows: 
A.  That each and all of the terms and conditions of the relocation permit shall be complied with to the satisfaction of the building inspector; 
B.  That all of the work required to be done pursuant to the conditions of the relocation permit shall be fully performed and completed within the time limit specified in the relocation permit. If no time limit is specified, the work shall be completed within ninety days after the date of the issuance of the relocation permit. The time limit specified in this subsection or the time limit specified in any permit issued within the provisions of this chapter may be extended for good and sufficient cause, either before or after the time period has expired, by a written order of the building inspector. 
(Ord. 207 §14, 1987)  
15.08.140 - Default of permit. 
Whenever the building inspector finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of any relocation permit, he shall give written notice thereof to the principal and to the surety on the bond. 
(Ord. 207 §15, 1987)  
15.08.150 - Notice to surety. 
A.  In a notice of default the building inspector shall state the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof, and the period of time deemed by him to be reasonably necessary for the completion of the work. 
B.  After receipt of a notice of default, the surety, within the time therein specified, shall cause the required work to be performed. 
(Ord. 207 §16, 1987)  
15.08.160 - Notice to principal. 
If a cash bond has been posted the building inspector shall give notice of default, as provided in Section 15.08.140, to the principal, and if compliance is not had within the time specified the building inspector shall proceed without delay and without further notice or proceeding whatever, to use the cash deposit or any portion of the deposit to cause the required work to be done by contract or otherwise in his discretion. The balance, if any, of such cash deposit, upon the completion of the work, shall be returned to the depositor or to his successors or assigns after deducting the cost of the work plus ten percent thereof. 
(Ord. 207 §17, 1987)  
15.08.170 - Default by principal. 
When any default has occurred on the part of the principal under the preceding provisions of this chapter, the surety, at its option, in lieu of completing the work required, may demolish the building or structure and clear, clean and restore the site. 
(Ord. 207 §18, 1987)  
15.08.180 - Termination of bond. 
The term of each bond posted pursuant to this chapter shall begin upon the date of the posting thereof and shall end upon the completion to the satisfaction of the building inspector of the performance of all the terms and conditions of the relocation permit. 
(Ord. 207 §19, 1987)  
15.08.190 - Return of cash deposit. 
When a cash bond has been posted, the building inspector shall return the cash to the depositor or his successors or assigns upon the termination of the bond, except any portion thereof that may have been used or deducted as elsewhere in this chapter provided. 
(Ord. 207 §20, 1987)  
15.08.200 - Inspection of premises. 
The building inspector, the surety and the duly authorized representatives of either, shall have access to the premises described in the relocation permit for the purpose of inspecting the progress of the work. 
(Ord. 207 §21, 1987)  
15.08.210 - Entry upon premises—Violation. 
In the event of any default in the performance of any term or condition of the relocation permit, the surety or any person employed or engaged on its behalf, or the building inspector, or any person employed or engaged on his behalf, may go upon the premises to complete the required work or to remove or demolish the building or structure. The owner, his representative, successor or assign, or any other person who interferes with or obstructs the ingress or egress to or from such premises, or any unauthorized representative, or agent of any surety or of the city engaged in the work of completing, demolishing or removing any building or structure for which a relocation permit has been issued, after a default has occurred in the performance of the terms or conditions thereof is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 207 §22, 1987)  
Chapter 15.12 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT[1] 
Sections: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 301-2005, adopted September 8, 2005, repealed the Chapter 15.12, §§ 15.12.010—15.12.510, and enacted a new Chapter 15.12 as set out herein. The former Chapter 15.12 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 262, 1993. 
 
ARTICLE I. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS 
 
15.12.010 - Statutory authorization. 
The legislature of the state of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the city of McFarland does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. 
(Ord. No. 301-2005, § 1.1, 9-8-05)  
15.12.020 - Findings of fact. 
A.  The flood hazard areas of the city of McFarland are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
B.  These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contribute to the flood loss. 
(Ord. No. 301-2005, § 1.2, 9-8-05)  
15.12.030 - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
A.  Protect human life and health; 
B.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
C.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
D.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
E.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
F.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage; 
G.  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
H.  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. No. 301-2005, § 1.3, 9-8-05)  
15.12.040 - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions to: 
A.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
B.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
C.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters; 
D.  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
E.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. No. 301-2005, § 1.4, 9-8-05)  
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
 
15.12.050 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
"Accessory use" means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
"Appeal" means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
"Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AH zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
"Area of special flood hazard" - see "special flood hazard area." 
"Base flood" means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one hundred-year flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter. 
"Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade — i.e., below ground level — on all sides. 
"Building" — see "structure." 
"Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
"Encroachment" means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
"Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of this chapter. 
"Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
"Flood, flooding, or flood water" means: 
1.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and 
2.  The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. 
"Flood hazard boundary map" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards. 
"Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
"Flood insurance study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
"Floodplain or flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source - see "flooding." 
"Floodplain administrator" is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
"Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
"Floodplain management regulations" means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
"Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. 
"Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as "regulatory floodway." 
"Floodway fringe" is that area of the floodplain on either side of the "regulatory floodway" where encroachment may be permitted. 
"Fraud and victimization" as related to Article VI, Variance Procedure, of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the floodplain administrator will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty to one hundred years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
"Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
"Governing body" is the local governing unit, i.e. county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. 
"Hardship" as related to Article VI, Variance Procedure, of this chapter means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The floodplain administrator requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
"Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
"Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
"Levee" means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
"Levee system" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
"Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. 
1.  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to: 
a.  The wet floodproofing standard in Section 15.12.170(C)(3); 
b.  The anchoring standards in Section 15.12.170(A); 
c.  The construction materials and methods standards in Section 15.12.170(B); and 
d.  The standards for utilities in Section 15.12.180. 
2.  For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements. This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas. 
"Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
"Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
"Market value" shall be determined by estimating the cost to replace the structure in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation which has accrued since the structure was constructed. The cost of replacement of the structure shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by reference to a building cost estimating guide recognized by the building construction industry. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking into account the age and physical deterioration of the structure and functional obsolescence as approved by the floodplain administrator, but shall not include economic or other forms of external obsolescence. Use of replacement costs or accrued depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized building cost estimating guides may be considered only if such factors are included in a report prepared by an independent professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation of the differences. 
"Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
"New construction," for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
"New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
"Obstruction" includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
"One hundred-year flood" or "100-year flood" see "Base flood." 
"Primary structure" means a structure used for the principal use of the property as distinguished from an accessory use. 
"Public safety and nuisance" as related to Article VI, Variance Procedure, of this chapter means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
"Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
"Remedy a violation" means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with State or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
"Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
"Sheet flow area" see "area of shallow flooding." 
"Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FIRM as zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH. 
"Start of construction" includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
"Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
"Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
"Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
2.  Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
"Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
"Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
"Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
"Watercourse" means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. No. 301-2005, § 2.0, 9-8-05)  
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
15.12.060 - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city of McFarland. 
(Ord. No. 301-2005, § 3.1, 9-8-05)  
15.12.070 - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the flood insurance study (FIS) dated September 29, 1986 and accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs), dated September 29, 1986, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator. The flood insurance study and the federal insurance rate maps are on file at the McFarland City Hall, 401 West Kern Avenue, McFarland, California, 93250. 
(Ord. No. 301-2005, § 3.2, 9-8-05)  
15.12.080 - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars or be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Every day upon which violation of this chapter shall exist, or continue, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 301-2005, § 3.3, 9-8-05)  
15.12.090 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another chapter, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 301-2005, § 3.4, 9-8-05)  
15.12.100 - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
A.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
B.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
C.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 301-2005, § 3.5, 9-8-05)  
15.12.110 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city of McFarland, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 301-2005, § 3.6, 9-8-05)  
15.12.120 - Severability. 
This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 301-2005, § 3.7, 9-8-05)  
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
15.12.130 - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 15.12.070. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
A.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures. 
B.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in Section 15.12.170(C)(2) of this chapter. 
C.  All appropriate certifications listed in Section 15.12.150(D) of this chapter; and 
D.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(Ord. No. 301-2005, § 4.1, 9-8-05)  
15.12.140 - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
The city manager is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. 
(Ord. No. 301-2005, § 4.2, 9-8-05)  
15.12.150 - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
A.  Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine that: 
1.  Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
2.  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; 
3.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and 
4.  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point. 
B.  Review, Use and Development of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.12.070, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Article V. Any such information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption. 
C.  Notification of Other Agencies. In alteration or relocation of a watercourse: 
1.  Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation. 
2.  Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and 
3.  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
D.  Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following: 
1.  Certification required by Sections 15.12.170(C)(1) and 15.12.200 (lowest floor elevations); 
2.  Certification required by Section 15.12.170(C)(2) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures); 
3.  Certification required by Section 15.12.170(C)(3) (wet floodproofing standard); 
4.  Certification of elevation required by Section 15.12.190(B) (subdivision standards); 
5.  Certification required by Section 15.12.220(A) (floodway encroachments). 
E.  Boundary Determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Article VI. 
F.  Enforcement. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 15.12.080. 
(Ord. No. 301-2005, § 4.3, 9-8-05)  
15.12.160 - Appeals. 
The city council of the city of McFarland shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 301-2005, § 4.4, 9-8-05)  
ARTICLE V. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
15.12.170 - Standards of construction. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required: 
A.  Anchoring. 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
2.  All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 15.12.200. 
B.  Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed: 
1.  With flood resistant materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
2.  Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
3.  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and if 
4.  Within zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
C.  Elevation and Floodproofing. 
1.  Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation in all zones. 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
2.  Nonresidential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall either be elevated to conform with Section 15.12.170(C)(1) or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities. 
a.  Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under Section 15.12.170(C)(1) so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
c.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this section (15.12.170(C)(2)) are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
3.  All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; or 
b.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect. 
4.  Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 15.12.200. 
(Ord. No. 301-2005, § 5.1, 9-8-05)  
15.12.180 - Standards for utilities. 
A.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
1.  Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and 
2.  Discharge from the systems into flood waters. 
B.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 301-2005, § 5.2, 9-8-05)  
15.12.190 - Standards for subdivisions. 
A.  All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood. 
B.  All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the lowest floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator. 
C.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
D.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
E.  All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 301-2005, § 5.3, 9-8-05)  
15.12.200 - Standards for manufactured homes. 
A.  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, within zone AH on the community's flood insurance rate map, on sites located 
1.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
2.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
3.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
4.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
B.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zone AH on the community's flood insurance rate map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection A of this section will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the: 
1.  Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six inches in height above grade. 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. 301-2005, § 5.4, 9-8-05)  
15.12.210 - Standards for recreational vehicles. 
A.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites within zone AH on the community's flood insurance rate map will either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days, and be fully licensed and ready for highway use — a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
2.  Meet the permit requirements of Article IV of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 15.12.200(A). 
(Ord. No. 301-2005, § 5.5, 9-8-05)  
15.12.220 - Floodways. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.12.070 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters, which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
A.  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other new development unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in the base flood elevation during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
B.  If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article V. 
(Ord. No. 301-2005, § 5.6, 9-8-05)  
ARTICLE VI. - VARIANCE PROCEDURE 
 
15.12.230 - Nature of variances. 
The variance criteria set forth in this section of the chapter are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristics must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners. 
It is the duty of the city council to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 301-2005, § 6.1, 9-8-05)  
15.12.240 - Appeal board. 
A.  In passing upon requests for variances, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the: 
1.  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
2.  Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3.  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property; 
4.  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
5.  Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
6.  Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
7.  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
8.  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
9.  Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
10.  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and 
11.  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges. 
B.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that 
1.  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars for one hundred dollars of insurance coverage, and 
2.  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the applicant in the Office of the Kern County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land; and a conformed copy of said recordation shall be provided to the floodplain administrator as indicated in the conditions attached to the variance. 
C.  The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. No. 301-2005, § 6.2, 9-8-05)  
15.12.250 - Conditions for variances. 
A.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Articles IV and V of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
B.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" (as defined in Section 15.12.050 of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
C.  Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
D.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the "minimum necessary" considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the floodplain administrator need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the floodplain administrator believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance. 
E.  Variances shall only be issued upon a: 
1.  Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional "hardship" (as defined in Section 15.12.050 of this chapter) to the applicant; and 
3.  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (as defined in Section 15.12.050 — see "public safety or nuisance"), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in Section 15.12.02) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
F.  Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of Sections 15.12.250(A)—15.12.250(E) are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance. 
G.  Upon consideration of the factors of Section 15.12.240(A) and the purposes of this chapter, the floodplain administrator may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 301-2005, § 6.3, 9-8-05)  
Chapter 15.16 - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
Sections: 
 
15.16.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public safety and welfare and to prescribe regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosions by the adoption of minimum fire prevention standards. 
(Ord. 114 §1, 1970)  
15.16.020 - Intent. 
It is the intent of this chapter to adopt and make effective in the city minimum fire prevention standards the same as those in effect in the unincorporated territory of the county. 
(Ord. 114 §2, 1970)  
15.16.030 - Title. 
This chapter may be cited as the "Uniform Fire Code of the city" or the "Uniform Fire Code." 
(Ord. 114 §3, 1970)  
15.16.040 - Interpretation. 
The fire prevention code shall be liberally construed to effect its purpose. If the code regulates one application with different limitations or requirements, the more restrictive regulations shall apply. 
(Ord. 114 §4, 1970)  
15.16.050 - Definitions. 
A.  Whenever the word "Municipality" is used in the Uniform Fire Code, it shall be held to mean the city. 
B.  Whenever the term "Corporation Counsel" is used in the Uniform Fire Code, it shall be held to mean the attorney for the city. 
(Ord. 114 §9, 1970)  
15.16.060 - Name of department. 
The fire department of the city is designated as, and shall hereafter be known as, the city fire department. 
(Ord. 114 §5, 1970)  
15.16.070 - Functions of department. 
All fire prevention and suppression services within the purview of the functions of the city shall be performed by the fire department except as otherwise particularly provided by law. 
(Ord. 114 §6, 1970)  
15.16.080 - Fire chief-Powers. 
The administrative direction of all fire prevention and suppression services within the purview of the functions of the city fire department shall be vested in the chief of the city fire department. Any duty or obligation delegated to or imposed upon a city fire warden and/or any authority vested in a city fire warden shall be assumed, performed and exercised by the chief of the city fire department. In the performance of any duty or in the exercise of any authority under the provisions of this section, the chief of the fire department shall act as the head of a department of the city. It is expressly provided that the provisions of this section shall not be construed as the appointment of a county fire warden under the provisions of Section 24008 of the Government Code of the state. 
(Ord. 114 §7, 1970)  
15.16.090 - Bureau of fire prevention created. 
A.  The Uniform Fire Code shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention in the fire department of the city, which bureau is established and shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire department. 
B.  The chief in charge of the bureau of fire prevention shall be appointed by the city council. 
C.  The chief of the fire department may select such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The chief of the fire department shall recommend to the city council the employment of technical inspectors, who, when such authorization is made, shall be selected through an examination to determine their fitness for the position. 
(Ord. 114 §8, 1970)  
15.16.100 - Bureau members-Duties. 
The chief and members of the fire prevention bureau shall have the powers of a police officer in performing their duties under this chapter when they come within the purview of the penal code of the state defining "peace officers." 
(Ord. 114 §10, 1970)  
15.16.110 - Adoption of Uniform Fire Code by reference. 
Kern County Ordinance No. G-5790 (with the Uniform Fire Code, 1991 Edition, as modified, amended, and adopted by reference therein) is adopted by reference to the same effect as if fully set forth in this code, and is declared to be the Uniform Fire Code of the city. 
(Ord. 248 §1, 1992: Ord. 224 §1, 1991: Ord. 193 §1, 1984: Ord. 114 §12, 1970)  
15.16.120 - Unsafe buildings-Condemnation. 
Any building, structure, or portion thereof, including buildings or structures in the process of erection, found to be dangerous to persons or property, unsafe for the purpose for which constructed, or due to damage caused by fire, the elements, sabotage, explosions or other means, shall constitute a public nuisance and are subject to abatement as such. 
(Ord. 114 §14, 1970)  
15.16.130 - Unsafe buildings-Power to condemn. 
Except in cases of emergency for the immediate preservation of life and property, before any action is taken to abate any public nuisance as defined in Section 15.16.120, such buildings or structures shall be inspected by the city building department and approval given for such abatement. In the event the building inspector determines that such building constitutes a public nuisance, it shall be forthwith condemned and shall not be occupied or used until made safe, and its use authorized by the building inspector. 
(Ord. 114 §15, 1970)  
15.16.140 - Violation of Sections 15.16.120 and 15.16.130. 
Use or occupation of a building in violation of Sections 15.16.130 and 15.16.140 shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 114 §16, 1970)  
15.16.150 - Modifications. 
The fire chief shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the Uniform Fire Code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the fire chief thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Ord. 114 §17, 1970)  
15.16.160 - Appeals. 
Whenever the fire chief disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the fire chief to the city council within thirty days of the date of the decision appealed. 
(Ord. 114 §18, 1970)  
15.16.170 - New materials, processes or occupancies which may require permits. 
The mayor of the city, the councilman serving as fire commissioner and the fire chief shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the code. The fire chief shall post such a list in a conspicuous place in his office, and distribute lists thereof to interested persons. 
(Ord. 114 §19, 1970)  
15.16.180 - Violation-Penalty. 
Any persons who violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or who violate or fail to comply with any order made hereunder by competent authority, or who in building or erecting any structure deviate from any specifications or plans submitted to and approved by the fire chief as provided in this chapter, or from any certificate or permit issued under this chapter, shall for each and every such violation or failure to comply be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall, upon conviction be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. A conviction for any offense under the provisions of this chapter shall not excuse the violation or authorize its continuance, and the person or persons convicted of such offense shall be required to correct or remedy any condition or installation which fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter with reasonable diligence. Each day that a condition prohibited by the provisions of this chapter is caused or permitted to be maintained or continued shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. 114 §13, 1970)  
Chapter 15.30 - LANDSCAPE WATER CONSERVATION 
Sections: 
 
15.30.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Anti-drain valve or check valve" means a valve located under a sprinkler head to hold water in the system so it minimizes drainage from the lower elevation sprinkler heads. 
"Application rate" means the depth of water applied to a given area, usually measured in inches per hour. 
"Applied water" means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape. 
"Automatic controller" means a mechanical or solid state timer, capable of operating valve stations to set the days and length of time of a water application. 
"Backflow prevention device" means a safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system. 
"Conservation factor (0.62)" means a number that converts the maximum applied water allowance from acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year. The conversion factor is calculated as follows: 
(325,851 gallons/43,560 square feet)/12 inches = (0.62) 
325,851 gallons = one acre foot 
43,560 square feet = one acre 
12 inches = one foot 
To convert gallons per year to one hundred-cubic-feet per year, another common billing unit for water, divide gallons per year by seven hundred forty-eight. (748 gallons = 100 cubic feet) 
"Ecological restoration project" means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem. 
"Effective precipitation or usable rainfall" means the portion of total precipitation that is used by the plants. Precipitation is not a reliable source of water, but can contribute to some degree toward the water needs of the landscape. 
"Emitter" means drip irrigation fittings that deliver water slowly from the system to the soil. 
"Established landscape" means the point at which plants in the landscape have developed roots into the soil adjacent to the root ball. 
"Establishment period" means the first year after installing the plant in the landscape. 
"Estimated applied water use" means the portion of the estimated total water use that is derived from applied water. The estimated applied water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. The estimated applied water use may be the sum of the water recommended through the irrigation schedule, as referenced in subsection C of Section 15.30.040, Estimated Applied Water Use. 
"Estimated total water use" means the annual total amount of water estimated to be needed to keep the plants in the landscaped area healthy. It is based upon such factors as the local evapotranspiration rate, the size of the landscaped area, the types of plants, and the efficiency of the irrigation system, as described in subsection D of Section 15.30.040, Estimated Total Water Use. 
"ET adjustment factor" means a factor of 0.8, that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape. A combined plan mix with a site-wide average of 0.5 is the basis of the plant factor portion of this calculation. The irrigation efficiency for purposes of the ET adjustment factor is 0.625. Therefore, the ET adjustment factor (0.8) = (0.5/0.625). 
"Evapotranspiration" means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil surfaces and transpired by plants during a specific time. 
"Flow rate" means the rate at which water flows through pipes and valves (gallons per minute or cubic feet per second). 
"Hydrozone" means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs that are served by a valve or set of valves with the same schedule. A hydrozone may be irrigated or nonirrigated. For example, a naturalized area planted with native vegetation that will not need supplemental irrigation once established is a nonirrigated hydrozone. 
"Infiltration rate" means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (inches per hour). 
"Irrigation efficiency" means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The minimum irrigation efficiency for purposes of this chapter is 0.625. Greater irrigation efficiency can be expected from well-designed and maintained systems. 
"Landscape irrigation audit" means a process to perform site inspections, evaluate irrigation systems, and develop efficient irrigation schedules. 
"Landscaped area" means the entire parcel less the building footprint, driveways, nonirrigated portions of parking lots, hardscapes, such as decks and patios, and other nonporous areas. Water features are included in the calculation of the landscaped area. Areas dedicated to edible plants, such as orchards or vegetable gardens are not included. 
"Lateral lines" means the water delivery pipeline that supplies water to the emitters or sprinklers from the valve. 
"Main line" means the pressurized pipeline that delivers water source to the valve or outlet. 
"Maximum applied water allowance" means, for design purposes, the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in subsection B of Section 15.30.040. It is based upon the area's reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscaped area. The estimated applied water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. 
"Mined-land reclamation projects" means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975. 
"Mulch" means any material such as leaves, bark, straw or other materials left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purpose of reducing evapotranspiration. 
"Operating pressure" means the pressure at which a system of sprinklers is designed to operate, usually indicated at the base of a sprinkler. 
"Overhead sprinkler irrigation system" means those with high flow rates (pop-ups, impulse sprinklers, rotors, etc.) 
"Overspray" means the water which is delivered beyond the landscaped area, wetting pavements, walks, structures, or other nonlandscaped areas. 
"Plant factor" means a factor that when multiplied by reference evapotranspiration, estimates the amount of water used by plants. For purposes of this chapter, the average plant factor of low water using plants ranges from 0 to 0.3, for average water using plants the range is 0.4 to 0.6, and for high water using plants the range is 0.7 to 1.0. 
"Rain-sensing device" means a system which automatically shuts off the irrigation system when it rains. 
"Record drawing or as-builts" means a set of reproducible drawings which show significant changes in the work made during construction and which are usually based on drawings marked up in the field and other data furnished by the contractor. 
"Recreational area" means areas of active play or recreation such as sports fields, school yards, picnic grounds, or other areas with intense foot traffic. 
"Recycled water," reclaimed water" or "treated sewage effluent water" means treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for nonpotable uses such as landscape irrigation; not intended for human consumption. 
"Reference evapotranspiration" or ETo means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is given in inches per day, month, or year. For the Delano-McFarland area the reference evapotranspiration in inches per month are: 
Jan 0.9 	Apr 4.7 	Jul 8.5 	Oct 3.4 
Feb 1.8 	May 6.6 	Aug 7.3 	Nov 1.4 
Mar 3.1 	Jun 7.7 	Sep 5.4 	Dec 0.7 
 
The annual ETo is 52.0. 
The ETo is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four to seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well-watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowances so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated. 
"Rehabilitated landscape" means any relandscaping project that requires a permit. 
"Runoff" means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the area. For example, runoff may result from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a severe slope. 
"Soil-moisture-sensing device" means a device that measures the amount of moisture in the soil. 
"Soil texture" means the classification of soil based on the percentage of sand, silt and clay in the soil. 
"Sprinkler head" means a device which sprays water through a nozzle. 
"Static water pressure" means the pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when water is not flowing. 
"Station" means an area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously. 
"Turf" means a surface layer of earth containing mowed grass with its roots. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, Perennial ryegrass, Red fescue, and Tall fescue are cool-season grasses. Bermudagrass, Kikuyugrass, Seashore paspalum, St. Augustinegrass, Zoysiagrass, and Buffalo grass are warm-season grasses. 
"Valve" means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system. 
"Water conservation concept statement" means a one-page checklist and a narrative summary of the project. 
(Ord. 254 §2(part), 1992)  
15.30.020 - Provisions for new or rehabilitated landscapes-Applicability. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection (A)(3) below, Sections 15.30.020 through 15.30.050 shall apply to: 
1.  All new and rehabilitated landscaping for public agency projects and private development projects that require a permit; and 
2.  Developer-installed landscaping in single-family and multiple-family projects. 
B.  Sections 15.30.020 through 15.30.050 shall not apply to: 
1.  Homeowner-provided landscaping at single-family and multifamily projects; 
2.  Cemeteries; 
3.  Registered historical sites; 
4.  Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; 
5.  Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or 
6.  Any project with a landscaped area less than two thousand five hundred square feet. 
(Ord. 254 §2(part), 1992)  
15.30.030 - Landscape documentation package-Required. 
A.  A copy of the landscape documentation package conforming to this chapter shall be submitted to the city. No permit shall be issued until the city reviews and approves the landscape documentation package. 
B.  A copy of the approved landscape documentation package shall be provided to the property owner or site manager along with the record drawings and any other information normally forwarded to the property owner or site manager. 
C.  A copy of the water conservation concept statement and the certificate of substantial completion shall be sent by the project manager to the McFarland Mutual Water Company. 
D.  Each landscape documentation package shall include the following elements, which are described in Section 15.30.040: 
1.  Water conservation concept statement; 
2.  Calculation of the maximum applied water allowance; 
3.  Calculation of the estimated applied water use; 
4.  Calculation of the estimated total water use; 
5.  Landscape design plan; 
6.  Irrigation design plan; 
7.  Irrigation schedules; 
8.  Maintenance schedule; 
9.  Landscape irrigation audit schedule; 
10.  Grading design plan; 
11.  Soil analysis; 
12.  Certificate of substantial completion (to be submitted after installation of the project). 
E.  If effective precipitation is included in the calculation of the estimated total water use, then an effective precipitation disclosure statement from the landscape professional and the property owner shall be submitted with the landscape documentation package. 
(Ord. 254 §2(part), 1992)  
15.30.040 - Landscape documentation package-Elements. 
A.  Water Conservation Concept Statement. 
Each landscape documentation package shall include a cover sheet, referred to as the water conservation concept statement. It serves as a checklist to verify that the elements of the landscape documentation package have been completed and has a narrative summary of the project. 
B.  The Maximum Applied Water Allowance. 
1.  A project's maximum applied water allowance shall be calculated using the following formula: 
MAWA 	= 	(ETo) (0.8) (LA) (0.62) where: 

MAWA 	= 	Maximum applied water allowance (gallons per year) 
ETo 	= 	Reference evapotranspiration (inches/year) 
0.8 	= 	ET adjustment factor 
LA 	= 	Landscaped area (square feet) 
0.62 	= 	Conversion factor (to gallons/square foot) 
 
2.  Two example calculations of the maximum applied water allowance are: 
a.  Project Site One. Landscaped area of fifty thousand square feet in Fresno: 
MAWA = (ETo) (.8) (LA) (.62) 
= (51 inches) (.8) (50,000 sq. ft.) (.62) 
Maximum applied water allowance = 1,264,800 gallons per year or 1,691 hundred- 
cubic-feet per year: 1,264/748 = 1,691 
b.  Project Site Two. Landscaped area of fifty thousand square feet in San Francisco: 
MAWA = (ETo) (.8) (LA) (.62) 
= (35 inches) (.8) (50,000 sq. ft.) (.62) 
Maximum applied water allowance = 868,000 gallons per year or 1,160 hundred-cubic-feet per year. 
3.  Portions of landscaped areas in public and private projects such as parks, playgrounds, sport fields, golf courses, or school yards where turf provides a playing surface or serves other recreational purposes are considered recreational areas and may require water in addition to the maximum applied water allowance. A statement shall be included with the landscape design plan, designating recreational areas to be used for such purposes and specifying any needed amount of additional water above the maximum applied water allowance. 
C.  Estimated Applied Water Use. 
1.  The estimated applied water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. 
2.  A calculation of the estimated applied water use shall be submitted with the landscape documentation package. It may be calculated by summing the amount of water recommended in the irrigation schedule. 
D.  Estimated Total Water Use. 
1.  A calculation of the estimated total water use shall be submitted with the landscape documentation package. The estimated total water use may be calculated by summing the amount of water recommended in the irrigation schedule and adding any amount of water expected from effective precipitation (not to exceed twenty-five percent of the local annual mean precipitation) or may be calculated from a formula such as the following: 
The estimated total water use for the entire landscaped area equals the sum of the estimated water use of all hydrozones in that landscaped area. 
EWU (hydrozone) 	= 	(ETo) (PF) (HA) (.62) 
		    (IE) 
EWU (hydrozone) 	= 	Estimated water use (gallons/year) 
ETo 	= 	Reference evapotranspiration (inches/year) 
PF 	= 	Plant factor 
HA 	= 	Hydrozone area (sq ft) 
(.62) 	= 	Conversion factor 
IE 	= 	Irrigation efficiency 
 
2.  If the estimated total water use is greater than the estimated applied water use due to precipitation being included as a source of water, an effective precipitation disclosure statement shall be included in the landscape documentation package. 
E.  Landscape Design Plan. A landscape design plan meeting the following requirements shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package: 
1.  Plant Selection Grouping. 
a.  Any plants may be used in the landscape, providing the estimated applied water use recommended does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance and that the plants meet the specifications set forth in subsections (E)(1)(b), (c) and (d). 
b.  Plants having similar water use shall be grouped together in distinct hydrozones. 
c.  Plants shall be selected appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic and topographical conditions of the site. Protection and preservation of native species and natural areas is encouraged. The planting of trees is encouraged wherever it is consistent with the other provisions of this chapter. 
d.  Fire prevention needs shall be addressed in areas that are fire prone. Information about fire-prone areas and appropriate landscaping for fire safety is available from local fire departments or the California Department of Forestry. 
2.  Water Features. 
a.  Recirculating water shall be used for decorative water features. 
b.  Pool and spa covers are encouraged. 
3.  Landscape Design Plan Specifications. The landscape design plan shall be drawn on project base sheets at a scale that accurately and clearly identifies: 
a.  Designation of hydrozones; 
b.  Landscape materials, trees, shrubs, groundcover, turf and other vegetation. Planting symbols shall be clearly drawn and plants labeled by botanical name, common name, container size, spacing, and quantities of each group of plants indicated; 
c.  Property lines and street names; 
d.  Streets, driveways, walkways and other paved areas; 
e.  Pools, ponds, water features, fences and retaining walls; 
f.  Existing and proposed buildings and structures including elevation if applicable; 
g.  Natural features including but not limited to rock outcroppings, existing trees and shrubs that will remain; 
h.  Tree staking, plant installation, soil preparation details and any other applicable planting and installation details; 
i.  A calculation of the total landscaped area; 
j.  Designation of recreational areas. 
F.  Irrigation Design Plan. An irrigation design plan meeting the following conditions shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package: 
1.  Irrigation Design Criteria. 
a.  Runoff and Overspray. 
i.  Soil types and infiltration rate shall be considered when designing irrigation systems. All irrigation systems shall be designed to avoid runoff, low-head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, walks, roadways or structures. Proper irrigation equipment and schedules, including features such as repeat cycles, shall be used to closely match application rates to infiltration rates therefore minimizing runoff. 
ii.  Special attention shall be given to avoid runoff on slopes and to avoid overspray in planting areas with a width less than ten feet, and in median strips. 
iii.  No overhead sprinkler irrigation systems shall be installed in median strips less than ten feet wide. 
b.  Irrigation Efficiency. For the purposes of determining the maximum applied water allowance, irrigation efficiency is assumed to be 0.625. Irrigation systems shall be designed, maintained, and managed to meet or exceed 0.625 efficiency. 
c.  Equipment. 
i.  Water meters. Separate landscape water meters shall be installed for all projects except for single-family homes or any project with a landscaped area of less than five thousand square feet. 
ii.  Controllers. Automatic control systems shall be required for all irrigation systems and must be able to accommodate all aspects of the design. 
iii.  Valves. Plants which require different amounts of water shall be irrigated by separate valves. If one valve is used for a given area, only plants with similar water use shall be used in that area. Anti-drain (check) valves shall be installed in strategic points to minimize or prevent low-head drainage. 
iv.  Sprinkler Heads. Heads and emitters shall have consistent application rates within each control valve circuit. Sprinkler heads shall be selected for proper area coverage, application rate, operating pressure, adjustment capability and ease of maintenance. 
v.  Rain-Sensing Override Devices. Rain-sensing override devices shall be required on all irrigation systems. 
vi.  Soil-Moisture-Sensing Devices. It is recommended that soil-moisture-sensing devices be considered where appropriate. 
2.  Recycled Water. 
a.  The installation of recycled water irrigation systems (dual distribution systems) shall be required to allow for the current and future use of recycled water, unless a written exemption has been granted as described in the following section. 
b.  Irrigation systems shall make use of recycled water unless a written exemption has been granted by the local water agency, stating that recycled water meeting all health standards is not available and will not be available in the foreseeable future. 
c.  The recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed and operated in accordance with all local state and county codes. 
3.  Irrigation Design Plan Specifications. 
a.  Irrigation systems shall be designed to be consistent with hydrozones. 
b.  The irrigation design plan shall be drawn on project base sheets. It shall be separate from, but use the same format as, the landscape design plan. The scale shall be the same as that used for the landscape design plan described earlier. 
c.  The irrigation design plan shall accurately and clearly identify: 
i.  Location and size of separate water meters for the landscape; 
ii.  Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system, including automatic controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture-sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers and backflow prevention devices; 
iii.  Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply; 
iv.  Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour) and design operating pressure (psi) for each station; 
v.  Recycled water irrigation systems as specified in the previous section. 
G.  Irrigation Schedules. Irrigation schedules satisfying the following conditions shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. 
1.  An annual irrigation program with monthly schedules shall be required for the plant establishment period, for the established landscape, and for any temporarily irrigated areas. 
2.  The irrigation schedule shall: 
a.  Include run time (in minutes per cycle), suggested number of cycles per day, and frequency if irrigation for each station; and 
b.  Provide the amount of applied water (in hundred cubic feet, gallons, or in whatever billing units the local water supplier uses) recommended on a monthly and annual basis. 
3.  The total amount of water for the project shall include water designated in the estimated total water use calculation plus water needed for any water features, which shall be considered as a high water using hydrozone. 
4.  Recreational areas designated in the landscape design plan shall be highlighted and the irrigation schedule shall indicate if any additional water is needed above the maximum applied water allowance because of high plant factors (but not due to irrigation inefficiency). 
5.  Whenever possible, irrigation scheduling shall incorporate the use of evapotranspiration data such as those from the California Irrigation Management Information System (CIMIS) weather stations to apply the appropriate levels of water for different climates. 
6.  Whenever possible, landscape irrigation shall be scheduled between two a.m. and ten a.m. to avoid irrigation during times of high wind or high temperature. 
H.  Maintenance Schedules. A regular maintenance schedule satisfying the following conditions shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package: 
1.  Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule shall include but not be limited to checking, adjusting, and repairing irrigation equipment; resetting the automatic controller; aerating and dethatching turf areas; replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning and weeding in all landscaped areas. 
2.  Whenever possible, repair of irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally specified materials or their equivalents. 
I.  Landscape Irrigation Audit Schedules. A schedule of landscape irrigation audits, for all but single-family residences, satisfying the following conditions shall be submitted to the city as part of the landscape documentation package. 
1.  At a minimum, audits shall be in accordance with the State Landscape Water Management Program as described in the Landscape Irrigation Auditor Handbook, the entire document, which is incorporated by reference. (See Landscape Irrigation Auditor Handbook, June 1990 version 5.5, formerly Master Auditor Training.) 
2.  The schedule shall provide for landscape irrigation audits to be conducted by the city at least once every five years, as time and personnel permits. 
J.  Grading Design Plan. Grading design plans satisfying the following conditions shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. 
1.  A grading design plan shall be drawn on project sheets. It shall be separate from, but use the same format as, the landscape design plan. 
2.  The grading design plan shall indicate finished configuration and elevations of the landscaped area, including the height of graded slopes, drainage patterns, pad elevations and finish grade. 
K.  Soils. 
1.  A soil analysis satisfying the following conditions shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package: 
a.  Determination of soil texture, indicating the percentage of organic matter; 
b.  An approximate soil infiltration rate (either measured or derived from soil texture/infiltration rate tables). A range of infiltration rates shall be noted where appropriate; 
c.  Measure of pH, and total soluble salts. 
2.  A mulch of at least three inches shall be applied to all planting areas except turf. 
L.  Certification. 
1.  Upon completing the installation of the landscaping and the irrigation system, an irrigation audit shall be conducted by a city irrigation auditor prior to the final field observation. 
2.  A licensed landscape architect or contractor, certified irrigation designer, or other licensed or certified professional in a related field shall conduct a final field observation and shall provide a certificate of substantial completion to the city. The certificate shall specifically indicate that plants were installed as specified, that the irrigation system was installed as designed, and that an irrigation audit has been performed, along with a list of any observed deficiencies. 
3.  Certification shall be accomplished by completing a certificate of substantial completion and delivering it to the city, to the retail water supplier, and to the owner of record. A sample of such a form shall be provided by the city. 
(Ord. 254 §2(part), 1992)  
15.30.050 - Public education. 
A.  Publications. 
1.  The city shall provide information to owners of all new single-family residential homes regarding the design, installation and maintenance of water-efficient landscapes. 
2.  Information about the efficient use of landscape water shall be provided to water users throughout the community. 
B.  Model Homes. At least one model home that is landscaped in each project consisting of eight or more homes shall demonstrate via signs and information the principles of water-efficient landscapes described in this chapter. 
1.  Signs shall be used to identify the model as an example of a water-efficient landscape and featuring elements such as hydrozones, irrigation equipment and others which contribute to the overall water-efficient theme. 
2.  Information shall be provided about designing, installing, and maintaining water-efficient landscapes. 
(Ord. 254 §2(part), 1992)  
15.30.060 - Provisions for existing landscapes. 
A.  Water Management. All existing landscaped areas to which the city, the McFarland Unified School District, the county of Kern, the McFarland Mutual Water Company or the McFarland recreation and park district, provides water that are five acres or more, including golf courses, green belts, common areas, multifamily housing, schools, business parks, cemeteries and public-owned landscapes shall have a landscape irrigation audit at least every five years as city time and personnel permits. At a minimum, the audit shall be in accordance with the California Landscape Water Management Program as described in the Landscape Irrigation Auditor Handbook, the entire document which is incorporated by reference (see Landscape Irrigation Auditor Handbook, Dept. of Water Resources, Water Conservation Office, June 1990 version 5.5). 
1.  If the project's water bills indicate that they are using less than or equal to the maximum applied water allowance for that project site, an audit shall not be required. 
2.  Recognition of projects that stay within the maximum applied water allowance is encouraged. 
B.  Water Waste Prevention. Water waste resulting from inefficient landscape irrigation is to be prevented by the prohibiting of runoff, low-head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions, where water flows onto adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, walks, roadways or structures. 
(Ord. 254 §2(part), 1992)  
15.30.070 - Effective precipitation. 
If effective precipitation is included in the calculation of the estimated total water use, an effective precipitation disclosure statement shall be completed, signed and submitted with the landscape documentation package. No more than twenty-five percent of the local annual mean precipitation shall be considered effective precipitation in the calculation of the estimated total water use. 
(Ord. 254 §2(part), 1992)  
15.30.080 - Violation-Penalty. 
Every person violating or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding the sum of four hundred fifty dollars for the first violation and eight hundred fifty dollars for the second and all subsequent violations or by imprisonment for not more than ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which the violation of, or failure, neglect or refusal to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person. 
(Ord. 254 §2(part), 1992)  
Title 16 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 16.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.04.010 - Scope. 
The provisions of this title shall be supplemental to those of the Subdivision Map Act of the state and shall apply to all subdivisions within the city. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provisions of this title shall apply to activity requiring a building permit whether or not the activity relates to a subdivision where specifically described herein. 
(Ord. 182 §1, 1980) 
(Ord. No. 323-2007, § 1(A), 10-11-07)  
16.04.020 - Definitions generally. 
For the purposes of this title, certain words and phrases used in this title are defined as follows in this chapter. 
(Ord. 182 §2(part), 1980)  
16.04.030 - Alley. 
"Alley" means a public way permanently reserved primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of property otherwise abutting on a street. 
(Ord. 182 §2(A), 1980)  
16.04.040 - Arterial street. 
"Arterial street" means a street designated as an arterial street on the general plan or an element thereof which, because of its design and location with respect to other streets or other sources of traffic, is used or designed to carry relatively heavy volumes of traffic through an urban area or between urban areas, which serve as an approach to a highway or freeway. 
(Ord. 182 §2(B), 1980)  
16.04.050 - Bicycle path. 
"Bicycle path" means a strip or parcel of land permanently reserved and designed for use by bicyclists, not located within a street or right-of-way. 
(Ord. 182 §2(C), 1980)  
16.04.060 - Block. 
"Block" means the distance, measured along a street center line between the centerlines of intersecting streets, between the centerline of an intersecting street and the end of that street. 
(Ord. 182 §2(D), 1980)  
16.04.070 - City. 
"City" means the city of McFarland. 
(Ord. 182 §2(E), 1980)  
16.04.080 - Collector street. 
"Collector street" means a street designated as a collector street on the general plan or an element thereof which, because of its location with respect to other streets and other sources of traffic, is used or designed to carry moderately heavy volumes of traffic between portions of urban areas or between arterial streets. 
(Ord. 182 §2(F), 1980)  
16.04.090 - Commission. 
"Commission" means the planning commission of the city. 
(Ord. 182 §2(G), 1980)  
16.04.100 - Cul-de-sac street. 
"Cul-de-sac street" means a street having only one outlet for vehicular traffic and which is not intended to be extended or continued to serve future subdivisions on adjacent lands. 
(Ord. 182 §2(H), 1980)  
16.04.110 - Frontage street. 
"Frontage street" means a local street which is parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street or limited-access highway and which provides access to abutting properties while relieving them of the effects of heavy volumes of fast through traffic. 
(Ord. 182 §2(I), 1980)  
16.04.120 - Local street. 
"Local street" means a street which, because of its design and location with respect to other streets, is used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
(Ord. 182 §2(J), 1980)  
16.04.130 - Lot. 
"Lot" means a parcel of subdivided land under one ownership used, or susceptible to being used, in accordance with the provisions of this title and in accordance with the zoning regulations applicable to the district in which the parcel is located. 
(Ord. 182 §2(K), 1980)  
16.04.140 - Nonaccess strip. 
"Nonaccess strip" means a strip adjoining the property line, within a street right-of- way, which is intended to prevent access to abutting properties from the street. 
(Ord. 182 §2(L), 1980)  
16.04.150 - Pedestrian way. 
"Pedestrian way" means a public way designed and intended for use by pedestrians and which is not located within a street right-of-way. 
(Ord. 182 §2(M), 1980)  
16.04.160 - Planting strip. 
"Planting strip" means a strip adjoining the sidewalk within a street right-of-way or between the pavement of a frontage street and the arterial street or limited-access highway it parallels, which is intended to be planted with trees or otherwise landscaped. 
(Ord. 182 §2(N), 1980)  
16.04.170 - Sidewalk. 
"Sidewalk" means a way designed for use by pedestrians, which is located within a street right-of-way. 
(Ord. 182 §2(O), 1980)  
16.04.180 - Standard specifications. 
"Standard specifications" means the specifications of the city pertaining to subdivision design and improvements. 
(Ord. 182 §2(P), 1980)  
16.04.190 - Stubbed street. 
"Stubbed street" means a street having only one outlet for vehicular traffic and which is intended to be extended or continued to serve future subdivisions on adjacent lands. 
(Ord. 182 §2(Q), 1980)  
16.04.200 - Subdivision Map Act. 
A.  "Subdivision Map Act" means the applicable provisions of the Government Code of the state, governing the subdivision and/or resubdivision of land in the state. 
B.  All terms, unless defined in this section, which are defined in the Subdivision Map Act of the state, shall have the same meaning as ascribed to them in the Act, and as the Act may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. 182 §2(R, S), 1980)  
Chapter 16.08 - ADVISORY AGENCY AND SUBDIVISION REVIEW BOARD 
Sections: 
 
16.08.010 - Advisory agency. 
The commission is designated as the advisory agency referred to in the Subdivision Map Act of the state and is charged with the duty of making investigations and reports on the design and improvements of proposed subdivisions and is authorized to recommend to the city council that the council approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove tentative maps of subdivisions prepared and filed with the city according to the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act. The city planner is designated as executive secretary to the advisory agency with the authority to receive preliminary and tentative maps of proposed subdivisions according to the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 182 §3(A), 1980)  
16.08.020 - Subdivision review board. 
There is established a subdivision review board consisting of the city manager, the director of public works, the city engineer, the city planner (or their representatives), and such other members as may be prescribed by the city manager. The subdivision review board shall have the powers and duties specified by the ordinance codified in this title and shall function in an advisory capacity to the planning commission and city council. 
(Ord. 182 §3(B), 1980)  
Chapter 16.12 - DESIGN STANDARDS 
Sections: 
 
16.12.010 - Conformance to plans. 
All subdivision maps shall conform to any specific plans of streets, public areas or other projects adopted by the council. There shall be conformance to the principles and standards of the general plan or elements thereof, and to the city's zoning regulations. In the absence of a general or master plan, the street system in a proposed subdivision shall relate to the existing streets in the area adjoining the subdivision. 
(Ord. 182 §4(A), 1980)  
16.12.020 - Arterial streets. 
Arterial streets shall conform to the standard specifications adopted by the council for subdivision improvements. 
(Ord. 182 §4(B), 1980)  
16.12.030 - Collector streets. 
Collector streets shall conform to the standard specifications adopted by the council for subdivision improvements. 
(Ord. 182 §4(C), 1980)  
16.12.040 - Local streets and cul-de-sacs. 
Local streets shall conform to the standard specifications adopted by the council for subdivision improvements. Cul-de-sac streets shall be not more than six hundred feet in length, measured from the centerline of the intersecting through street to the center of the cul-de-sac, and shall be terminated by a turnaround of not less than fifty feet radius. Local streets shall be laid out so that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
(Ord. 182 §4(D), 1980)  
16.12.050 - Frontage streets. 
Along arterial streets or highways, a frontage street separated from the arterial street or highway by an adequate separation, when indicated by a master or precise plan, may be required for access to abutting private property and local streets. 
(Ord. 182 §4(E), 1980)  
16.12.060 - Street curves and tangents. 
A minimum centerline radius of at least five hundred feet shall be used on all arterial streets. Curves on local streets shall have minimum radii of two hundred thirty-five feet. 
(Ord. 182 §4(F), 1980)  
16.12.070 - Street corner property line radii. 
Street corner radii shall be twenty feet. 
(Ord. 182 §4(G), 1980)  
16.12.080 - Street intersections. 
Street intersections shall be as near right angles as practicable. 
(Ord. 182 §4(H), 1980)  
16.12.090 - Alignment of continuation of streets. 
Streets which are a continuation of streets in contiguous territory shall be aligned so that their centerlines will coincide. In cases where straight line continuations are not physically possible, such centerlines shall be continued by curves. 
(Ord. 182 §4(I), 1980)  
16.12.100 - Alleys. 
Alleys twenty feet wide will be required at the rear of all lots zoned for, or to be used for, commercial or industrial purposes. Where two alleys intersect, the corner shall be cut on a straight line connecting points on both lot lines fifteen feet from the projected intersection of the alleys. 
(Ord. 182 §4(J), 1980)  
16.12.110 - Lot frontage. 
All lots shall have a frontage on a public street. Lots having double frontage should be avoided but where unavoidable should have depths of not less than two hundred feet, except where access is limited to one street frontage only or such double frontage is necessitated by topographical or physical conditions. 
(Ord. 182 §4(K), 1980)  
16.12.120 - Lot boundary lines. 
No lot shall be divided by the boundary line of the city, a school district or any other taxing district. 
(Ord. 182 §4(L), 1980)  
16.12.130 - Size of blocks. 
Blocks less than four hundred feet in length may be cause for disapproval of the tentative map, but in no case shall blocks be longer than one thousand three hundred twenty feet in residential subdivisions. Block length is measured along the street centerline on which the lots front; blocks which have no lots fronting thereon may be of a lesser length. 
(Ord. 182 §4(M), 1980)  
16.12.140 - Size of blocks adjacent to arterial streets. 
Long blocks shall be desirable adjacent to arterial streets in order to reduce the number of intersections. The dimensions of such blocks measured at right angles to such arterial streets shall be sufficient to allow for two tiers of lots except when access from lots is limited to one frontage street only. 
(Ord. 182 §4(N), 1980)  
16.12.150 - Commercial and industrial areas. 
When property is designated for commercial or industrial use whether in the general plan, an element thereof or the zoning regulations, the plan of the subdivision shall be appropriate for such uses. Streets shall have adequate capacity to handle the anticipated traffic which will utilize them. As far as practicable, streets shall be laid out so that there will be direct access to the commercial or industrial area from arterial or collector streets without utilizing local streets traversing residential areas. Lot areas and dimensions shall be adequate to accommodate the yard spaces, off-street parking facilities and off-street loading facilities required by the zoning regulations. 
(Ord. 182 §4(O), 1980)  
16.12.160 - Undergrounding of utilities in new subdi visions. 
Utility distribution facilities and lines, including, but not limited to, electric, communication, street lighting and cable television shall be placed underground in any residential, commercial or industrial subdivision. The subdivider shall be responsible for complying with the requirements of this chapter, and the subdivider shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies for the installation of and access to such facilities. For the purposes of this chapter, appurtenances and associated equipment such as, but not limited to, surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, and meter cabinets may be placed aboveground. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to utility distribution facilities and lines which do not provide service to the area being subdivided. 
(Ord. 182 §4(P), 1980)  
16.12.170 - Streets in subdivisions adjoining unsub divided land. 
Where a subdivision adjoins unsubdivided land, streets which may be necessary to assure the proper subdivision of the adjoining land shall be provided to the boundary line of the subdivision. A temporary turnaround of a fifty-foot radius shall be provided at the end of a stubbed street where it is determined by the planning commission to be necessary for the movement of emergency vehicles. 
(Ord. 182 §4(Q), 1980)  
16.12.180 - Reserve strips. 
A.  A one-foot reserve strip shall be provided at the dead-end of a stubbed street or at the edge of a partial width street and shall be offered to the city for dedication thereto for future street purposes. 
B.  Reserve strips shall be designated on the final map of the subdivision and shall be specifically referred to in the dedication certificate. 
(Ord. 182 §4(R), 1980)  
16.12.190 - Private streets. 
Private streets shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. 182 §4(S), 1980)  
16.12.200 - Walkways. 
The subdivider may be required to dedicate and improve walkways through long blocks or to provide access to schools, parks or other public areas. 
(Ord. 182 §4(T), 1980)  
16.12.210 - Flood hazards. 
The city engineer shall review all subdivision proposals to assure that: 
A.  All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
B.  All public facilities and utilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, are located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
C.  Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. 182 §4(U), 1980)  
16.12.220 - Watercourses, drainage and flood control. 
The subdivider shall, subject to riparian rights, dedicate right-of-way as may be approved by the city engineer for storm drainage purposes conforming substantially with the lines of any natural watercourse or channel, stream, or creek that traverses the subdivision, or provide by dedication further and sufficient easements or construction or both, as approved by the city engineer, to dispose of surface stormwater. All flood control works to be constructed within selected flood lines shall be subject to approval by the city engineer. In those cases where all or a portion of a subdivision is located within a floodplain, and the subdivider is required to construct flood control works which will be dedicated to the city, the city may require that the subdivider enter into an agreement with the city for the construction of such flood control works. The city may require the subdivider to provide security to carry out his obligations under such an agreement, and the type and amount of such security and provisions for release of such security shall be set forth in the agreement. 
(Ord. 182 §4(V), 1980)  
Chapter 16.16 - SUBDIVISION CONFERENCE 
Sections: 
 
16.16.010 - Letter of intention to subdivide. 
A.  Prior to the filing of a tentative map, a subdivider shall submit a letter to the city clerk indicating his intention to subdivide. Such letter of intention is required to alert city officials and interested public and private agencies of the intention to subdivide so that such interested parties may have an opportunity to inform the subdivider of physical conditions, facts and policies of the respective agencies which are or may be pertinent to the preparation of the tentative map. 
B.  The subdivider shall submit twenty copies of the letter of intention to subdivide to the city clerk. The city clerk shall transmit one copy to each member of the planning commission and the city council, and one copy to the city engineer, together with requests for recommendations thereon. Additional copies of the letter of intention shall be transmitted by the city clerk to school districts, water districts, irrigation districts, the State Division of Highways, utility companies and other public and private agencies when affected by the proposed subdivision, together with request for recommendations thereon. 
C.  A preliminary map or sketch may be submitted by the subdivider as an aid to review and discussion of his design proposals. When a preliminary sketch is submitted, the number of copies and method of distribution required under subsection A of this section shall apply. 
(Ord. 182 §5(A), 1980)  
16.16.020 - Information on letter of intention. 
The letter of intention shall contain the following information: 
A.  Location of the proposed subdivision with reference to section,township and range, and with reference to the names for any streets which border the property; 
B.  Names and addresses of record owner(s) and subdivider; 
C.  The area of the parcel, range of lot sizes, and uses contemplated for the subdivision; 
D.  Proposed methods of utility service; 
E.  Such other information as will be helpful to indicate the intent of the subdivider. 
(Ord. 182 §5(B), 1980)  
16.16.030 - Subdivision conference. 
Within twenty days after the receipt of the letter of intention by the city clerk, the city clerk shall schedule a subdivision conference with the subdivider and/or his engineer. The subdivision review board shall attend the conference. Representatives of other public and private agencies affected by the proposed subdivision may attend and shall be encouraged by the city clerk to attend the subdivision conference. Representatives of the city and other public and private agencies may transmit such information and make such recommendations to the subdivider as they deem desirable for the benefit of the subdivider in preparing the tentative map. As a result of the discussion conducted during the subdivision conference, the subdivider may request such additional meetings with participants in the subdivision conference or with the city council as may be necessary to clarify policies of the city or other public or private agencies which may have an effect on the proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. 182 §5(C), 1980)  
Chapter 16.20 - TENTATIVE MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.20.010 - Preparation-Filing. 
A.  The tentative map shall be prepared in accord with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title and shall be filed with the city clerk. Such filing shall be prior to the completion of final surveys of streets and lots and before the start of any grading or construction work within the proposed subdivision. 
B.  A minimum of twenty copies of the tentative map, plus one sepia, and accompanying reports and statements shall be submitted to the city clerk at the time of filing. Filing of required documents shall be deemed official upon a written receipt notice from the city clerk. 
(Ord. 182 §6(A), 1980)  
16.20.020 - Review by subdivision review board. 
A.  All tentative maps of subdivisions shall be reviewed by the subdivision review board prior to the submission of such tentative map to the planning commission. 
B.  The subdivision review board shall examine and review the following: 
1.  The completeness and accuracy of the tentative map and the suitability of the land for purposes of subdivision; 
2.  Conformity of the overall design of the subdivision to the general plan and all pertinent requirements of this chapter and other laws and plans of the city; 
3.  The provisions for, and suitability of, street improvements, underground utilities, fire hydrants, street lights, storm drains, streets, trees and sidewalks; 
4.  The adequacy of the water supply, sewage disposal and easements for utilities and drainage; 
5.  Provisions for public areas, including parks, schools, public utilities facilities, etc. 
C.  If any portion of the subdivision is in conflict with any of the requirements of the ordinance codified in this title, other ordinances, or state law, the subdivision review board shall, to the best of its ability, advise the subdivider of such conflicts. 
D.  The subdivision review board may deem it advisable to recommend additional improvements, easements, dedications, etc., to be included, in which case the subdivider shall be duly informed of the nature of the recommendations following the subdivision review board meeting. 
E.  The subdivision review board shall make a report of its findings to the planning commission, and shall furnish a copy of that report to the subdivider, in writing, no less than three days prior to the planning commission meeting at which the tentative map is to be considered by the commission. 
(Ord. 182 §6(B), 1980)  
16.20.030 - Fees. 
Filing fees to cover the costs of processing and checking shall be paid for each tentative map at the time of filing in amounts as may be adopted by the city council from time to time by resolution. If, after approval of a tentative map, revisions of the initial map are filed or a new tentative map is filed covering the same or additional land, each filing shall be considered as a new subdivision, and the subdivider shall pay in the manner above stated a fee in the amount of fifty percent of the original filing fee; provided, however, there shall be no charge for filing of changes in tentative maps to meet the requirements of the city. 
(Ord. 182 §6(C), 1980)  
16.20.040 - Size of map. 
The tentative map shall show the entire subdivision on one or more eighteen-by-twenty- six-inch sheets at a scale of not less than two hundred feet to the inch. 
(Ord. 182 §6(D), 1980)  
16.20.050 - Information required on map. 
Each tentative map shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name of the proposed subdivision, and designation as a tentative map. 
2.  The name and address of the owner of the property proposed to be subdivided. 
3.  The name and address of the subdivider. 
4.  The name of the person or firm who prepared the map. 
5.  The approximate acreage. 
6.  The north point. 
7.  The scale. 
8.  The date. 
9.  The boundary line. 
10.  The location and width of all streets within the boundaries of the proposed subdivision. 
11.  The proposed name of all streets within the boundaries of the proposed subdivision; proposed streets which are obviously in line with others already named and existing should be given the same name. 
12.  The name, location and width of adjacent streets. 
13.  The width and location of alleys. 
14.  The lot lines and approximate dimensions; lots shall be numbered consecutively. 
15.  The approximate location and width of watercourses or areas subject to inundation from floods, including floodplain boundaries, and the location of structures, irrigation districts and other permanent physical features. 
16.  An accurate description of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision or legal description of the property comprising the subdivision, a vicinity map indicating the location of the proposed subdivision in relation to the surrounding area or region. 
17.  The width and location of all existing or proposed public or private easements. 
18.  The proposed use of lots as to desired residential, commercial, industrial or other uses. 
19.  Any railroads. 
20.  The approximate radius of curves. 
21.  Approximate contours drawn to one foot contour intervals. 
22.  The zoning district in which the proposed subdivision is located. 
23.  The general plan land use designated for the area of the proposed subdivision. 
24.  Any public areas proposed. 
25.  The dimensions and locations of any existing buildings which are to remain in place on the property; the variety, size and location of all existing trees having a diameter of four inches or greater, except orchard trees, which shall be shown by general area, location and spacing or rows. 
26.  The locations of any existing wells, pipelines or septic tanks. 
27.  Any of the foregoing information as may not practicably be shown on the map shall be contained in a written statement accompanying the map. 
(Ord. 182 §6(E), 1980)  
16.20.060 - Accompanying reports and statements. 
A.  Information Required. The tentative map shall contain or be accompanied by reports and/or written statements from the subdivider giving essential information regarding the following matters: 
1.  The source of water supply. 
2.  The type of street improvements, and utilities which the subdivider proposes to install. 
3.  The proposed method of sewage disposal. 
4.  The proposed stormwater, sewage or other means of drainage. 
5.  The proposed tree planting and related landscaping. 
6.  Preliminary title reports of the entire property. 
7.  If a subdivision is to be developed as consecutive individual units, it shall be so stated on the tentative map and the order and approximate dates of completion shall be given at the time of filing of the tentative map. 
B.  Distribution of Filed Maps. When the tentative maps, accompanying reports and statements are filed, the city clerk shall immediately forward copies of each to the following agencies: 
1.  The city engineer (two copies plus one sepia). 
2.  The county health officer (one copy). 
3.  All applicable school districts (one copy each). 
4.  All utility companies involved (two copies each). 
5.  The irrigation or drainage district, if any (one copy). 
6.  The city planner (one copy). 
7.  The building inspector (one copy). 
8.  The California Regional Water Quality Control Board (one copy). 
9.  Other agencies as required. 
Such agencies shall respond within fifteen days after the date of submission of the tentative map for their comments to be considered by the commission. 
C.  Staff Reports. Any report or recommendation on a tentative map by the staff of the commission or the council shall be in writing and a copy thereof served on the subdivider at least three days prior to any hearing or action on such map by the commission or the council. 
D.  Commission Approval. Within fifty days after the tentative map has been filed with the city clerk or at such later date as may be required to concurrently process the appurtenant environmental review documents required by state law and local ordinances, the commission shall report in writing to the subdivider and to the council their recommendations regarding approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of the map and the conditions on which such action is based. On the official filed copy of the tentative map, or attached thereto, a statement shall be made covering such action. Such report shall be transmitted to the city council at its next succeeding meeting. 
E.  Council Action. The city council may overrule or modify any ruling or determination of the commission in regard to a tentative map and may make conditional exceptions if special circumstances pertaining to the property involved justify a variance to the provisions of this chapter within the time limits prescribed by the Subdivision Map Act. 
F.  Expiration of Approved or Conditionally Approved Tentative Map. Failure to record a final map within twenty- four months after approval or conditional approval of the tentative map subject to exceptions and extensions of time provided in the Subdivision Map Act shall terminate all proceedings; provided, however, that upon application of the subdivider in writing, an extension not exceeding one year may be granted by the planning commission. In the event the planning commission denies a subdivider's application for extension, the subdivider may appeal to the city council. Where proceedings have terminated because of failure to record a final map or failure to receive extension by the planning commission or the city council, a new tentative map shall be filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter before a final map thereafter is recorded or any lot sold. 
(Ord. 210 §18(A, B), 1987; Ord. 182 §6(F), 1980)  
CHAPTER 16.22 - VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.22.010 - Citation and authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1) of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the state of California (hereinafter referred to as the "vesting tentative map statute"). 
(Ord. No. 305-2005, § 1, 12-8-05)  
16.22.020 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish procedures necessary for the implementation of the vesting tentative map statute, and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. Except as otherwise set forth in the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this title shall apply to maps considered under this chapter. 
To accomplish this purpose, the regulations outlined in this chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, and for the promotion of orderly growth and development. 
(Ord. No. 305-2005, § 1, 12-8-05)  
16.22.030 - Consistency. 
No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan or not permitted by Title 17 or other applicable provisions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 305-2005, § 1, 12-8-05)  
16.22.040 - Definition. 
A "vesting tentative map" shall mean a "tentative map" for any subdivision that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "vesting tentative map" at the time it is filed in accordance with Section 16.22.060, and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 305-2005, § 1, 12-8-05)  
16.22.050 - Application. 
Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by this title, requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed, in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the vesting tentative map statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction. 
(Ord. No. 305-2005, § 1, 12-8-05)  
16.22.060 - Filing and processing. 
A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in this title for a tentative map except as hereinafter provided: 
A.  At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "vesting tentative map." 
B.  At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, a subdivider shall also supply the following information: 
1.  Boundary survey map prepared by a registered land surveyor; 
2.  A site development plan showing, in general height, size, and location of buildings, number of dwelling units, number and location of parking spaces, landscape areas, and park sites, if any; 
3.  A statement as to the uses to which the buildings will be put; 
4.  Preliminary soils report; 
5.  Detailed improvement plans for all roads, streets, highways, and ways in the proposed subdivision including the location, names, exact widths, curve radii and grades, typical sections, and an indication as to whether the facility is intended to be public or private. Details of curbs, gutters, sidewalks and other improvements shall be shown and shall be of such scale as to show clearly all details thereof; 
6.  Precise drainage and flood control plans. All lot drainage, including easements required for lot-to-lot drainage and off-site drainage shall be addressed. Additionally, all proposed erosion control measures shall be included; 
7.  Precise sewerage plans and a capacity study of the downstream collector sewer; 
8.  Precise water plans; 
9.  Final grading plans, showing existing and proposed grades, the extent of cut-and-fill, slope angle of all banks, spot elevations at the top of cuts and toe of fills for all grading, any existing or proposed retaining walls, and sections at lot lines and subdivision boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 305-2005, § 1, 12-8-05)  
16.22.070 - Fees. 
Upon filing a vested tentative map, the subdivider shall pay the fees required by city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 305-2005, § 1, 12-8-05)  
16.22.080 - Expiration. 
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same extensions, established by this title for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map. 
(Ord. No. 305-2005, § 1, 12-8-05)  
16.22.090 - Vesting on approval of vesting tentative map. 
A.  The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards described in Government Code Section 66474.2. 
However, if Section 66474.2 of the Government Code is repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved. 
Fees required as conditions of approval of a vesting tentative map shall be such fees as are in effect as of the date of filing of the final map therefore, except that whenever a subdivider elects to defer payment of any such fees until development or issuance of a building permit, such fees shall be those in effect as of such later date. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a permit, approval, extension, or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following are determined: 
1.  A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both; 
2.  The condition or denial is required in order to comply with state or federal law. 
C.  The rights referred to herein shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in Section 16.22.080. If the final map is approved, these rights shall last for the following periods of time: 
1.  An initial time period of twelve months. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded; 
2.  The initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds thirty days, from the date a complete application is filed; 
3.  A subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section expires. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the city council within fifteen days; 
4.  If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subdivisions 1 through 3 of this subsection, the rights referred to herein shall continue until the expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit. 
(Ord. No. 305-2005, § 1, 12-8-05)  
16.22.100 - Development inconsistent with zoning—Conditional approval. 
Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with the zoning ordinance in existence at that time, that inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The city shall deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned on the subdivider, or his or her designee, obtaining the necessary change in the zoning ordinance to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in the zoning ordinance is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall, notwithstanding Section 16.22.090, confer the vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change in the zoning ordinance and the map, as approved. 
The rights conferred by this section shall be for the time periods set forth in Section 16.22.090(C). 
(Ord. No. 305-2005, § 1, 12-8-05)  
16.22.110 - Applications inconsistent with current policies. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, a property owner or his or her designee may seek approvals or permits for development which depart from the ordinance, policies, and standards described in Sections 16.22.090(A) and 16.22.100, and the city may grant these approvals or issue these permits to the extent that the departures are authorized under applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 305-2005, § 1, 12-8-05)  
Chapter 16.24 - FINAL MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.24.010 - Filing. 
Within eighteen months after receipt of the council action approving or conditionally approving the tentative map, the subdivider may file with the city clerk the original final map and three prints of the final map, completed in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and this title. Such final map shall be accompanied by: 
A.  Plans, profiles and specifications of the proposed public improvements, designed in accord with the requirements of the city engineer. 
B.  A filing fee to cover the expense of checking in an amount to be established by the city council from time to time by resolution. 
C.  A preliminary title report issued by a title insurance company in the name of the owner of the land, issued to or for the benefit or protection of the city, showing all parties whose consent is necessary and their interest therein, except where the land included in the subdivision is registered under the Land Registration Act. If the land is so registered, a certified copy of the certificate of title shall be furnished. 
D.  Calculation and traverse sheets used in computing the distances, angles and courses shown on the final map and ties to existing and proposed monuments, and showing closures, within the allowable limits of error specified in this title, for exterior boundaries of the subdivision and for each irregular block or lot of the subdivision. 
E.  Two copies of the proposed deed restrictions. 
(Ord. 182 §7(A), 1980)  
16.24.020 - Size, format and materials. 
The final map which is filed shall be in full accord with all applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 182 §7(B), 1980)  
16.24.030 - Information required. 
Each final map shall contain the information required by the Subdivision Map Act (namely Section 66434); provided, however, that if any of the following information is in addition to what is required by the Subdivision Map Act, the additional information shall be in the form of a separate document or an additional map sheet which shall indicate its relationship to the final map, and shall contain a statement that the additional information is for informational purposes, describing conditions as of the date of filing, and is not intended to affect record title interest. 
A.  If more than three sheets are used, an index map shall show the entire subdivision. 
B.  The tract name, date, north arrow and scale. 
C.  A general description of the land included. 
D.  The location and names, without abbreviations, of all: 
1.  Proposed streets; 
2.  Proposed public areas and easements; and 
3.  Adjoining streets. 
E.  The dimensions, in feet and decimals of a foot. 
F.  The dimensions of all lots, and a lot number for each lot. 
G.  The centerline data for streets including bearings and distances. 
H.  The radius, tangent, arc length and central angle of curves. 
I.  Suitable primary survey control points. 
J.  The location and description of permanent monuments. 
K.  Ties to any city or county boundary lines involved. 
L.  All required certificates. 
M.  Any other requirements of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 210 §18(C), 1987; Ord. 182 §7(C), 1980)  
16.24.040 - Lot data. 
Sufficient data shall be shown to determine readily the bearing and length of each line. Dimensions of lots shall be the net dimensions. No ditto marks shall be used. Lots containing one acre or more shall show net acreage to the nearest hundredth. 
(Ord. 182 §7(D), 1980)  
16.24.050 - Surveying data. 
A.  The final map shall show the centerlines of all streets; the lengths, tangents, radii and central angle, or radial bearings of all curves; the bearings of radial lines to each beginning and end of a curve; the total width of each street; the width of the portion being dedicated, the width of the existing dedication, and the width of each side of the centerline; and the width of all rights-of-way of railroads, flood control or drainage channels and any other easements appearing on the map. 
B.  Surveys in connection with the preparation of subdivision maps shall be made in accordance with standard practices and principles for land surveying. A traverse of the boundaries of the subdivisions and all lots and blocks shall close within a limit of error of 0.005 feet. 
(Ord. 182 §7(E), 1980)  
16.24.060 - Record of easements. 
The final map shall show the location, width and side lines of all easements to which the lots are subject. If an existing easement is not definitely located of record, a statement as to the easement shall appear on the title sheet. Easements for storm drains, sewers, utilities and other purposes shall be denoted by broken lines. Distance and bearings on the side lines of the lots which are cut by an easement shall be so shown as to indicate clearly the actual lengths of the lot lines. The width of the easement, the lengths of the bearings of the lines thereof, and sufficient ties to locate the easement shall be clearly labeled and identified, and, if already of record, proper reference to the records shall be given. Easements being dedicated shall be so indicated in the certificate of dedication. 
(Ord. 182 §7(F), 1980)  
16.24.070 - Monuments. 
The final map shall show clearly what stakes, monuments or other evidence were found on the ground to determine the boundaries of the tract. The corners of adjoining subdivisions, or portions thereof, shall be identified and ties thereto shall be shown. 
(Ord. 182 §7(G), 1980)  
16.24.080 - City boundaries. 
The final map shall show city boundaries adjoining the subdivision. 
(Ord. 182 §7(H), 1980)  
16.24.090 - Lot and block numbers. 
The lots shall be numbered consecutively, commencing with the number one, with no omissions or duplications; provided, however, where the subdivision is a continuation of, or an addition to, an existing subdivision, the lot numbers may commence with the number immediately following the last or highest number of such existing subdivision, and in all other respects shall conform with the preceding requirements. Each lot shall be shown entirely on one sheet. Blocks may be used. They shall be consecutively numbered or lettered in the manner required for numbering lots. Lots within each block shall be numbered as provided for subdivisions where block numbers are not used. 
(Ord. 182 §7(I), 1980)  
16.24.100 - Dedications. 
All streets, alleys, access rights, drainage and/or sewer easements and other easements and parcels of land shown on the final map as intended for public use shall be offered for dedication for public use pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 182 §7(J), 1980)  
16.24.110 - Waiver of direct access rights. 
The council, at its discretion, may require that offers of dedication of streets include a waiver of direct access rights from any property shown on the final map as abutting thereon. 
(Ord. 182 §7(K), 1980)  
16.24.120 - Reservation for future uses. 
At the discretion of the council, areas of real property within the subdivision may be reserved for future needs for schools, fire stations, libraries, recreational facilities or other public uses, pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 182 §7(L), 1980)  
16.24.130 - Approval of the city planner. 
If the final map conforms to the tentative map as approved by the planning commission and no changes have been made which have not been approved by the planning commission, the city planner shall certify the original tracing of the final map on behalf of the planning commission. If the final map does not so conform, the city planner shall report such fact and the nature of the nonconforming features to the city engineer and the city planner shall not certify the map on behalf of the planning commission until the commission specifically authorizes him to do so. 
(Ord. 182 §7(M), 1980)  
16.24.140 - Approval of the city engineer. 
After issuance of a receipt by the city clerk for the improvement drawings and the final map, the city engineer shall examine them as to conformity with the tentative map, as to the sufficiency of affidavits and acknowledgements, correctness of surveying data and computations, and such other matters as require checking to ensure compliance with the provisions of th Subdivision Map Act and this title. The city engineer shall return one copy of the map to the subdivider or his engineer, showing necessary corrections, if any. If the final map is found to be in correct form and the matters shown thereon are sufficient, the city engineer shall endorse his approval thereon and transmit it to the city council within twenty days from the time the final map is submitted to him by the subdivider for approval. 
(Ord. 182 §7(N), 1980)  
16.24.150 - Approval by the council. 
At its first regular meeting following the filing of the final map, or within ten days following the filing thereof, the council shall consider the final map, the plan of subdivision improvements, and the offers of dedication in accord with the requirements of this title. The council may reject any and all offers of dedication and the city clerk shall certify on the final map such action by the council. If the council determines that the map is in conformity with the requirements of this title, it shall approve the final map. 
(Ord. 182 §7(O), 1980)  
16.24.160 - Transmittal to county. 
When the subdivider has filed with the city clerk the agreement and bond or other security and has made the deposits and cost payments required by the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act, and when such agreement, deposits and/or security have been approved by the city engineer as to sufficiency and by the city attorney as to form, the final map shall be transmitted by the city clerk to the clerk of the county board of supervisors for ultimate transmittal to the county recorder. 
(Ord. 182 §7(P), 1980)  
16.24.170 - Disapproval by the council. 
If the council determines that the final map is not in conformity with the requirements of this title or the tentative map, it shall disapprove the map, specifying its reasons therefor, and the city clerk shall advise the subdivider in writing of such disapproval and the reason or reasons for such disapproval. If the council has disapproved any map, the subdivider may file with the city clerk a map altered to meet the approval of the council. In such case the subdivider shall conform to all the requirements imposed upon him by this title when filing the first final map with the city, and the same proceedings shall be required as are prescribed by this title upon the filing of the first final map with the city. If the map fails to meet a technical requirement of this title or any provision of the Subdivision Map Act and/or the map has an inadvertent error which, if determined by the council, does not materially affect the validity of the map, the council may waive the appropriate provisions of this title and/or the Subdivision Map Act relative thereto. 
(Ord. 182 §7(Q), 1980)  
Chapter 16.28 - IMPROVEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
16.28.010 - General requirements. 
The subdivider shall install improvements in accord with the general requirements of this chapter; provided, however, that the city engineer may require changes in typical sections and details if unusual conditions appertain to the subdivision or arise during the construction to warrant such change. 
(Ord. 182 §8(A), 1980)  
16.28.020 - Standard specifications. 
All improvements shall conform to the standard specifications adopted by the city of which copies are on file for use and examination in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 182 §8(B), 1980)  
16.28.030 - Improvement plans and profiles. 
Improvement work shall not be commenced until plans and profiles for such work have been submitted to and approved by the city engineer. Such plans will be required before approval of the final map. All such plans and profiles shall be drawn on twenty-four inch by thirty-six inch tracing cloth or paper, in ink or pencil capable of producing a legible print and shall be filed with the city engineer. An estimate of the quantities of improvement work for purposes of determining security agreement requirements shall accompany the plans. 
(Ord. 182 §8(C), 1980)  
16.28.040 - Improvement work-Notice. 
Improvement work shall not be commenced until the city engineer and the public works director have been notified in advance, and if work has been discontinued for any reason, it shall not be begun again until the city engineer and public works director have been notified. 
(Ord. 182 §8(D), 1980)  
16.28.050 - Improvement work-Inspections. 
All required improvements shall be constructed under the inspection of, and to the approval of, the city engineer and the city public works director. 
(Ord. 182 §8(E), 1980)  
16.28.060 - Underground utilities. 
All underground utilities, sanitary sewers and storm drains installed in streets, service roads, alleys or highways shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of such street, service road, alley or highway. Service connections for all underground utilities and sanitary sewers shall be placed to such length as will obviate the necessity for disturbing the street or alley improvements when connections thereto are made. 
(Ord. 182 §8(F), 1980)  
16.28.070 - Streets and highways. 
All streets and highways shall be graded and surfaced to cross sections and grades approved by the city engineer. The subdivider shall improve the extension of all subdivision streets, highways or public ways to the intercepting paving line of any county road, city street or state highway. 
(Ord. 182 §8(G), 1980)  
16.28.080 - Structures. 
Structures shall be installed as required for drainage, access and/or public safety. Such structure shall be placed to grades and shall be of a design approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 182 §8(H), 1980)  
16.28.090 - Sidewalks, curbs, gutters and driveway approaches. 
Vertical curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be installed to grades and at locations approved by the city engineer prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit on building construction on any site within the subdivision. Sidewalks shall be required on all street frontages. Whether or not related to a subdivision, the foregoing requirements shall apply to any activity requiring a building permit, provided, however, that if the building permit is for the purpose of remodeling an existing structure, the foregoing requirements shall only apply if the activity will increase the footprint of the existing structure or the habitable condition living area by twenty-five percent or more; provided further, however, that if the building permit is to construct a detached accessory structure, the foregoing requirements shall only apply if the accessory structure consists of two hundred fifty square feet or more. 
(Ord. 182 §8(I), 1980) 
(Ord. No. 323-2007, § 1(B), 10-11-07)  
16.28.100 - Sanitary sewers. 
Sanitary sewer facilities connecting with the existing city sewer system shall be installed to serve each lot and to grades, location and design and size approved by the city engineer. No septic tanks or cesspools shall be permitted. Location of house sewer laterals shall be marked on curb or sidewalk with a letter "S." 
(Ord. 182 §8(J), 1980)  
16.28.110 - Storm drains. 
Storm drains shall be installed as required by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 182 §8(K), 1980)  
16.28.120 - Water mains and fire hydrants. 
Water mains and fire hydrants of design and layout and in locations approved by the city engineer and public works director shall be installed by the subdivider. Location of water services shall be marked on the curb or sidewalk with a letter "W." The water system shall be installed and in operation and all required fire hydrants connected thereto prior to the commencement of building construction on any site within the subdivision. Fire hydrants shall be installed in accord with the following: 
A.  Hydrants shall be of a type approved by the public works director or city engineer. 
B.  One fire hydrant shall be installed for each one hundred eighty thousand square feet, including streets, of single-family residential development, or major portion thereof. In areas of strip development, one hydrant shall be installed for each six hundred lineal feet of residential frontage. In isolated single-family residential areas, no development shall have less than two hydrants located not more than four hundred fifty feet, one from the other. 
C.  One fire hydrant shall be installed for each one hundred twenty thousand square feet, including streets, of multiple-family or mobile home park residential development, or major portion thereof. In areas of strip multiple-family development, one hydrant shall be installed for each four hundred fifty lineal feet of residential area. In isolated areas, no development shall have less than two hydrants located not more than four hundred fifty feet, one from the other. 
D.  One fire hydrant shall be installed for each ninety thousand square feet, including streets, of commercial or industrial development, or major portion thereof. In areas of strip development, one hydrant shall be installed for each three hundred lineal feet of commercial or industrial frontage. In isolated areas, no development shall have less than two hydrants located not more than three hundred feet, one from the other. 
E.  Combined use areas shall have fire protection installed in accord with the above criteria as approved by the city engineer. 
F.  Areas of strip development shall be as defined by the planning commission. 
G.  The exact location of fire hydrants within or adjacent to subdivisions and final decision as to the number of fire hydrants to be installed for adequate fire protection shall be determined by the city engineer. 
H.  In areas where fire hydrant installation has taken place at the expense of the city, the developer shall pay a proportional share of hydrant installation. 
(Ord. 182 §8(L), 1980)  
16.28.130 - Street signs and access barricades. 
Street signs of a type approved by the city shall be installed by the subdivider, in locations approved by the city engineer, or shall, at the subdivider's option, be installed by the city at the subdivider's expense. Two street name signs shall be installed at each four-way intersection within the subdivision and one street name sign shall be installed at each two-way or three-way intersection. Any required barricades to prevent traffic access to dead-end streets shall be provided by the subdivider. 
(Ord. 182 §8(M), 1980)  
16.28.140 - Street lights. 
Ornamental street lights shall be installed by the subdivider, at locations approved by the city engineer, at each four-way intersection, at each three-way intersection, at each two-way intersection, at the end of each cul-de-sac and at such other locations as necessary to provide that no point along any street within the subdivision shall be more than two hundred fifty feet from a street light. 
(Ord. 182 §8(N), 1980)  
16.28.150 - Railroad crossings. 
Provisions shall be made for any and all railroad crossings necessary to provide access to, or circulation with, the proposed subdivision including the preparation of all documents necessary for application to the Public Utilities Commission of the state for the establishment and improvement of the crossing. Costs for such establishment and improvement shall be the responsibility of the subdivider. 
(Ord. 182 §8(O), 1980)  
16.28.160 - Monuments. 
Permanent monuments in accord with the standard specifications shall be set at all angle and curve points on the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, at all street intersections, at all angle points of street lines, and at all curve points, both simple and compound, of street lines. Monuments in street lines shall be set on street centerlines unless otherwise directed by the city engineer; provided, however, such permanent monuments need not be set at angle and curve points on the exterior boundaries of the subdivision when such points on the exterior boundaries of the subdivision have been previously monumented and accepted by the city. 
(Ord. 182 §8(P), 1980)  
16.28.170 - Lot markers. 
The engineer or surveyor shall set at all corners a marker not less substantial and enduring than one-half-inch iron pipe eighteen inches long with a noncorroding material with the registered engineer's or licensed land surveyor's marker on the head thereof. 
(Ord. 182 §8(Q), 1980)  
16.28.180 - Permanent elevation benchmarks. 
Permanent elevation benchmarks of a type approved by the city engineer and referred to the city datum shall be set at locations approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 182 §8(R), 1980)  
16.28.190 - Replacement of monuments and benchmarks. 
Any monument or benchmark, as required by the provisions of this title, which is disturbed or destroyed before acceptance of all improvements, shall be replaced by the subdivider. 
(Ord. 182 §8(S), 1980)  
16.28.200 - Setting of monuments and benchmarks. 
Monuments and benchmarks shall be set before acceptance of the improvements by the council. 
(Ord. 182 §8(T), 1980)  
16.28.210 - Cost of improvements. 
All improvements necessary to conform the proposed subdivision to the standards and policies of the city existing at the time of filing the tentative map shall be installed at the cost of the subdivider. 
(Ord. 182 §8(U), 1980)  
16.28.220 - Agreement. 
Prior to approval by the council of the final map, the subdivider shall execute and file an agreement between himself and the city specifying a period (not to exceed twelve months), within which he, or his agent or contractor, shall complete all improvement work and providing that if he fails to complete such work within such period, the city may complete the same and recover the full cost and expense thereof from the subdivider. The agreement shall provide for the inspection of all improvements by the city engineer. Such agreement shall include such stipulations as may be required to assure completion of the subdivision in accord with the requirements of the city. 
(Ord. 182 §8(V), 1980)  
16.28.230 - Security-Filing. 
The subdivider shall file with the agreement required by the provisions of Section 16.28.220, to assure his full and faithful performance thereof, a bond or security for such sum as the city engineer deems sufficient to cover the cost of the improvements. 
(Ord. 182 §8(W), 1980)  
16.28.240 - Security-Form and amount. 
A.  The security shall be in the manner, form and kind provided in the Subdivision Map Act. The security shall be in the amount of one hundred percent of the estimated cost of the improvements, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his agreement by the subdivider, and in the additional amount of fifty percent of such sum securing the payment by the subdivider to his contractor, his subcontractors and to persons renting equipment or furnishing labor or materials to them for the improvements. 
B.  The security provided shall guarantee maintenance and/or all defects in the required improvements for a period of one year following acceptance of the improvements by the city. 
C.  In lieu of a one hundred percent performance bond and fifty percent labor and materials bond, surety may be assured by the filing of an instrument of credit, cash deposit, or deposit of negotiable bonds, which creates a trust fund in an amount equal to one hundred fifty percent of the cost of the work estimated by the city engineer. The trust fund shall be maintained in a financial institution subject to regulation by the state and federal government with the trust fund limited to the following conditions: 
1.  Ten percent of the cost, representing a labor and materials deposit, to be retained for thirty days after the filing of the notice of completion. 
2.  Funds may be discharged from the balance of the surety account from time to time as work is completed, up to ninety percent of the value of the work completed, with authorization of the city engineer, until all work is completed and the notice of completion is filed, at which time an additional fifty percent shall be released thirty days thereafter. 
3.  Prior to final acceptance by the city of the improvements, the subdivider shall provide the city with a one-year maintenance bond in the amount of ten percent of the estimated cost of the improvements. 
(Ord. 182 §8(X), 1980)  
16.28.250 - Completion of work by the city. 
In the event that the subdivider fails to complete all improvement work in accordance with the provisions of this title and the city has completed the same, or if the subdivider fails to reimburse the city for the cost of incidental expenses or to cover the cost of replacement and repair of existing streets or other improvements damaged in the development of the subdivision or requiring repair or replacement during the one- year guarantee period, the city shall demand performance of the agreement by the bonding company, or use the cash or other security deposit placed with the city by the subdivider to do such work and reimburse itself for the cost of work agreed to be performed by the subdivider. If the amount of the surety bond or cash deposit exceeds all costs and expenses incurred by the city, the city shall release the remainder of the bond or certification less the cost and expense incurred by the city. The subdivider shall be liable to the city for any costs additional to those secured, in an action to be brought therefor by the city. 
(Ord. 182 §8(Y), 1980)  
16.28.260 - Cash payments. 
In addition to the required securities, the subdivider shall file with the agreement required by the provisions of Section 16.28.220 a cash payment in an amount deemed sufficient by the city engineer to pay all city improvement costs, or city fees required by this title and/or other city ordinances and resulting from or required with the approval and/or construction of the subdivision. 
(Ord. 182 §8(Z), 1980)  
16.28.270 - Assessment act financing of improvements not permitted. 
The city will require that the completion of all improvements be secured under the provisions of Sections 16.28.220 through 16.28.260, and will not permit completion of such improvements by assessment act financing. 
(Ord. 182 §8(AA), 1980)  
16.28.280 - Inspection costs. 
All required improvements shall be constructed under the inspection of the public works director and/or the city engineer. The cost of inspection or work shall be paid for by the subdivider in an amount, as determined by the city engineer, sufficient to pay for the inspection, and in no case less than two percent of the estimated cost of the improvements. 
(Ord. 182 §8 (BB), 1980)  
16.28.290 - Approval. 
No extension of time, progress payments from cash deposits, or releases of surety bond or cash deposit shall be made except upon the certification by the city engineer that work covered thereby has been satisfactorily completed, and upon approval of the city council. 
(Ord. 182 §8(CC), 1980)  
16.28.300 - Storm drainage-Agreements and bonds. 
In the event the immediate construction of storm drains to serve the subdivision is not required by the city engineer, the subdivider shall execute and file an agreement between himself and the city providing that he shall contribute to the future construction of storm sewers which will be of benefit to the subdivision whether the construction is performed or required by the city or any other public district or body. The agreement shall specify the termination date of the same and shall provide that the city may call for the contribution at any time during the period of the agreement; provided, however, that the city shall not have the right to call for the contribution unless plans have been made and a resolution passed to advertise for bids. The agreement shall also specify the amount of the contribution, which amount shall be specified by the city engineer. In the event the agreement described in this section is executed, the subdivider shall also file, to assure his full and faithful performance of the agreement, a bond sufficient to cover the total amount of the contribution. The term of the bond shall cover the full term of the agreement. The bond shall be executed by a surety company authorized to transact a surety business in the state, and must be approved by the city attorney as to form and by the city engineer as to sufficiency. In lieu of the bond, the subdivider may deposit cash or a certified check with the city clerk. 
(Ord. 182 §8(DD), 1980)  
16.28.310 - Storm drainage-Alternative disposal methods and fees. 
A.  When it is not possible for the developer to provide for the ultimate disposal of storm drainage into a natural channel deemed adequate by the city engineer to carry the provided flow without artificial channel or bridge construction, and a connection is made to an existing storm drain line which has been previously installed by the city, county or other governmental agency or by private parties regulated by such agency, a fee shall be paid in such amount as may be established by the city council. 
B.  Ponding basins, as a method of storm water disposal, shall not be permitted. 
C.  The maximum distance permitted for surface drainage in developments within the city is one thousand three hundred feet. Storm drainage disposal fees shall be paid if surface drainage to other than an approved point of ultimate disposal is permitted. 
(Ord. 182 §8(EE), 1980)  
16.28.320 - Lot grading. 
The subdivider of any proposed subdivision shall grade the entire area thereof so that all lots drain to the street grades approved by the city. 
(Ord. 182 §8(FF), 1980)  
16.28.330 - Irrigation ditches. 
All irrigation ditches traversing, adjoining or abutting property to be subdivided under this title shall be permanently abandoned, permanently pipelined or otherwise totally enclosed in a manner satisfactory to the city, or shall be fenced with chain link fencing of minimum five feet height, or other fencing acceptable to the city. 
(Ord. 182 §8(GG), 1980)  
16.28.340 - Street trees. 
A.  Street trees shall be planted in the parkway area as a part of the subdivision development. The required trees shall be planted in accordance with the standard specifications governing spacing, size and allowance varieties. 
B.  The subdivider shall mark on his initial plot map the variety, size and location of all native or ornamental trees having a diameter of four inches or greater. No such trees may be destroyed until the applicant has satisfied the planning commission that such tree either has no landscaping value or is so badly located that it cannot reasonably be integrated into the plan of the development. The subdivider shall remove all fruit trees which may be on the property unless a responsible party posts a bond satisfactory in form to the city attorney and satisfactory in amount to the planning commission assuring adequate pruning, spraying and other cultural practice to protect neighborhood agricultural uses from diseases or pests which might be harbored or spread because of inadequately tended fruit trees in the parkway. 
(Ord. 182 §8(HH), 1980)  
Chapter 16.32 - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS 
Sections: 
 
16.32.010 - Planned unit developments. 
Where, in accordance with the provisions of the city zoning ordinance, a use permit has been granted authorizing a planned unit development on the land or a portion of the land proposed to be subdivided, the plan of the subdivision shall conform with the plan of the planned unit development as approved by the planning commission and the city council. Exceptions to the subdivision regulations are necessary to execute the planned unit development as approved by the planning commission and the city council may be authorized by the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16.40. 
(Ord. 182 §9, 1980)  
Chapter 16.34 - PARKS AND RECREATIONAL LAND DIVISION[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 336-2008, § 1, adopted November 19, 2008, in effect repealed the former Chapter 16.34, §§ 16.34.010—16.34.060, and enacted a new Chapter 16.34 as set out herein. The former Chapter 16.34 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 216, 1988 and Ord. No. 321-2007, adopted August 9, 2007. 
 
16.34.010 - Purpose. 
City believes that it is necessary to have park and recreational facilities available to its residents. The purpose of this chapter is to describe how such facilities for new subdivisions will be financed and provided by fees described in Government Code Sections 66000 et seq. ("impact fees") and fees, dedications of land in lieu of thereof, or both under Government Code Section 66477 ("QuimbyAct"). Park and recreational facilities within the city are owned, developed, and operated by the McFarland Recreation and Parks District, a subdivision of the state of California duly organized pursuant to Sections 5780 et seq. of the Public Resources Code of the state ("district"). The city also may own, develop, and operate such facilities. The land to be conveyed or the fees to be paid under the Quimby Act and by impact fees adopted by the district in conformance with this chapter shall be conveyed or paid directly to the district in the manner hereinafter described. Use of the land and the fees shall be pursuant to the schedule developed by the district in its master plan ("master plan") specifying how, when, and where the district will use the land or the fees, or both, to develop park and recreational facilities. Impact fees adopted by the city shall be paid to the city. 
(Ord. No. 002-2009, § 1, 5-14-09; Ord. No. 326-2008, § 1, 11-19-08)  
16.34.020 - Requirements. 
As a condition of approval of a tentative subdivision map or residential parcel map within the jurisdiction of the city, the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or both, pursuant to the Quimby Act and pay impact fees as set forth in this chapter, for park and recreational purposes at the time and according to the standards and formula contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 002-2009, § 1, 5-14-09; Ord. No. 326-2008, § 1, 11-19-08)  
16.34.030 - Formula for dedication of land or payment of fees. 
A.  The amount and location of land to be dedicated or fees to be paid under the Quimby Act will be jointly determined by the city and the district, provided, however, that the master plan will be used in the determination of same unless the city, in the reasonable exercise of its discretion, determines that other documentation, studies, or information should receive the same level of consideration as the master plan. The formula for determining the amount of land to be dedicated shall be established by use of the following formula: 
A = 5.0 (No.D.U. × D.F.) 
1000 
 
The terms used in the above formula have the following definitions: 
1.  "A" means the area in acres required to be dedicated or to be appraised for payment of a fee. 
2.  "5.0" means the number of acres per one thousand persons. 
3.  "No. D.U." means the number of dwelling units proposed in the subdivision which shall be the number proposed for construction. When the actual number of units to be considered is unknown, it shall be assumed for the purpose of this chapter that the maximum number permissible by law will be constructed. 
4.  "D.F." means the density factor applicable to the subdivision which shall be as described in Subsection (a)(2) of Section 66477 of the Government Code of the state. 
B.  The amount of the impact fees for the district shall be established by the district and the amount of the impact fees for the city shall be established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 002-2009, § 1, 5-14-09; Ord. No. 326-2008, § 1, 11-19-08)  
16.34.040 - Procedure for determining dedication of land and payment of fees under the Quimby Act. 
A.  At the time of submission of a tentative tract map or parcel map ("map"), city shall send a copy of the map to the district. The district shall thereafter notify the city that either land shall be dedicated or fees paid or both under the Quimby Act and, if land is to be dedicated, district shall designate the location of the land to be dedicated which shall be in compliance with the city's general plan and the district's master plan. The subdivider shall show the land on its map as open space for park or recreational facilities required to be dedicated to the district. The land shall be conveyed directly to the district by the subdivider. 
B.  Where a fee is required to be paid in lieu of land dedication under the Quimby Act, the amount of such fee shall be determined by appraisal to determine the fair market value of the land which would otherwise be required to be dedicated. The cost for the appraisal shall be paid by the subdivider. The appraiser shall be chosen by the district and the district shall obtain the appraisal. The fair market value shall be based on the value of the lots as if contained in a tentative tract map or parcel map approved or conditionally approved by the planning commission or the city council and ready for approval as a final map and for recordation. The appraised value shall be reviewed annually and revised accordingly until the fees are paid in full. The subdivider shall pay the cost of such annual review and revision. The fees shall be paid directly to the district by the subdivider. 
C.  Conveyance of dedicated land or payment of fees under the Quimby Act shall be made prior to recordation of the final tract map or parcel map or simultaneously therewith and conveyance of dedicated land shall be by grant deed in fee simple to the district by the subdivider free and clear of all monetary liens and those encumbrances which will unreasonably interfere with the use of the property for park and recreation purposes as reasonably determined by district. 
(Ord. No. 002-2009, § 1, 5-14-09; Ord. No. 326-2008, § 1, 11-19-08)  
16.34.050 - Criteria for requiring both land dedication and payment of fees. 
A.  When only a portion of the land for the subdivision is proposed in the master plan as the site for a park or recreational facilities, such portion shall be dedicated, and a fee computed under the Quimby Act pursuant to the provisions of Sections 16.34.030(A) and 16.34.040 shall be paid for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated. When a major part of the local park or recreational facility has already been acquired by the district and only a small portion of land is needed from the development to complete the site, the remaining portion shall be dedicated and a fee computed and paid for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated pursuant to Section 16.34.030(A). 
B.  Where the proposed subdivision has been recently annexed into the city and if not yet incorporated into the master plan, the amount of land dedication or fee to be paid shall be determined as described in Section 16.34.030(A) unless the subdivider requests that the land be incorporated into the master plan in which case the district shall proceed to do so at the sole cost of the subdivider and, after completion of same, the land to be dedicated or fees to be paid shall be based on the updated master plan. 
(Ord. No. 002-2009, § 1, 5-14-09; Ord. No. 326-2008, § 1, 11-19-08)  
16.34.060 - Credit for improvements and equipment. 
If the subdivider proposes to make park and recreational improvements or install park and recreational equipment to the dedicated land, subdivider shall first determine from the district the value of those improvements or equipment and the amount of the credit to be given to the subdivider by the district toward the amount of land to be dedicated or the fees to be paid under the Quimby Act and this chapter. If the improvements or the equipment are to be made a condition of the map or development, district shall provide specific information to the city with regard to same sufficient for the city to include the foregoing as conditions, otherwise, they shall not be included. 
(Ord. No. 002-2009, § 1, 5-14-09; Ord. No. 326-2008, § 1, 11-19-08)  
16.34.070 - Timing for conveyance of land or payment of fees. 
Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary under this chapter, city may authorize recordation of a final map or issuance of building permits prior to the conveyance of land or payment of fees under the Quimby Act or prior to payment of impact fees but shall not issue a certificate of occupancy on any residential dwelling or unit within the development until the land has been conveyed or the fees paid. 
(Ord. No. 002-2009, § 1, 5-14-09; Ord. No. 326-2008, § 1, 11-19-08)  
Chapter 16.36 - PARCEL MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.36.010 - Purpose. 
The council incorporates this chapter into this title in order to adopt rules, regulations and specifications for the division, either by lease, sale or financing of any land, including land divided into four parcels or less, which is a subdivision regulated by the Subdivision Map Act and/or the preceding chapters of this title. 
(Ord. 182 §10(A), 1980)  
16.36.020 - Advisory agency. 
The commission is designated as the advisory agency referred to in Chapter 2 of the Subdivision Map Act and is charged with the duty of making investigations and reports on the design and improvements of proposed divisions of land under this chapter. The city planner is designated as the secretary to the advisory agency with authority to receive parcel maps. 
(Ord. 182 §10(B), 1980)  
16.36.030 - Tentative parcel maps. 
The person or agency dividing land under this chapter shall file a tentative parcel map with the secretary of the planning commission not less than thirty days before the date of the planning commission meeting at which such map is to be considered. Such filing shall be prior to the start of any grading or construction work within the proposed division of land. The tentative parcel map shall be submitted in the same manner as provided for subdivisions as to area improvement and design, flood and water drainage control, and as to required public improvements. 
(Ord. 182 §10(C), 1980)  
16.36.040 - Tentative parcel map procedures. 
A person desiring to divide land subject to the provisions of this chapter shall submit the tentative parcel map therefor in accord with the following requirements: 
A.  Filing. Fifteen copies of the tentative parcel map shall be filed with the secretary of the planning commission. The tentative parcel map shall be legibly drawn, on eighteen-inch by twenty-six-inch tracing paper suitable for reproduction, to a scale and in a manner to best illustrate the proposed division. The scale shall be not less than two hundred feet to the inch. 
B.  Fees. At the time of filing the tentative parcel map, a fee shall be paid to the city in such amount as may be established by the city council from time to time by resolution. 
C.  Acceptance. The city engineer shall examine any such tentative parcel map within five working days of presentation and shall not accept such map unless the map is in full compliance with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act of the state as to form, data, information and other matters to be shown on or furnished therewith. 
D.  Distribution. The secretary of the planning commission shall immediately forward copies of the tentative parcel map to each of the following: 
1.  The city manager (one copy); 
2.  The city planner (one copy); 
3.  The city engineer (two copies); 
4.  The appropriate utility companies (two copies each); 
5.  Others required. 
E.  Agency or Department Action. The department or agency receiving a copy of the tentative parcel map shall file a report within fifteen days after the receipt thereof. If a reply is not received prior to the meeting at which consideration of the map is made, it will be assumed that the map conforms to the requirements of the particular agency or department concerned. 
(Ord. 182 §10(D), 1980)  
16.36.050 - Information required. 
The tentative parcel map shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name and address of the person preparing the parcel map and the legal owner of record of the land, and applicant if different from the legal owner of record. 
B.  The boundary line of the entire parcel, including the area to be divided, with dimensions based on existing survey data or property descriptions. 
C.  The proposed division lines, approximate dimensions, and approximate acreage or square footage of each proposed parcel. 
D.  The identification of each parcel with a letter designation. 
E.  All existing surface and underground structures and improvements located on the original parcel, together with their dimensions, the distance between them, the distance to division and property lines, and the number of stories or the height of each structure. 
F.  The names, widths and locations of all existing and proposed streets abutting or traversing the original parcel, and a statement if the street is private and/or a statement if the street does not actually exist on the ground. 
G.  The location, purposes, width and recorded owners of all existing and proposed easements or private rights- of-way abutting or traversing any part of the original parcel. Easement boundaries shall be shown by means of dotted lines. 
H.  An accurate description of the original parcel. 
I.  The date of preparation, north arrow and scale of the drawing. 
J.  The existing and proposed uses of the property. 
K.  The proposed method of sewage disposal. 
L.  The proposed domestic water supply. 
M.  The assessor's parcel numbers. 
N.  The new street names. 
O.  The approximate location and width of watercourses of areas subject to inundation from floods, and the location of structures, irrigation ditches and other permanent features. 
P.  Any railroads. 
Q.  The approximate radius of curves. 
R.  A location map showing the original parcels and surrounding area. 
S.  The existing zone designation of the original parcels. 
(Ord. 182 §10(E), 1980)  
16.36.060 - Review of tentative parcel maps. 
The commission shall review the tentative parcel map and approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the map within thirty days after the receipt of the map, or at such later date as may be required to concurrently process the appurtenant environmental review documents required by state law and local regulations adopted in implementation thereof. The commission may approve the map only if all of the following conditions are met: 
A.  The division conforms to all applicable zoning regulations, the provisions of this title and the requirements of the improvement standards of the city and the Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  All parcels proposed shall have road and public utility easement access in accordance with improvement standards, allowing access to each parcel and such roads shall be dedicated to the city. 
(Ord. 182 §10(F), 1980)  
16.36.070 - Appeals procedure. 
If the applicant is dissatisfied with the decision of the commission he may, within fifteen days after the decision of the commission, appeal in writing to the council for a hearing thereon. Such hearing need not be concluded on the day thus set but may be continued. 
(Ord. 182 §10(G), 1980)  
16.36.080 - Exemptions. 
Any division of land not subject to a parcel map procedure by the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 182 §10(H), 1980)  
16.36.090 - Improvements. 
Pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, the subdivider shall install, construct and/or provide all on-site or off-site improvements as recommended by the city engineer and as required by the commission, and the nature, extent and design of such improvements and the guaranteeing of completion thereof shall be in full conformance with Chapter 16.28, all of which shall comply with Government Code Section 66411.1 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 182 §10(I), 1980)  
16.36.100 - Right-of-way dedications. 
Pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act, the subdivider shall provide such dedication of such rights-of-way and/or easements as may be required by the commission. 
(Ord. 182 §10(J), 1980)  
16.36.110 - Waiver of direct access rights. 
The commission may, at its discretion, require that offers of dedication or dedication of streets include a waiver of direct access rights to any such streets from any property shown on the final parcel map as abutting thereon in accord with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 182 §10(K), 1980)  
16.36.120 - Expiration of tentative parcel map. 
The tentative map shall expire twelve months after it has been approved or conditionally approved by the commission or by the council in the case of an appeal. 
(Ord. 182 §10(L), 1980)  
16.36.130 - Final parcel maps. 
Within twelve months from the date of approval by the commission, or by the council in the case of an appeal of the tentative parcel map, and upon the accomplishment of all dedications by certification on the map and required construction of all public improvements, or the execution of an agreement and provision of surety providing therefor, and the payment of all applicable fees and charges, the applicant may submit a final parcel map with the city engineer for his examination prior to filing. Within twenty days after receiving the final parcel map, the city engineer shall examine it for the survey information shown thereon, and if satisfied that it is technically correct, he shall place his certificate thereon per Government Code Section 66450 of the Subdivision Map Act, and immediately thereafter file the map with the secretary of the planning commission, who shall approve the final parcel map if it substantially conforms to the approved tentative parcel map and all applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. The appropriate certificates, as provided by the applicant in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, shall be signed by the city engineer and the secretary of the planning commission. The city clerk shall then transmit the map to the county recorder for recording. 
(Ord. 182 §10(M), 1980)  
16.36.140 - Waiver of final parcel map. 
A.  The city council may, at its discretion, waive the final parcel map when the division is solely for the purpose of conveyance to an adjacent property owner, or when one or more of the following conditions is found to exist: 
1.  The land before division contains less than five acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway and no dedications or improvements have been required by the city; or 
2.  Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of twenty acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or highway; or 
3.  The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of the city as to street alignments or widths; or 
4.  Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less than forty acres or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section; provided, however, that the city requires that a tentative and final parcel map be approved for a subdivision in which one or more of the resultant parcels is between forty acres and sixty acres in size. 
B.  If the city council elects to waive the filing of a final parcel map it shall make the following finding: That the proposed division of land complies with all requirements established by the Subdivision Map Act and all city ordinances enacted pursuant thereto as to area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection, and other requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and city ordinances enacted pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. 182 §10(N), 1980)  
Chapter 16.40 - EXCEPTIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.40.010 - Petition. 
The planning commission may recommend that the city council authorize conditional exceptions to any of the requirements and regulations set forth in this title. Application for any such exception shall be made by a petition of the subdivider stating fully the grounds for the application and the facts relied upon by the petitioner. Such petition shall be filed with the tentative map of the subdivision. 
(Ord. 182 §11(A), 1980)  
16.40.020 - Findings. 
A.  In order for the property referred to in the petition to come within the provision of this chapter, it shall be necessary that the planning commission find the following facts: 
1.  That there are special circumstances and conditions affecting the property; 
2.  That the exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner; 
3.  That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which the property is situated. 
B.  In recommending such exceptions, the planning commission shall secure substantially the objectives of the regulations to which exceptions are requested, and shall act to protect the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. 
C.  In recommending the authorization of any exception under the provisions of this chapter, the planning commission shall report to the city council its findings with respect thereto and all facts in connection therewith, and shall specifically and fully set forth the exception recommended and conditions designated. 
D.  Upon receipt of such report, the city council may approve the tentative map with or without exceptions and conditions recommended by the planning commission, and with such other exceptions, if any, as the city council deems necessary to substantially secure the objectives of this title. 
(Ord. 182 §11(B), 1980)  
Chapter 16.44 - VIOLATIONS—PENALTIES 
Sections: 
 
16.44.010 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or copartnership who wilfully violates any of the provisions or fails to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this title is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety days in the county jail, or by both fine and imprisonment, except that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to bar and legal, equitable or summary remedy for which the city or other corporation, partnership or copartnership may file a suit in the superior court of the county, to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision, or act in violation of this title. 
(Ord. 182 §13, 1980)  
Chapter 16.48 - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES 
Sections: 
 
16.48.010 - Definitions. 
"Commercial" means neighborhood centers, retail uses, office uses, and medical office uses. 
"Development" means the construction, alteration, addition, occupancy or use of any building or structure within the city of McFarland. 
"Dwelling Unit" means a dwelling unit as defined in the Uniform Building Code (UBC). 
"Equivalent dwelling unit (EDU)" shall be the result of a calculation, based on a reasonable comparison to a dwelling unit for all developments for which the schedule of impact fees are not specifically defined. An EDU is equivalent to twenty sewer fixture units as defined in the Uniform Plumbing Code or one thousand four hundred square feet of building area. The City Engineer shall have the authority to determine EDU's for any development not specifically defined, using a reasonable relationship standard. 
"Industrial" means warehouse, light industrial and heavy industrial. 
"Land area" means every square foot of parcel area. 
"Multiple unit" means any dwelling unit which is not a single-family unit. 
"Single-family unit" means a dwelling unit for which no enclosing walls, including the walls of any attached structures, are within six feet of an enclosing wall of another dwelling unit, or a wall of an attached structure of that unit. A mobile home is a single-family unit. 
"Square foot" means every square foot of floor area as defined in the UBC, except for floor area devoted exclusively to parking. The city engineer shall determine the square footage of any project which cannot be calculated by using the definition of floor area. 
(Ord. No. 300-2005, § 1, 9-8-05)  
16.48.020 - Fee collection and fees set by resolution. 
A.  The development impact fees shall be charged and paid upon issuance of a building permit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the City Council may require payment of sewer or water connection fees or both at any earlier time including, without limitation, as a condition to recording a final map." 
B.  The fees for development shall be the sum of the amounts specified in the current schedule of fees adopted by resolution of the city council. 
C.  Existing fees areas are hereby terminated as of the date of this resolution. Fees collected for public facilities shall be expended on designated projects. New fees shall be collected for all building and development requiring a building permit from and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 300-2005, § 1, 9-8-05; Ord. No. 314-2006, § 1, 12-14-06)  
16.48.030 - Exemptions from fees. 
A.  The development impact fees shall not be imposed on any of the following: 
1.  Any alteration or addition to a residential structure, except to the extent that additional rooms are created; 
2.  Any alteration or addition to a non-residential structure if the square footage is increased less than twenty-five square feet, unless the alteration or addition provides for higher intensity use; 
3.  Any replacement or reconstruction of an existing residential structure that has been destroyed or demolished provided that the building permit for reconstruction is obtained within five years after the building was demolished except to the extent that additional units or guest rooms are created; 
4.  Any replacement or reconstruction of an existing non-residential structure that has been destroyed or demolished provided that the building permit for reconstruction is obtained within five years after the building was demolished unless the replacement or reconstruction increases the square footage of the structure by fifty square feet, or changes the use of the structure to a higher density category. 
B.  Whenever the alteration, addition, replacement or reconstruction is not exempt, the fees shall be imposed only on the additional units or guest rooms, or change in use, so long as the building was in existence within five years prior to issuance of the new permit. 
(Ord. No. 300-2005, § 1, 9-8-05)  
16.48.040 - Payment of other fees required. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this resolution, every development is responsible for the payment of all applicable fees adopted by the city. 
B.  Nothing in the resolution affects the obligation of any person to pay any fees establish pursuant to this code so long as the fees shall not result in the duplication of fees for any development or portion thereof included in the area of benefit. 
(Ord. No. 300-2005, § 1, 9-8-05)  
16.48.050 - Use of fee revenues. 
The revenues raised by payment of these fees shall be placed in separate accounts along with any interest earnings on each account, and shall be used for the following purposes: 
A.  To pay for design and construction of designated public facilities and reasonable costs of outside consultant studies related thereto; 
B.  To reimburse the city for designated public facilities constructed by the city with funds from other sources, unless the city funds were expended to remedy existing deficiencies as identified in the studies or were obtained from grants or gifts; 
C.  To reimburse developers who have designed and constructed designated public facilities which are oversized as defined in this code with supplemental size, length, or capacity. This section shall not apply if a reimbursement agreement has been reached by a developer and the city. 
D.  To pay for and/or reimburse costs of program development and ongoing administration of the development impact fee program. 
(Ord. No. 300-2005, § 1, 9-8-05)  
16.48.060 - Accounts. 
The fees collected pursuant to this resolution shall be deposited into the following master accounts: 
A.  Law enforcement improvements account; 
B.  Fire station improvements account; 
C.  Government facilities account; 
D.  Storm drainage facilities account; 
E.  Park development facilities account; 
F.  Circulation facilities account; 
G.  Water facilities account; 
H.  Sewer facilities account; 
(Ord. No. 300-2005, § 1, 9-8-05)  
16.48.070 - Expenditures of the fees. 
A.  Fees in the accounts established in Section 16.48.060 shall be expended only for the purpose for which the fee is collected with primary consideration to areas of the city in which development has taken place and in which the fees have been paid. 
B.  The standards upon which the needs for facilities are based are the city general plan and those regulations and standards of practice to provide acceptable levels of service. The city will remedy any existing deficiencies without using the proceeds of the development impact fees. 
(Ord. No. 300-2005, § 1, 9-8-05)  
16.48.080 - Effective date. 
The fees provided in this resolution shall be effective sixty days from the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 300-2005, § 1, 9-8-05)  
16.48.090 - Annual rate adjustment. 
Unless subsequently modified by a resolution of the city council, the fees as established herein shall be adjusted annually, beginning on January 1, 2007, in accordance with the previous 12-month construction cost index as published by Engineering-News Record. 
(Ord. No. 300-2005, § 1, 9-8-05)  
16.48.100 - Repeal of inconsistent ordinances or resolutions. 
All ordinances or resolutions which are inconsistent with the ordinance codified in this chapter are repealed effective on the day the new fees herein become effective. 
(Ord. No. 300-2005, § 1, 9-8-05)  
Chapter 16.52 - CREATION OF EASEMENT BY COVENANT[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 005-2009, § 1, adopted August 13, 2009, set out provisions intended for use as Chapter 16.48. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Chapter 16.52. 
 
16.52.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to implement the provisions of Article 2.7 (commencing with Section 65870) of Chapter 4 of Division 1, Title 7, of the California Government Code, subject to the limitations specified in Section 65875 thereof. 
(Ord. No. 005-2009, § 1, 8-13-09)  
16.52.020 - Creation of easement by covenant. 
Whenever an easement for parking, ingress, egress, emergency access, light and air access, landscaping or open space purposes is required by the city to be made in connection with approval of any subdivision, site plan, building permit, general plan or zoning amendment, or in satisfaction of such requirement imposed pursuant to any adopted city procedure, regulation or ordinance, such easement may be created by recorded covenant, provided at the time of recording of the covenant of easement, all of the real property benefitted or burdened by the covenant is under common ownership and provided the covenant of easement contains a legal description of the real property to be subject to the easement and of the real property to be benefitted thereby, identifies the approval, permit or designation granted which relied upon or required the covenant, and is executed by the owner of the real property. 
(Ord. No. 005-2009, § 1, 8-13-09)  
16.52.030 - Release of covenant. 
The covenant of easement shall be released in the same manner as public streets, highways or service easements under Streets and Highways Code Section 8300 et seq., provided that the city council makes an additional finding that the restriction is no longer necessary to achieve city land use goals. 
(Ord. No. 005-2009, § 1, 8-13-09)  
Title 17 - ZONING 
Chapters:  
Chapter 17.04 - PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.04.010 - General purpose. 
The ordinance codified in this title, the official land use zoning ordinance for the city is adopted and established to serve the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare and to provide the economic and social advantages resulting from an orderly planned use of land resources, and to encourage, guide and provide a definite plan for the future growth and development of the city. 
(Ord. 109 § 1.00, 1969)  
17.04.020 - Definitions generally. 
A.  The ordinance codified in this title shall be known as the "Land Use Zoning Ordinance" of the city. 
B.  For the purposes of this title, certain terms and words are defined as provided in this chapter. 
C.  When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the singular number include the plural number and words in the plural number include the singular number, and the masculine includes the feminine. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.00, 1969)  
17.04.030 - Accessory use. 
"Accessory use" means a use naturally and normally incidental to, subordinate to and devoted exclusively to the main use of the premises. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.01, 1969)  
17.04.040 - Accessory building. 
"Accessory building" means a detached, subordinate building, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main building or to the main use of the land and which is located on the same lot with the main building or use. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.02, 1969)  
17.04.050 - Alley. 
"Alley" means a public way permanently reserved as a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.03, 1969)  
17.04.060 - Amusement machine. 
"Amusement machine" means any mechanical, electrical, electronic or other machine, apparatus, contrivance or device, which may be operated or played by the placing or deposit therein of a coin, check, slug, ball, token, card or other article, or by paying for the use thereof in advance or after use, involving in its operation or play either skill or chance, including but not limited to pinball machines, bowling game machines, shuffleboard machines, marble game machines, video game machines, or any other similar machine or device. The term "amusement machine" does not include phonographs, juke boxes or other music machines. 
(Ord. 191 § 1(part), 1982: Ord. 109 § 2.76, 1969)  
17.04.070 - Apartment house. 
"Apartment house" means a building, or portion thereof, designed for or occupied by three or more families living independently of each other. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.04, 1969)  
17.04.080 - Arcade. 
"Arcade" means any business with a fixed place of business which maintains on the business premises four or more amusement machines for use and play by the public generally or by patrons of such business, whether the business of arcade is conducted as a single business or in conjunction with another business. 
(Ord. 191 § 1(part), 1982: Ord. 109 § 2.77, 1969)  
17.04.090 - Automobile service station. 
"Automobile service station" means a service station which supplies gasoline and diesel fuel to motor vehicles, and including grease racks or elevators, wash racks or pits, tire repairs, battery servicing and repairing, ignition service, sales of motor vehicle accessories and other customary services for automobiles, but excluding painting, body work and steam cleaning. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.05, 1969)  
17.04.100 - Boarding and rooming house. 
"Boarding and rooming house" means a building or portion thereof which is used to accommodate, for compensation, five or more boarders or roomers, not including members of the occupant's immediate family who might be occupying such building. The word "compensation" includes compensation in money, services or other things of value. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.06, 1969)  
17.04.110 - Building. 
"Building" means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the housing or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.07, 1969)  
17.04.120 - Building height. 
"Building height" means the vertical distance from the grade to the the highest point of the structure. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.08, 1969)  
17.04.130 - Building site. 
"Building site" means the ground area of a building or a group of buildings together with all open spaces as required by this title. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.09, 1969)  
17.04.140 - Bungalow court. 
"Bungalow court" means a group of three or more detached, one-story, one-family or two-family dwellings located upon a single lot, together with all open spaces as required by this title, but not including motels. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.10, 1969)  
17.04.150 - Camp car. 
"Camp car" means a motor vehicle which is designed or permanently altered and equipped for human habitation, and is subject to the provisions applicable to a travel trailer. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.11, 1969)  
17.04.160 - Camper or pick-up camper coach. 
"Camper" or "pick-up camper coach" means a shelter or structure designed to be mounted on a motor vehicle, to provide facilities for human habitation or camping purposes and which is subject to the provisions applicable to a travel trailer. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.12, 1969)  
17.04.170 - Camping trailer. 
"Camping trailer" means a trailer with one or more wheels containing a disassembled temporary shelter, which is designed for human habitation and is subject to the provisions applicable to a travel trailer. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.13, 1969)  
17.04.180 - Carport. 
"Carport" means a permanent, roofed structure with not more than two enclosed sides and which is used or intended to be used for automobile shelters and storage. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.14, 1969)  
17.04.190 - Church. 
"Church" means a building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons regularly assemble for worship, and which building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.15, 1969)  
17.04.200 - Club. 
"Club" means an association of persons, whether incorporated or unincorporated, for some common purpose, but not including groups organized primarily to render a service carried on as a business. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.16, 1969)  
17.04.210 - Colony. 
"Colony" means a group of bees with one queen kept in a standard California-type hive, measuring twenty inches by sixteen and one-fourth inches by nine and five-eighths inches. 
(Ord. 179 § 1, 1979)  
17.04.220 - Dwelling. 
"Dwelling" means a building or portion thereof designed for or occupied for residential purposes, including one-family, two-family and multiple dwellings, but not including hotels, motels, boarding and lodging houses and trailers. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.17, 1969)  
17.04.230 - Dwelling, one-family. 
"One-family dwelling" means a detached building designed for or occupied exclusively by one family. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.18, 1969)  
17.04.240 - Dwelling, two-family. 
"Two-family dwelling" means a detached building designed for or occupied exclusively by two families living independently of each other. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.19, 1969)  
17.04.250 - Dwelling group. 
"Dwelling group" means a combination or arrangement of dwellings on one building site. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.20, 1969)  
17.04.260 - Dwelling, multiple-family. 
"Multiple-family dwelling" means a building or portion thereof, designed for or occupied by three or more families living independently of each other. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.21, 1969)  
17.04.270 - Dwelling unit. 
"Dwelling unit" means one or more rooms in a dwelling, apartment house or apartment hotel designed for or occupied by one family for living or sleeping purposes and having not more than one kitchen. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.22, 1969)  
17.04.280 - Educational institution. 
"Educational institution" means a college or university giving general academic instruction equivalent to the standards prescribed by the State Board of Education. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.23, 1969)  
17.04.282 - Emergency shelters. 
Emergency shelter (per Health and Safety Code 50801): housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay. 
(Ord. No. 042-2014, § 1, 2-12-15)  
17.04.290 - Family. 
"Family" means an individual, or two or more persons related by blood or marriage or legal adoption living together in a dwelling unit or six or fewer related or unrelated persons living together. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.24, 1969) 
(Ord. No. 008-2011, § 1(B), 4-14-11; Ord. No. 030-2013, § 1, 4-11-13)  
17.04.300 - Garage, private. 
"Private garage" means a building or portion of a building in which motor vehicles used by the occupants or tenants of the main building or buildings of the premises are stored or kept. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.25, 1969)  
17.04.310 - Garage, public. 
"Public garage" means a building other than a private garage, used for the care, repair or equipment of automobiles or where such vehicles are parked or stored for remuneration, hire or sale. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.26, 1969)  
17.04.320 - Grade. 
"Grade" (or "ground level") means the average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of a building. In case walls are parallel to and within five feet of a sidewalk, the ground level shall be measured at the sidewalk. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.27, 1969)  
17.04.330 - Hog ranch. 
"Hog ranch" means any premises used for the commercial raising of hogs that are fed garbage secured from off the premises. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.28, 1969)  
17.04.340 - Home occupation. 
"Home occupation" means an occupation carried on by the resident of a dwelling as a secondary use in connection with which there is no person employed, no sounds audible beyond the premises, no display and no advertising, except that one sign, not to exceed two square feet in area, may be attached flat against the wall of a building. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.29, 1969)  
17.04.350 - Home occupation, quasi. 
"Quasi-home occupation" means an occupation carried on by the occupant of a dwelling as a secondary use in connection with which there is no display or signs, no stock in trade or commodity sold upon the premises, and no person employed; and no mechnical equipment used except such as is necessary for housekeeping purposes. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.30, 1969)  
17.04.360 - Hospital. 
"Hospital" means any building or portion thereof used for the accommodation and medical care of sick, injured or infirm persons and including sanitariums. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.31, 1969)  
17.04.370 - Hotel. 
"Hotel" means a building designed for, or occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place of individuals who are lodged with or without meals in which there are six or more guest rooms, and in which no provision is made for cooking in any individual room or suite. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.32, 1969)  
17.04.380 - Lot. 
"Lot" means a parcel of real property with a separate and distinct number of letters as shown on a plat recorded or filed with the recorder of Kern County, or a parcel of real property abutting upon at least one public street or private easement and held under separate ownership prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.33, 1969)  
17.04.390 - Lot area. 
"Lot area" means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.34, 1969)  
17.04.400 - Lot, corner. 
"Corner lot" means a lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets having an angle of intersection of not more than one hundred thirty-five degrees. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.35, 1969)  
17.04.410 - Lot, interior. 
"Interior lot" means a lot other than a corner lot. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.36, 1969)  
17.04.420 - Lot, key. 
"Key lot" means the first lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot, whether or not separated by an alley. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.37, 1969)  
17.04.430 - Lot, reversed corner. 
"Reversed corner lot" means a corner lot whose side street line is substantially a continuation of the front lot lines of the first lot to its rear. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.38, 1969)  
17.04.440 - Lot, through. 
"Through lot" means a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.39, 1969)  
17.04.450 - Lot line, front. 
"Front lot line" means the property line dividing a lot from a street. On a corner lot only one street line shall be considered as a front line and the shorter street frontage shall be considered the front lot line. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.40, 1969)  
17.04.460 - Lot line, rear. 
"Rear lot line" means the line opposite the front lot line. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.41, 1969)  
17.04.470 - Lot line, side. 
"Side lot line" means any lot lines other than front lot lines or rear lot lines. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.42, 1969)  
17.04.475 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 075-2017, § 5, adopted November 9, 2017, repealed § 17.04.475, which pertained to marijuana cultivation and derived from Ord. No. 063-2017, adopted January 27, 2017 and Ord. No. 064-2017, adopted February 9, 2017.  
17.04.476 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 075-2017, § 5, adopted November 9, 2017, repealed § 17.04.476, which pertained to marijuana dispensary and derived from Ord. No. 063-2017, adopted January 27, 2017 and Ord. No. 064-2017, adopted February 9, 2017.  
17.04.480 - Mobile home. 
"Mobile home" means a large independent trailer coach or a prefabricated dwelling with wheels attached, which is of such size that it is conveyable over the highway system only with special motorized equipment, special permits and a special driver's license. A mobile home is usually larger in size than eight feet by forty feet, and contains all the basic facilities of a dwelling unit, including one or more rooms for living or sleeping purposes, one kitchen and one or more bathrooms with a toilet, a bathtub or shower, and a lavatory, and can perform the functions of a dwelling unit when connected to the utilities on a mobile home site. The mobile home can be a single, expandable or multiple coach unit. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.43, 1969)  
17.04.490 - Mobile home, cabana. 
"Cabana mobile home" means any portable, demountable or permanent accessory building or other enclosure erected or constructed on a mobile home lot within six feet of a mobile home on the same lot and used for human habitation, which though not attached to the mobile home, is considered part of the mobile home unit for dimensional purposes, and which shall not contain a kitchen or other space for the preparation of food nor be used for sleeping purposes. The height of the cabana shall not exceed one story or thirteen feet. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.44, 1969)  
17.04.500 - Mobile home lot. 
"Mobile home lot" means any lot within a mobile home park for the accommodation of one mobile home. It shall include a mobile home site and surrounding area with accessory buildings or structures and at least two parking spaces. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.45, 1969)  
17.04.510 - Mobile home park. 
"Mobile home park" means any area or tract of land where one or more mobile home lots are rented or held out for rent in compliance with all requirements set forth by city and state law. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.46, 1969)  
17.04.520 - Mobile home site. 
"Mobile home site" means the area occupied by a mobile home unit. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.47, 1969)  
17.04.530 - Mobile home space. 
"Mobile home space" means a concrete surfaced area or concrete slab on a mobile home site for the placement or parking of a mobile home with free ingress and egress at all times, which concrete slab shall be placed upon well graded land, extend not less than two inches above the surrounding ground level and be of a size not less than two feet longer and two feet wider than the mobile home that is to be placed upon it. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.48, 1969)  
17.04.540 - Mobile home unit. 
"Mobile home unit" means a mobile home in a mobile home space and its accessory cabana or utility structure, including the utility connections in a concrete utility island, which together provide complete housekeeping facilities for one family. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.49, 1969)  
17.04.545 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 075-2017, § 5, adopted November 9, 2017, repealed § 17.04.545, which pertained to mobile marijuana dispensary and derived from Ord. No. 063-2017, adopted January 27, 2017 and Ord. No. 064-2017, adopted February 9, 2017.  
17.04.550 - Motel. 
"Motel" means a group of attached or detached buildings containing individual sleeping or living units, designed for or used temporarily by automobile tourists or transients with garage or parking space conveniently located to each unit, including tourist courts, auto courts or motor lodges. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.50, 1969)  
17.04.560 - Nonconforming building. 
"Nonconforming building" means a building or structure or portion thereof existing in conflict with the provisions of this title applicable to the zone in which it is situated. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.51, 1969)  
17.04.570 - Nonconforming use. 
"Nonconforming use" means the use of a structure or premises for a purpose which is in conflict with the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.52, 1969)  
17.04.580 - Occupied. 
"Occupied" includes arranged, designed, built, altered, converted, rented or leased or intended to be occupied. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.53, 1969)  
17.04.590 - Person. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, organization, syndicate, city, county, municipality, district or other political subdivision, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.54, 1969)  
17.04.600 - Ramada. 
"Ramada" means any roof or shade structure installed, erected or used above a mobile home and lot or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.55, 1969)  
17.04.610 - Recreational trailer park. 
"Recreational trailer park" means any area or tract of land, within a designated recreation area, owned, operated and maintained by an agency of the federal, state, county or city government, where one or more travel trailers, camp car or tent camping sites are rented or held out for rent. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.56, 1969)  
17.04.620 - School, elementary or high. 
"Elementary school" or "high school" means an institution of learning which offers instruction in the several branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools by the Education Code of the state. "High schools" include junior and senior schools. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.57, 1969)  
17.04.625 - Secondary residential unit. 
"Secondary residential unit" means either a detached or attached dwelling unit which provides complete, independent living facilities designed or used for one or more related persons. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation on the same parcel or parcels as the primary unit is situated. 
(Ord. 268 § 1, 1993)  
17.04.630 - Self-service laundry. 
"Self-service laundry" means any establishment for laundering where there is no pick-up or delivery service and no steam or hand laundry of any type. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.58, 1969)  
17.04.640 - Sign. 
"Sign" means any outdoor advertising, whether it is in the form of a sign, cloth, paper, metal, display, device, figure, painting, drawing, message, placard, poster, billboard or other thing or device whatsoever which is designed, intended, or used to advertise or inform by erecting, constructing, maintaining, posting, assembling, painting, printing, tacking, nailing, gluing, sticking, carving or otherwise fastening or placing, affixing or making visible outdoor advertising on or to the ground or any tree, bush, rock, fence, post, wall, vehicle, building, structure or thing. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.59, 1969)  
17.04.642 - Single room occupancy. 
"Single room occupancy (SRO) facility" means a cluster of seven or more units of weekly or longer tenancy providing sleeping or living facilities, in which sanitary facilities may be provided within the units, and cooking facilities may be shared. Maximum room capacity shall not exceed requirements of any applicable housing or building code(s). 
(Ord. No. 042-2014, § 1, 2-12-15)  
17.04.650 - Stable, private. 
"Private stable" means a detached accessory building for the keeping of one or more horses owned by the occupants of the premises and not kept for remuneration, hire or sale. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.60, 1969)  
17.04.660 - Stable, public. 
"Public stable" means a stable other than a private stable. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.61, 1969)  
17.04.670 - Stock yard. 
"Stock yard" means an enclosed area where animals are fed concentrated food prior to shipping to market or slaughtering or where animals are held for resale only. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.62, 1969)  
17.04.680 - Story. 
"Story" means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.63, 1969)  
17.04.690 - Story, half. 
"Half story" means a story with at least two of its opposite sides situated in a sloping roof, the floor area of which does not exceed two-thirds of the floor area immediately below it. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.64, 1969)  
17.04.700 - Street. 
"Street" means a public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.65, 1969)  
17.04.710 - Structure. 
"Structure" means anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground, but not including fences or walls used as fences less than six feet in height. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.66, 1969)  
17.04.712 - Supportive housing. 
"Supportive housing" (per Health and Safety Code 50675.14(b)) means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population as defined in subdivision (d) of Section 53260, and that is linked to onsite or offsite services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. Supportive housing shall be allowed in all residential zones and shall be required to conform to the requirements of any residential development standards. 
(Ord. No. 042-2014, § 1, 2-12-15)  
17.04.720 - Trailer coach. 
"Trailer coach" means a vehicle, other than a motor vehicle designed for human habitation or human occupancy, for industrial, professional or commercial purposes, for carrying persons or property on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. The larger sizes, over eight feet by forty feet (Vehicle Code), include the mobile home and the smaller sizes, less than eight feet by forty feet (Vehicle Code), include the travel trailers. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.67, 1969)  
17.04.730 - Trailer coach park or automobile parking space. 
"Trailer coach park or automobile parking space" means an enclosed and roofed or an open-air, off-street and well-surfaced area containing not less than three inches of bituminous concrete, or other surfacing of a higher type and covering an area of not less than nine feet wide and twenty feet long for placement of a motor vehicle, except trucks of more than one ton capacity, with free ingress and egress provided at all times. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.69, 1969)  
17.04.732 - Transitional housing. 
"Transitional housing" (per Health and Safety Code 50675.2(h)) means buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months. Transitional housing shall be allowed in all residential zones and shall be required to conform to the requirements of any residential development standards. 
(Ord. No. 042-2014, § 1, 2-12-15)  
17.04.740 - Travel coach, dependent. 
"Dependent travel coach" means a trailer coach not equipped with a toilet for sewage disposal. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.68, 1969)  
17.04.750 - Travel trailer. 
"Travel trailer" means any trailer coach, camping trailer, camper or camp car, dependent or independent, which is used for travel or recreational purposes, and which at no time exceeds eight feet in width and forty feet in length, and for which a special permit and/or special driver's license is not required by the California Vehicle Code to move such vehicle on a public highway. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.70, 1969)  
17.04.760 - Use. 
"Use" means the purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged or intended, or for which either is or may be occupied or maintained. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.71, 1969)  
17.04.770 - Washroom. 
"Washroom" means any building which contains laundry facilities and/or bathroom facilities, but does not include kitchen facilities. 
(Ord. 149 § 2, 1976: Ord. 109 § 2.71(a), 1969)  
17.04.780 - Yard. 
"Yard" means an open space other than a court, on a lot, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this title. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.72, 1969)  
17.04.790 - Yard, front. 
"Front yard" means a yard extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line and the nearest line or point of the main building. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.73, 1969)  
17.04.800 - Yard, rear. 
"Rear yard" means a yard extending across the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and the nearest line or point of the main building. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.74, 1969)  
17.04.810 - Yard, side. 
"Side yard" means a yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the side lot line and the nearest line or point of the main building or of accessory building attached thereto. 
(Ord. 109 § 2.75, 1969)  
Chapter 17.08 - ZONES GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
17.08.010 - Establishment of zones. 
In order to classify, regulate, restrict and segregate the uses of lands and buildings; to regulate and restrict the height, bulk and construction of buildings; to regulate the area of yards and other open spaces about buildings; and to regulate the density of population, the following classes of land use zones are established to be known as follows: 
R-1 One-Family Dwelling Zone. 
R-1-C One-Family Dwelling and Limited Commercial Zone. 
R-2 Two-Family Dwelling Zone. 
R-3 Limited Multiple-Family Dwelling Zone. 
R-4 Multiple-Family Dwelling Zone. 
R-S Suburban Residential Zone. 
E Estate Zone. 
E-1 Estate Zone. 
E-2 Estate Zone. 
E-3 Estate Zone. 
E-4 Estate Zone. 
E-5 Estate Zone. 
E-6 Estate Zone. 
E-7 Estate Zone. 
E-8 Estate Zone. 
C-O Professional Office Zone. 
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial Zone. 
C-2 Commercial Zone. 
M-1 Limited Manufacturing Zone. 
M-2 Light Manufacturing Zone. 
M-3 General Manufacturing Zone. 
A-1 Light Agricultural Zone. 
A-2 General Agricultural Zone. 
P Automobile Parking Zone. 
D Architectural Design Zone. 
H Airport Approach Height Zone. 
B Buffer Zone. 
M-H Mobile Home One-Family Dwelling Zone. 
M-S Mobile Home Subdivision Zone. 
M-P Mobile Home Park Zone. 
P-D Precise Development Zone. 
(Ord. 154 § 1, 1976; Ord. 149 § 1, 1976; Ord. 113 § 1, 1970; Ord. 109 § 3.00, 1969)  
17.08.020 - Zoning map. 
The zones listed in Section 17.08.010 and the boundaries of such zones are shown upon the map attached to the ordinance codified in this title and made a part of this title, being designated as the "zoning map," and said map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this title as if the matters and information set forth by the map were all fully described in this section. 
(Ord. 109 § 3.01, 1969)  
17.08.030 - Boundaries of zones. 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zone shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following street and alley lines or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries; 
B.  In unsubdivided property or where a zone boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map; 
C.  In case any uncertainty exists, the planning commission shall determine the location of the boundaries; 
D.  Where any public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the abutting property shall apply to the vacated or abandoned street or alley; 
E.  Where any private right-of-way or easement of any railroad, railway, canal, transportation or public utility company is vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the abutting property shall apply to the vacated or abandoned property. 
(Ord. 109 § 3.02, 1969)  
17.08.040 - Uses permitted in zones. 
Except as provided in this title: 
A.  No building shall be erected, and no existing building shall be moved, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land, building or premises be used, designed or intended to be used for any purpose or in any manner other than a use listed in this title or amendments to this title as permitted in the zones in which such land, building or premises is located. 
B.  No building shall be erected or any existing building be moved, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed in height the limit established by this title or amendments to this title for the zone in which such building is located. 
C.  No building shall be erected, nor shall any existing building be moved, altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any open space surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity with the building site requirements and the area and yard regulations established in this title or amendments to this title for the zone in which such building is located. 
D.  No yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the regulations of this title shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building or structure. 
(Ord. 109 § 3.03, 1969)  
17.08.045 - Cannabis prohibitions and regulations. 
A.  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
"Cannabis" means all parts of the plant cannabis sativa linnaeus, cannabis indica, or cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. "Cannabis" includes cannabis that is used for medical, non-medical, or other purposes. "Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. "Cannabis" also does not include industrial hemp, as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11018.5. 
"Cannabis product" means cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients. 
"Commercial cannabis activity" means the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis and cannabis product for medical, non-medical, or any other purpose and includes the activities of any business licensed by the state or other government entity under Division 10 of the California Business and Professions Code, or any provision of state law that regulates the licensing of cannabis businesses. Commercial cannabis activity does not include the cultivation, possession, storage, manufacturing, or transportation of cannabis by a qualified patient for his or her personal medical use so long as the qualified patient does not provide, donate, sell or distribute cannabis to any other person. Commercial cannabis activity also does not include the cultivation, possession, storage, manufacturing, transportation, donation or provision of cannabis by a primary caregiver, exclusively for the personal medical purposes of no more than five specified qualified patients for whom he or she is the primary caregiver, but who does not receive remuneration for these activities except for compensation in full compliance with California Health and Safety Code section 11362.765. 
"Commercial cannabis use" means the use of any property for commercial cannabis activity. 
"Concentrated cannabis" means manufactured cannabis that has undergone a process to concentrate one or more active cannabinoids, thereby increasing the product's potency. Resin from granular trichomes from a cannabis plant is a concentrate. 
"Cultivation" means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis. 
"Delivery" means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer. "Delivery" also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer. 
"Distribution" means the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between entities licensed under Division 10 of the California Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Fully enclosed and secure structure" means a space within a building, greenhouse or other structure which has a complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls extending from the ground to the roof, which is secure against unauthorized entry, provides complete visual screening, and which is accessible only through one or more lockable doors and inaccessible to minors. 
"Indoors" means within a fully enclosed and secure structure. 
"Manufacture" means to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or prepare a cannabis product. 
"MAUCRSA" means the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act as codified in Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Outdoors" means any location that is not within a fully enclosed and secure structure. 
"Person" means any natural person, firm, corporation, association, club, society, partnership, joint venture, limited liability company, sole proprietorship, collective, cooperative, coop, non-profit, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other organization, group or entity or combination of organizations or entities of any kind whatsoever, however formed, as well as trustees, heirs, executors, administrators, and/or assigns, and shall also include any owner, operator, manager, proprietor, employee, agent, officer, volunteer, salesperson, trustees, heirs, executors, administrators and assigns. 
"Primary caregiver" shall have the same meaning as is defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7(d), as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Private residence" means a house, an apartment unit, mobile home, or other similar dwelling that is lawfully used as a residence. 
"Qualified patient" means a person who is entitled to the protections of California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5, as the same may be amended from time to time, but who does not have an identification card. 
B.  Prohibited Activities and Uses. Subject to the exceptions set forth below in Section 17.80.030, the following activities are prohibited in the city: 
1.  Commercial cannabis uses are expressly prohibited in all zones in the city. No person shall establish, operate, maintain, conduct or allow commercial cannabis uses anywhere within the city. The city shall not approve any application for a building permit, conditional use permit, variance, or any other entitlement authorizing the establishment, operation, maintenance, development, or construction of any commercial cannabis use. 
2.  A property owner shall not rent, lease or otherwise permit any person or business that engages in commercial cannabis activity to occupy real property in the city. A property owner shall not allow any person or business to establish, operate, maintain, conduct, or engage in commercial cannabis activity on any real property owned or controlled by that property owner that is located in the city. 
3.  Outdoor cannabis cultivation is expressly prohibited everywhere in the city. No person owning, renting, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any parcel shall cause or allow such property to be used for cultivating cannabis outdoors. 
4.  Indoor cannabis cultivation, including cultivation by a qualified patient and primary caregiver, is prohibited except in strict compliance with subsection C below. 
C.  Indoor Cannabis Cultivation. It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any real property in the city to cause or allow such real property to be used for the cultivation of cannabis except in strict compliance with the requirements set forth below. 
1.  Cannabis cultivation shall only occur indoors at a private residence, or inside an accessory structure located upon the grounds of a private residence. 
2.  Only persons twenty-one years of age or older may cultivate cannabis. Any cannabis cultivation must comply with the requirements set forth in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.1 and 11362.2. 
3.  Cannabis cultivation is permitted only within fully enclosed and secure structures. 
D.  Exceptions. 
1.  Nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from transporting cannabis through the jurisdictional limits of the city for delivery or distribution to a person located outside the city, where such transport does not involve delivery or distribution within the jurisdictional limits of the city. 
2.  Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person twenty-one years of age or older from engaging in any activities authorized under California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.1. 
3.  Nothing in this section shall prohibit any commercial cannabis activity that the city is required by state law to permit within its jurisdiction pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 26054(c) and (d), as the same may be amended from time to time, or any other provision of the MAUCRSA. 
E.  Violation and Penalty. The city attorney or city prosecutor may bring a civil action for injunctive relief and civil penalties against any person or entity that violates this chapter. In any civil action brought pursuant to this article, a court of competent jurisdiction may award reasonable attorneys' fees and costs to the prevailing party. Notwithstanding the penalties set forth in Chapter 1.12, Citations for Ordinance Violations of the McFarland Municipal Code, no provision of this section authorizes a criminal prosecution, arrest or penalty inconsistent with or prohibited by Health and Safety Code Section 11362.71, et seq. or Section 11362.1, et seq., as the same may be amended from time to time. In the event of any conflict between the penalties enumerated under Chapter 1.12 of the McFarland Municipal Code and any penalties set forth in state law, the maximum penalties allowable under state law shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 075-2017, § 6, 11-9-17)  
17.08.050 - Marijuana dispensaries, mobile marijuana dispensaries, and marijuana cultivation. 
Marijuana dispensaries, mobile marijuana dispensaries, and marijuana cultivation are prohibited in all zones. 
(Ord. No. 063-2017, § 2(C), 1-27-17; Ord. No. 064-2017, § 2(C), 2-9-17) 
Cross reference— See Section 17.08.045, Cannabis prohibitions and regulations.  
Chapter 17.12 - R-1 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.12.010 - Applicability. 
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply to the R-1 one-family dwelling zone unless otherwise provided in this title. 
(Ord. 109 § 4.00, 1969)  
17.12.020 - Uses permitted. 
Permitted uses are as follows: 
A.  One-family dwellings. 
B.  The accessory buildings and structures necessary to such use located on the same lot or parcel of land, including a private garage, the capacity of which shall not exceed three automobiles. 
C.  Quasi home occupations upon a granting of a special permit by city staff which permit shall not be granted unless city staff finds that the proposed quasi-home occupation complies with the definition of this title. 
D.  A home occupation permit is also required even if the resident is maintaining a mailing address for commercial and business license purpose only, even if no stock in trade, supplies, professional equipment, apparatus or business equipment are kept on the premises, and even if no employee or assistants are engaged for the services on the premises and, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no signs are displayed. 
E.  One unlighted sign of not to exceed one-half square foot in area attached to and parallel with the front wall of the building, and containing only the name and title or occupation of the occupant. 
F.  One sign of not to exceed four square feet in area advertising the premises for sale, lease or rent, located not nearer than ten feet to adjoining premises, not nearer than five feet to a street line. 
G.  One temporary sign of not to exceed six square feet in area giving the name of the contractors, engineers and architects during construction period. 
H.  Agricultural and horticultural uses for domestic purposes, including nurseries, greenhouses, orchards or the raising of field crops, tree crops, berry or bush crops, or vegetable or flower gardening. 
I.  Except as otherwise described herein, pheasants, rabbits, chinchillas or similar fur-bearing animals, provided that not more than two of any one or combination of such animals may be maintained on one lot; two dogs; and chickens and roosters, provided that no more than four of any one or combination of such animals may be maintained on one lot. The keeping of such fowl and animals shall conform to all other provisions of law governing same, and no fowl or animals nor any pen or coop shall be kept or maintained with thirty feet of any window or door of any residence, dwelling or other building used for human habitation or within one hundred feet of the front lot line of the lot upon which it is located, or within twenty-five feet of the street side of a corner lot, or within one hundred feet of any public park, school, hospital or similar institution. 
J.  Where a dwelling exists, prior to the passage date of the ordinance codified in this title, on the rear half of the lot and at least seventy-five feet back of the front line, an additional dwelling may be constructed and maintained on the front half of the lot, provided there shall be a minimum distance of twenty feet between the dwellings. 
K.  A trailer may be used or occupied as a temporary dwelling for a period not to exceed ninety days in any one-year period. 
L.  Oil and gas drilling and production shall be permitted by the planning commission if a conditional use permit has been secured from the planning commission for such purposes, as provided in Section 17.140.040. Provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to require the planning commission to issue such a permit, except as provided in Section 17.140.040. 
M.  Additional uses may be permitted by the planning commission according to the provisions of Section 17.152.020. 
N.  Manufactured homes shall be permitted provided that the proposed manufactured home complies with the following requirements: 
1.  The manufactured home shall be certified under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. - Section 5401 et seq.); and 
2.  The manufactured home shall be installed on a permanent foundation system pursuant to Section 18551 of the California Health and Safety Code; and 
3.  The manufactured home is no older than ten years from the date application is made for an installation permit; and 
4.  The manufactured home has a width greater than sixteen feet; and 
5.  The manufactured home complies with the following architectural requirements: 
a.  A minimum three-twelfths (three inches vertical to twelve inches horizontally) roof pitch; and 
b.  Shingles customarily utilized in the construction of conventional single-family dwellings; and 
c.  A minimum one-foot eave around the entire perimeter of the manufactured home as measured from the vertical wall surface; and 
d.  Nonreflective siding material customarily utilized in the construction of conventional single-family dwellings which shall extend to ground level; and 
e.  Siding material utilized as skirting shall be the same in construction materials, composition, and color as the siding material utilized on the exterior wall surface of the manufactured home. 
O.  Supportive and transitional housing, provided that they comply with all the applicable development standards required by Chapter 17.134, Development Standards. 
Any uses allowed in the R-1 zone are allowed in the R-2, R-3 and R-4 zoning districts. 
(Ord. 260 § 1, 1993; Ord. 227 § 1, 1989; Ord. 179 § 2, 1979; Ord. 109 § 4.01, 1969) 
(Ord. No. 288-2004, § 1, 6-17-04; Ord. No. 003-2009, § 1(1, 2), 7-9-09; Ord. No. 008-2011, § 1(A), 4-14-11; Ord. No. 042-2014, § 1, 2-12-15)  
17.12.030 - Building height. 
Two and one-half stories and not to exceed thirty-five feet. 
(Ord. 109 § 4.02, 1969)  
17.12.040 - Front yard. 
A.  There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty-five feet, except where lots comprising forty percent or more of the frontage on one side of a street between intersecting streets are developed with buildings having an average front yard with a variation of not more than ten feet, no building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall project beyond the average front yard line so established. In determining such front yard depth, buildings located more than thirty-five feet from the front property line of buildings facing a side street on a corner lot shall not be counted. 
B.  The front yard shall be measured from the front property line except that where there is an official plan line or a future street line the front yard shall be measured from the official plan line or future street line. Provided, however, that along any secondary highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of forty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required, and along any major highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of forty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required. 
(Ord. 109 § 4.03, 1969)  
17.12.050 - Side yard. 
There shall be a side yard on each side of a main building of not less than five feet, except that on the street side of corner lots there shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet. Provided, however, that along any secondary highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of forty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required, and along any major highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of fifty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required. 
(Ord. 109 § 4.04, 1969)  
17.12.060 - Rear yard. 
There shall be a rear yard behind every main building of not less than five feet. 
(Ord. 109 § 4.05, 1969)  
17.12.070 - Area requirements. 
The minimum lot area shall be six thousand square feet per dwelling unit, provided, however, that when a lot has less area than required in this section and was recorded at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this title, the lot may be occupied by not more than one dwelling unit. In no case shall more than forty-five percent of any lot be covered by buildings or structures. 
(Ord. 109 § 4.06, 1969)  
17.12.080 - Distance between buildings. 
A.  There shall be a minimum distance of six feet between a building used for dwelling purposes and an accessory building. 
B.  There shall be a minimum distance of six feet between accessory buildings. 
(Ord. 109 § 4.07, 1969)  
17.12.090 - Secondary units. 
A.  Purpose and Application. This section is intended to establish a procedure to allow new secondary residential units on existing lots in the one-family residential (R-1), estate (E), or light agriculture (A-1) zones that already contain a legally established principal dwelling unit. This section also sets forth development criteria through a conditional use permit procedure for secondary residential units in these zones. The legislation for secondary residential units on one-family lots is in accordance with Sections 65852.1 and 65852.2 of the Government Code and Section 21080 of the Public Resources Code, relating to housing. Pursuant to Government Code Section 65852.2(b), secondary residential units are deemed to be in conformance with the density limitations established by the general plan land use category applicable to the area within which the unit is located. 
B.  Definitions. As used throughout this section, the following definitions are included: 
1.  Residence, One-Family. "One-family residence" means a building designed for and used to house not more than one family. A one-family dwelling may include a second unit subject to the provisions of conditional use permit approval which shall meet the requirements of this section. 
2.  Secondary Residential Unit. "Secondary residential unit" means either a detached or attached dwelling unit which provides complete, independent living facilities for one or more related persons. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, and sanitation on the same parcel or parcels as the primary unit is situated. 
C.  Establishment of Secondary Residential Unit. A secondary residential unit may be established by any one of the following methods: 
1.  Alteration of interior space of an existing dwelling; 
2.  Conversion of an attic, basement, garage, or other previously uninhabited portion of a dwelling or accessory structure; 
3.  Addition of a separate unit onto an existing dwelling; 
4.  Construction of a separate structure on a lot in addition to an existing principal dwelling. 
D.  Development Criteria. No secondary residential unit may be established unless it complies with the following standards: 
1.  The secondary residential unit may be occupied by family members, guests, servants or employees of the property owner, or used as a rental unit. The second unit cannot be sold. 
2.  The lot on which the secondary residential unit is to be established shall be a minimum of seven thousand five hundred net square feet in area and shall not be subdivided unless it meets the minimum requirements for subdivision. 
3.  The existing principal dwelling on the lot shall contain a minimum of one thousand one hundred square feet. 
4.  Only one secondary residential unit may be created per legal lot. 
5.  The total floor area of the secondary residential unit may not exceed nine hundred square feet or fifty percent of the total floor area of the existing principal dwelling, whichever is greater. The minimum size for a second dwelling unit is at least six hundred forty square feet. 
6.  The secondary residential unit shall contain separate kitchen and bathroom facilities and have a separate entrance. 
7.  The existing principal dwelling on the lot shall be occupied by the property owner. 
8.  The secondary residential unit shall comply with the development standards for the zone in which it is located, including front-, rear-, and side-yard setbacks, minimum distance between structures, height limits but excluding minimum lot area per dwelling unit standards. 
9.  Off-street parking for the secondary residential unit shall be provided in accordance with Section 17.144.020 of the McFarland Municipal Code. 
10.  The secondary residential unit shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of Title 15 of the McFarland Municipal Code and other codes as adopted by the city in regard to room size, plumbing, heating and electrical equipment. 
11.  The secondary residential unit shall be constructed in such a manner as to be compatible with the existing principal dwelling unit and neighborhood in terms of design, height, material and landscaping. 
12.  The principal entrance to the secondary residential unit shall not be visible from the street. 
13.  The secondary residential unit shall comply with applicable health standards and shall be approved by the Kern County director of health. 
14.  Mobile homes shall not be utilized as secondary residential units nor shall secondary residential units be permitted for lots where the existing principal dwelling is a mobile home. 
15.  There shall be metered water service, sewer, and other essential services to maintain the second unit. Water service shall be provided to the satisfaction of the McFarland Mutual Water Company. An additional charge for refuse collection and sewer service and the payments of utilities shall be the responsibility of the property owners. 
16.  The second unit shall not materially reduce the privacy otherwise available to residents of adjoining properties and shall not create a nuisance. 
17.  Additional requirements or conditions may be added as deemed necessary to assure that the second unit will not, under the circumstances or particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety, peace, morals, comfort and general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or the general welfare of the city. 
E.  Secondary Residential Unit Plot Plan Review and Approval. No secondary residential unit may be established until an application for a conditional use permit (CUP) has been submitted to and approved by the planning commission and city council. 
1.  Application Contents. Application for a conditional use permit for a secondary residential unit shall include the following: 
a.  Name and address of the applicant; 
b.  Name and address of property owner; 
c.  Address of the existing principal dwelling on the lot on which the secondary residential unit is to be established; 
d.  Assessor parcel number or legal description of the property; 
e.  Floor area of the existing principal dwelling and of the proposed secondary residential unit; 
f.  Plot plan drawn at scale specified by the city planner, including the following: property line and lot dimensions; location of all existing buildings and accessory structures; location of the proposed secondary residential unit; location of all easements; location of existing and proposed parking area; north arrow; 
g.  Photographs accurately showing property on which the secondary residential unit is to be constructed and properties adjacent to side property lines. 
2.  Review and Approval. The CUP application shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with the procedures set out in Section 17.152.010 of the McFarland Municipal Code. 
F.  Permit Revocation and Modification. Any permit issued pursuant to this section may be revoked or modified pursuant to Section 17.160.010 and/or any other provision contained in the McFarland Municipal Code 
(Ord. 268 § 2, 1993)  
Chapter 17.16 - R-1-C ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.16.010 - Uses permitted. 
All regulations in the R-1-C zone shall be the same as in the R-1 zone, except as follows: One building to be used for the repair of the occupant's own equipment used in his commercial harvesting enterprise with the height thereof limited to one story or in no event twenty-five feet in height and so long as the building meets all of the yard and lot setbacks as provided in the R-1 zone and any other provision of the city's Uniform Building Code. 
(Ord. 125 § 1, 1972: Ord. 109 § 4(A)00, 1969)  
Chapter 17.20 - R-2 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.20.010 - Applicability. 
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply in the R-2 two-family dwelling zone unless otherwise provided in this title. 
(Ord. 109 § 5.00, 1969)  
17.20.020 - Uses permitted. 
Permitted uses are as follows: 
A.  Any use permitted in the R-1 zone or two-family dwelling or two one-family dwellings. 
B.  The accessory buildings and structures necessary to such use located on the same lot or parcel of land. 
C.  Home occupations. 
D.  Bees, provided that not more than six colonies may be maintained on one lot. 
(Ord. 179 § 3, 1979; Ord. 130 § 1, 1972; Ord. 109 § 5.01, 1969)  
17.20.030 - Building height. 
Two and one-half stories and not to exceed thirty-five feet. 
(Ord. 109 § 5.02, 1969)  
17.20.040 - Front yard. 
A.  There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty-five feet, except where lots comprising forty percent or more of the frontage on one side of a street between intersecting streets are developed with buildings having an average front yard with a variation of not more than ten feet, no buildings hereafter erected or structurally altered shall project beyond the average front yard line so established. In determining such front yard depth, buildings located more than thirty-five feet from the front property line or buildings facing a side street on a corner lot shall not be counted. 
B.  The front yard shall be measured from the front property line except that where there is an official plan line or a future street line the front yard shall be measured from the official plan line or future street line. Provided, however, that along any secondary highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of forty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required, and along any major highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of forty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required. 
(Ord. 109 § 5.03, 1969)  
17.20.050 - Side yard. 
There shall be a side yard on each side of a main building of not less than five feet, except that on the street side of corner lots there shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet. Provided, however, that along any secondary highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of forty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required, and along any major highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of fifty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required. 
(Ord. 109 § 5.04, 1969)  
17.20.060 - Rear yard. 
There shall be a rear yard behind every main building of not less than five feet. 
(Ord. 109 § 5.05, 1969)  
17.20.070 - Area requirements. 
The minimum lot area shall be six thousand square feet. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be three thousand square feet. Provided, however, that when a lot has less area than required in this section and was recorded at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this title, the lot may be occupied by not more than one dwelling unit. In no case shall more than fifty percent of any lot be covered by buildings or structures. 
(Ord. 109 § 5.06, 1969)  
17.20.080 - Distance between buildings. 
A.  There shall be a minimum distance of ten feet between buildings used for dwelling purposes. 
B.  There shall be a minimum distance of six feet between a building used for dwelling purposes and an accessory building. 
C.  There shall be a minimum distance of six feet between accessory buildings. 
(Ord. 109 § 5.07, 1969)  
Chapter 17.24 - R-3 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.24.010 - Applicability. 
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply in the R-3 limited multiple-family dwelling zone unless otherwise provided in this title. 
(Ord. 109 § 6.00, 1969)  
17.24.020 - Uses permitted. 
Permitted uses are as follows: 
A.  Any use permitted in the R-1 or R-2 zones, three- family dwellings, four-family dwellings and bungalow courts. 
B.  The accessory buildings and structures necessary to such use located on the same lot or parcel of land. 
C.  Bees, provided that not more than six colonies may be maintained on one lot. 
(Ord. 179 § 4, 1979; Ord. 130 § 2, 1972: Ord. 109 § 6.01, 1969)  
17.24.030 - Building height. 
Two and one-half stories and not to exceed thirty-five feet. 
(Ord. 109 § 6.02, 1969)  
17.24.040 - Front yard. 
A.  There shall be a front yard of not less than fifteen feet, except where lots comprising forty percent or more of the frontage on one side of a street between intersecting streets are developed with buildings having an average front yard with a variation of not more than ten feet, no building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall project beyond the average front yard line so established. In determining such front yard depth, buildings located more than thirty-five feet from the front property line or buildings facing a side street on a corner lot shall not be counted. 
B.  The front yard shall be measured from the front property line except where there is an official plan line or a future street line the front yard shall be measured from the official plan line or future street line. Provided, however, that along any secondary highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of forty- five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required, and along any major highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of fifty- five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required. 
(Ord. 109 § 6.03, 1969)  
17.24.050 - Side yard. 
There shall be a side yard on each side of a main building of not less than five feet, except that on the street side of corner lots there shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet. Provided, however, that along any secondary highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of forty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required, and along any major highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of fifty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required. 
(Ord. 109 § 6.04, 1969)  
17.24.060 - Rear yard. 
There shall be a rear yard behind every main building of not less than fifteen feet; provided, however, this rear yard may be reduced to five feet if not more than fifty-five percent of the lot is covered by buildings or structures. 
(Ord. 109 § 6.05, 1969)  
17.24.070 - Area requirements. 
The minimum lot area shall be six thousand square feet. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be fifteen hundred square feet. Provided, however, that when a lot has less area than required in this section and was recorded at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this title, the lot may be occupied by not more than one dwelling unit for each fifteen hundred square feet. 
(Ord. 109 § 6.06, 1969)  
17.24.080 - Distance between buildings. 
A.  There shall be a minimum distance of ten feet between buildings used for dwelling purposes. 
B.  There shall be a minimum distance of six feet between a building used for dwelling purposes and an accessory building. 
C.  The shall be a minimum distance of six feet between accessory buildings. 
(Ord. 109 § 6.07, 1969)  
Chapter 17.28 - R-4 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.28.010 - Applicability. 
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply in the R-4 zone unless otherwise provided in this title. 
(Ord. 109 § 7.00, 1969)  
17.28.020 - Uses permitted. 
Permitted uses are as follows: 
A.  Any use permitted in the R-1, R-2 or R-3 zones; group dwellings; apartment houses; churches; schools, elementary or high; day nurseries; nursery schools; boarding and rooming houses; institutions of educational, philanthropic or eleemosynary nature; lodge halls; and private clubs, except the chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a business. 
B.  The accessory buildings and structures necessary to such use located on the same lot or parcel of land. 
C.  Bees, provided that not more than six colonies may be maintained on one lot. 
(Ord. 179 § 5, 1979; Ord. 130 § 3, 1972; Ord. 109 § 7.01, 1969)  
17.28.030 - Building height. 
Four stories and not to exceed forty-five feet. 
(Ord. 109 § 7.02, 1969)  
17.28.040 - Front yard. 
A.  There shall be a front yard of not less than ten feet, except where lots comprising forty percent or more of the frontage on one side of a street between intersecting streets are developed with buildings having an average front yard with a variation of not more than ten feet, no building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall project beyond the average front yard line so established. In determining such front yard depth, buildings located more than twenty-five feet from the front property line or buildings facing a side street on a corner lot shall not be counted. 
B.  The front yard shall be measured from the front property line except that where there is an official plan line or a future street line the front yard shall be measured from the official plan line or future street line. Provided, however, that along any secondary highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of forty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required, and along any major highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of fifty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required. 
(Ord. 109 § 7.03, 1969)  
17.28.050 - Side yard. 
There shall be a side yard on each side of a main building of not less than five feet, except that on the street side of corner lots there shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet. Provided, however, that along any secondary highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of forty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required, and along any major highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of fifty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required. 
(Ord. 109 § 7.04, 1969)  
17.28.060 - Rear yard. 
There shall be a rear yard behind every main building of not less than fifteen feet; provided, however, the rear yard may be reduced to five feet if not more than sixty percent of the lot is covered by buildings or structures. 
(Ord. 109 § 7.05, 1969)  
17.28.070 - Area requirements. 
The minimum lot area shall be six thousand square feet. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be one thousand square feet. Provided, however, that when a lot has less area than required in this section and was recorded at the time of the enactment of the ordinance codified in this title, the lot may be occupied by not more than one dwelling unit for each one thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 109 § 7.06, 1969)  
17.28.080 - Distance between buildings. 
A.  There shall be a minimum distance of ten feet between buildings used for dwelling purposes. 
B.  There shall be a minimum distance of six feet between a building used for dwelling purposes and an accessory building. 
C.  The shall be a minimum distance of six feet between accessory buildings. 
(Ord. 109 § 7.07, 1969)  
Chapter 17.32 - R-S ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.32.010 - Uses permitted. 
A.  All permitted uses and regulations in the R-S zone shall be the same as in the R-1 zone. 
B.  Land classified in an R-S zone may also be classified in another zone, except the B, C or M zones, and when so used the land shall be subject to all of the regulations and restrictions applicable to such other zones. 
C.  The keeping of the animals and fowl shall conform to all other provisions of law governing the same, and no fowl or animals, nor any pen, coop, stable, barn or corral shall be kept or maintained within fifty feet of any dwelling or other building used for human habitation, or within one hundred feet of the front lot line of the lot upon which it is located, or within twenty-five feet of the street side of a corner lot, or within one hundred feet of any public park, school, hospital or similar institution. There shall be no killing or dressing of any of such animals or poultry for commercial purposes. 
(Ord. 109 § 8.00, 1969) 
(Ord. No. 003-2009, § 1(3), 7-9-09)  
Chapter 17.36 - E ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.36.010 - Uses permitted. 
All regulations in the E zone shall be the same as in the R-1 zone, except as follows: Each single-family dwelling with its accessory buildings hereafter erected shall be located upon a lot having an area of not less than ten thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 109 § 9.00, 1969)  
Chapter 17.40 - E-1 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.40.010 - Uses permitted. 
All regulations in the E-1 zone shall be the same as in the R-1 zone, except as follows: Each single-family dwelling with its accessory buildings hereafter erected shall be located upon a lot having an area of not less than twelve thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 109 § 10.00, 1969)  
Chapter 17.44 - E-2 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.44.010 - Uses permitted. 
All regulations in the E-2 zone shall be the same as in the R-1 zone, except as follows: Each single-family dwelling with its accessory buildings hereafter erected shall be located upon a lot having an area of not less than eighteen thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 109 § 11.00, 1969)  
Chapter 17.48 - E-3 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.48.010 - Uses permitted. 
All regulations in the E-3 zone shall be the same as in the R-1 zone, except that the following additional uses are permitted in any E-3 zone: 
A.  Breeding, hatching, raising and fattening of poultry, foul, birds, rabbits, chinchillas, fish, frogs and bees, for the domestic use of the resident occupant of the lot. 
B.  Keeping of bovine, sheep and horses under ownership of the resident occupant of the lot, provided that any combination of such animals on any one lot shall be limited to one animal for every one-quarter acre. 
(Ord. 109 § 12.00, 1969) 
(Ord. No. 003-2009, § 1(4), 7-9-09)  
Chapter 17.52 - E-4 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.52.010 - Uses permitted. 
All regulations in the E-4 zone shall be the same as in the R-1 zone, except that the following additional uses are permitted in any R-S zone: 
A.  Breeding, hatching, raising and fattening of poultry, foul, birds, rabbits, chinchillas, fish, frogs and bees, for the domestic use of the resident occupant of the lot. 
B.  Keeping of bovine, sheep and horses under ownership of the resident occupant of the lot, provided that any combination of such animals on any one lot shall be limited to one animal for every one-quarter acre. 
(Ord. 109 § 13.00, 1969) 
(Ord. No. 003-2009, § 1(5), 7-9-09)  
Chapter 17.56 - E-5 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.56.010 - Uses permitted. 
All regulations in the E-5 zone shall be the same as in the R-1 zone, except that the following additional uses are permitted in any R-S zone: 
A.  Breeding, hatching, raising and fattening of poultry, foul, birds, rabbits, chinchillas, fish, frogs and bees, for the domestic use of the resident occupant of the lot. 
B.  Keeping of bovine, sheep and horses under ownership of the resident occupant of the lot, provided that any combination of such animals on any one lot shall be limited to one animal for every one-quarter acre. 
(Ord. 109 § 14.00, 1969) 
(Ord. No. 003-2009, § 1(6), 7-9-09)  
Chapter 17.60 - E-6 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.60.010 - Uses permitted. 
All regulations in the E-6 zone shall be the same as in the R-1 zone, except that the following additional uses are permitted in any R-S zone: 
A.  Breeding, hatching, raising and fattening of poultry, foul, birds, rabbits, chinchillas, fish, frogs and bees, for the domestic use of the resident occupant of the lot. 
B.  Keeping of bovine, sheep and horses under ownership of the resident occupant of the lot, provided that any combination of such animals on any one lot shall be limited to one animal for every one-quarter acre. 
(Ord. 109 § 15.00, 1969) 
(Ord. No. 003-2009, § 1(7), 7-9-09)  
Chapter 17.64 - E-7 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.64.010 - Uses permitted. 
All regulations in the E-7 zone shall be the same as in the R-1 zone, except that the following additional uses are permitted in any R-S zone: 
A.  Breeding, hatching, raising and fattening of poultry, foul, birds, rabbits, chinchillas, fish, frogs and bees, for the domestic use of the resident occupant of the lot. 
B.  Keeping of bovine, sheep and horses under ownership of the resident occupant of the lot, provided that any combination of such animals on any one lot shall be limited to one animal for every one-quarter acre. 
(Ord. 109 § 16.00, 1969) 
(Ord. No. 003-2009, § 1(8), 7-9-09)  
Chapter 17.68 - E-8 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.68.010 - Uses permitted. 
All regulations in the E-8 zone shall be the same as in the R-1 zone, except that the following additional uses are permitted in any R-S zone: 
A.  Breeding, hatching, raising and fattening of poultry, foul, birds, rabbits, chinchillas, fish, frogs and bees, for the domestic use of the resident occupant of the lot. 
B.  Keeping of bovine, sheep and horses under ownership of the resident occupant of the lot, provided that any combination of such animals on any one lot shall be limited to one animal for every one-quarter acre. 
(Ord. 109 § 17.00, 1969) 
(Ord. No. 003-2009, § 1(9), 7-9-09)  
Chapter 17.72 - C-O ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.72.010 - Applicability. 
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply in the C-O professional office zone unless otherwise provided in this title. 
(Ord. 109 § 18.00, 1969)  
17.72.020 - Uses permitted. 
The uses permitted in the C-O zone are as follows: 
A.  Professional, executive and administrative offices, including, but not limited to: accountants, architects, attorneys at law, chiropractors, chiropodists, dentists, registered engineers and licensed surveyors, insurance agents, opticians, optometrists, osteopaths, physicians, real estate brokers and surgeons. 
B.  The accessory buildings and structures necessary to such use located on the same lot or parcel of land. 
C.  Automobile parking areas when developed as required in Section 17.104.020 if adjacent to a residential zone. 
(Ord. 109 § 18.01(part), 1969)  
17.72.030 - Signs. 
Any exterior sign displayed shall pertain only to a use conducted within the building; shall be attached flat against a wall of the building and parallel with its horizontal dimension and shall front the principal street, a parking area in the rear, or in the case of a corner building, on that portion of the side street wall within fifty feet of the principal street. In no case shall a sign project above the roof line. 
(Ord. 109 § 18.01(part), 1969)  
17.72.040 - Building height. 
Four stories and not to exceed forty-five feet. 
(Ord. 109 § 18.02, 1969)  
17.72.050 - Front yard. 
There shall be a front yard of not less than ten feet. The front yard shall be measured from the front property line except that where there is an official plan line or a future street line the front yard shall be measured from the official plan line or future street line. Provided, however, that along any secondary highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of forty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required, and along any major highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of fifty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required. 
(Ord. 109 § 18.03, 1969)  
17.72.060 - Side yard. 
No side yard is required. 
(Ord. 109 § 18.04, 1969)  
17.72.070 - Rear yard. 
There shall be behind every building a rear yard having a minimum depth of twenty feet, except where an alley abuts the property in the rear, and in that event the rear yard shall have a minimum depth of five feet. 
(Ord. 109 § 18.05, 1969)  
17.72.080 - Area requirements. 
The minimum lot area shall be six thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 109 § 18.06, 1969)  
17.72.090 - Distance between buildings on same lot. 
There are no requirements. 
(Ord. 109 § 18.07, 1969)  
17.72.100 - Parking requirements. 
For all professional offices, not less than the same area of parking shall be provided on the same site as there is floor space in the office building. 
(Ord. 109 § 18.08, 1969)  
Chapter 17.76 - C-1 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.76.010 - Applicability. 
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply in the C-1 neighborhood commercial zone unless otherwise provided in this title. 
(Ord. 109 § 19.00, 1969)  
17.76.020 - Uses permitted. 
The uses permitted in the C-1 zone are as follows: 
A.  Any use permitted in a C-O zone. 
B.  1.  Any of the following uses: 
a.  Arcades. 
b.  Automobile parking areas when developed as required in Section 17.104.020 if adjacent to a residential zone. 
c.  Banks, not to exceed one thousand square feet in floor area and to employ not more than three employees. 
d.  Barber shops with not more than three chairs. 
e.  Beauty shops with not more than three chairs. 
f.  Book stores. 
g.  Confectionery stores. 
h.  Dress or millinery shops. 
i.  Drug stores, not to exceed one thousand five hundred square feet of floor area and not to employ more than three employees. 
j.  Dry cleaning, pressing and laundry agencies (pick-up only). 
k.  Dry goods or notions stores not to exceed one thousand five hundred square feet of floor area. 
l.  Electric appliance stores and repairs (not furniture stores). 
m.  Florist shops. 
n.  Grocery, fruit and vegetable stores, not to exceed one thousand five hundred square feet in floor area and not to employ more than three employees. 
o.  Ice storage houses of not more than five-ton capacity. 
p.  Jewelry stores. 
q.  Meat markets or delicatessen stores, not to exceed one thousand five hundred square feet of floor area. 
r.  Offices, business, professional or public utility (not to exceed one thousand square feet of floor area). 
s.  Pet food stores. 
t.  Photographic shops. 
u.  Self-service laundries. 
v.  Shoe stores or shoe repair shops. 
w.  Stationery stores. 
x.  Tailor, clothing or wearing apparel shops. 
2.  The above-specified stores, shops or businesses shall be retail establishments selling new merchandise exclusively and shall be permitted only under the following conditions: 
a.  Such stores, shops or businesses shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building. 
b.  Products made incidental to a permitted use shall be sold at retail on the premises. 
c.  All public entrances to such stores, shops or businesses shall be from the principal street upon which the property abuts or within fifty feet thereof, except that a rear or side entrance from the building to a parking area may be provided. 
d.  Except as hereinafter provided, any exterior sign displayed shall pertain only to a use conducted on the premises, shall not exceed a height of twenty-four feet above the ground level, shall not project into a street or alley more than twelve inches beyond any property line, and any sign projecting beyond a property line shall have a clearance of not less than ten feet between the bottom of the sign and the ground level. 
C.  The accessory buildings and structures necessary to such use located on the same lot or parcel of land, including a storage garage for the exclusive use of the patrons and employees of the above stores and businesses. 
(Ord. 200 § 1, 1986; Ord. 191 § 2, 1982; Ord. 109 § 19.01, 1969)  
17.76.030 - Building height. 
Four stories and not to exceed fifty feet. 
(Ord. 109 § 19.02, 1969)  
17.76.040 - Front yard. 
All buildings shall be located not nearer than forty feet from the centerline of a street. Provided, however, that along any secondary highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of forty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required, and along any major highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of fifty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required. 
(Ord. 109 § 19.03, 1969)  
17.76.050 - Side yard. 
None, except all buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the provisions of the R-4 zone. 
(Ord. 109 § 19.04, 1969)  
17.76.060 - Rear yard. 
There shall be behind every building a rear yard having a minimum depth of twenty feet. 
(Ord. 109 § 19.05, 1969)  
17.76.070 - Area requirements. 
Six thousand square feet is the minimum lot area. 
(Ord. 109 § 19.06, 1969)  
17.76.080 - Distance between buildings on same lot. 
There are no requirements, except that all buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the provisions of the R-4 zone. 
(Ord. 109 § 19.07, 1969)  
Chapter 17.80 - C-2 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.80.010 - Applicability. 
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply in the C-2 commercial zone unless otherwise provided in this title. 
(Ord. 109 § 20.00, 1969)  
17.80.020 - Uses permitted. 
The uses permitted in the C-2 zone are as follows: 
A.  Any use permitted in the C-O and C-1 zones. 
B.  Any of the following uses: 
1.  Retail or wholesale stores or businesses provided they do not involve the following: 
a.  Any kind of manufacture, processing or treatment of products other than that which is clearly incidental to the retail business conducted on the premises and provided than no more than five persons are employed, and not more than fifty percent of the floor area of the building is used in the manufacture, processing or treatment of products, and that such operations are not objectionable due to noise, odor, dust, smoke, vibration or other similar causes; and 
b.  The sale of any alcoholic beverage as defined by Section 23004 of the Business and Professions Code of the state for consumption on the premises where sold. 
2.  Automobile parking areas. 
3.  Automobile service stations 
4.  Bakeries employing not more than ten persons on the premises. 
5.  Baths, Turkish and the like. 
6.  Billiard or pool halls or bowling alleys. 
7.  Blueprinting or photostating shops. 
8.  Bird stores or pet shops. 
9.  Churches, temporary revivals. 
10.  Cleaning and pressing establishments using nonflammable and nonexplosive cleaning fluid. 
11.  Conservatories of music. 
12.  Department stores. 
13.  Electric distributing substations and gas distribution regulating and metering stations. 
14.  Furniture stores. 
15.  Furniture warehouses for storing personal household goods. 
16.  Garages, public. 
17.  Hotels. 
18.  Interior decorating shops. 
19.  Off-sale liquor stores as defined by the laws, rules and regulations of the state. 
20.  Medical laboratories. 
21.  Motels, auto courts and tourist courts. 
22.  Music and vocal instruction. 
23.  Music stores. 
24.  Nurseries, flower or plant. 
25.  Printing, lithographing or publishing establishments. 
26.  Public parking areas. 
27.  Radio and television stores. 
28.  Refrigerated lockers. 
29.  Restaurants, tea rooms or cafes. 
30.  Skating rinks. 
31.  Studios. 
32.  Taxidermists. 
33.  Telephone exchanges. 
34.  Theaters or auditoriums (except drive-in theatres). 
35.  Trade schools, not objectionable due to noise, odor, dust, smoke, vibration or similar causes. 
36.  Upholstery shops. 
37.  Used car sales areas, provided: 
a.  That no repair or reconditioning of automobiles shall be permitted, except when enclosed in a building; and 
b.  That such area is located and developed as required in Section 17.104.020. 
38.  Wedding chapels. 
C.  The accessory buildings and structures necessary to such uses located on the same lot or parcel of land. 
D.  Emergency shelters, provided that they comply with all the applicable development standards required by Chapter 17.134, Development Standards. 
(Ord. 229 § 1, 1989; Ord. 109 § 20.01, 1969) 
(Ord. No. 042-2014, § 1, 2-12-15)  
17.80.022 - Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit. 
A.  Single room occupancies (SRO's) provided they comply with all the applicable development standards required by Chapter 17.134, Development Standards. 
(Ord. No. 042-2014, § 1, 2-12-15)  
17.80.030 - Building height. 
Six stories and not to exceed seventy-five feet unless the building sets back from each street, alley and lot line at least one foot for each three feet of height above six stories or seventy-five feet. No building shall exceed one hundred thirty-five feet or ten stories. 
(Ord. 109 § 20.02, 1969)  
17.80.040 - Front yard. 
All buildings shall be located not nearer than forty feet from the centerline of a street. Provided, however, that along any secondary highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of forty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required, and along any major highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of fifty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required. 
(Ord. 109 § 20.03, 1969)  
17.80.050 - Side yard. 
None, except all buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the provisions of the R-4 zone. 
(Ord. 109 § 20.04, 1969)  
17.80.060 - Rear yard. 
There shall be behind every building a rear yard having a minimum depth of twenty feet. 
(Ord. 109 § 20.05, 1969)  
17.80.070 - Area requirements. 
None, except all buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the provisions of the R-4 zone. 
(Ord. 109 § 20.06, 1969)  
17.80.080 - Distance between buildings on same lot. 
None, except that all buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the provisions of the R-4 zone. 
(Ord. 109 § 20.07, 1969)  
Chapter 17.84 - M-1 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.84.010 - Applicability. 
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply in the M-1 limited manufacturing zone unless otherwise provided in this title. 
(Ord. 109 § 21.00, 1969)  
17.84.020 - Uses permitted. 
The uses permitted in the M-1 zone are as follows: 
A.  Any use permitted in the C-2 zone; provided, however, that no building shall be used as a dwelling except accessory buildings which are incidental to the use of the land. 
B.  Any of the following uses: 
1.  Any kind of manufacture, compounding, assembling, processing or treatment of products other than any which produces, causes or emits any fumes, odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise or vibrations which are or may be detrimental to properties in the neighborhood or to the welfare of the occupants thereof and which are conducted wholly within a building. 
2.  Assaying. 
3.  Animal hospitals, kennels and veterinaries. 
4.  Frozen food lockers. 
5.  Wholesale businesses, storage buildings and warehouses. 
6.  The following uses, if wholly enclosed within a solid masonry wall or fence as approved by the planning commission, not less than six feet in height, and provided that such uses are conducted so that no material or equipment is visible to a person walking or riding on adjoining streets or property: 
a.  Building material storage yards; 
b.  Contractors' plants or storage yards; 
c.  Draying, freighting or trucking yards or terminals; 
d.  Feed and fuel yards; 
e.  Lumber yards; 
f.  Petroleum products storage; 
g.  Stone monument works; 
h.  Truck parking or storage; 
i.  Plumbing and sheet metal shops; 
j.  Public utilities service yards. 
C.  The accessory buildings and structures necessary to such use located on the same lot or parcel of land. 
D.  Oil and gas drilling and production shall be permitted by the planning commission according to the provisions of Section 17.140.050. 
E.  Additional uses may be permitted by the planning commission according to the provisions of Sections 17.152.020 and 17.152.030. 
(Ord. 109 § 21.01, 1969)  
17.84.030 - Building height. 
Two stories and not to exceed thirty-five feet. 
(Ord. 109 § 21.02, 1969)  
17.84.040 - Front yard. 
A.  All buildings shall be located not nearer than forty feet from the centerline of a street. Provided, however, that along any secondary highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of forty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required, and along any major highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of fifty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required. 
B.  All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the provisions of the R-4 zone. 
(Ord. 109 § 21.03, 1969)  
17.84.050 - Side yard. 
None, except all buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the provisions of the R-4 zone. 
(Ord. 109 § 21.04, 1969)  
17.84.060 - Rear yard. 
None, except all buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the provisions of the R-4 zone. 
(Ord. 109 § 21.05, 1969)  
17.84.070 - Area requirements. 
Six thousand square feet minimum lot area; all buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the provisions of the R-4 zone. 
(Ord. 109 § 21.06, 1969)  
17.84.080 - Distance between buildings on same lot. 
None, except that all buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the provisions of the R-4 zone. 
(Ord. 109 § 21.07, 1969)  
17.84.090 - Parking requirements. 
For all buildings, not less than the same area of parking space shall be provided on the same site as there is floor space in the building. 
(Ord. 109 § 21.08, 1969)  
Chapter 17.88 - M-2 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.88.010 - Applicability. 
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply in the M-2 light manufacturing zone unless otherwise provided in this title. 
(Ord. 109 § 22.00, 1969)  
17.88.020 - Uses permitted. 
The uses permitted in the M-2 zone are as follows: 
A.  Any use permitted in the M-1 zone; provided, however, that no buildings shall be used as a dwelling except accessory buildings which are incidental to the use of the land. 
B.  Any of the following uses: 
1.  Any kind of manufacturing, compounding, assembling, processing or treatment of products other than any which produces, causes or emits any fumes, odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise or vibrations which are or may be detrimental to properties in the neighborhood or to the welfare of the occupants thereof. 
2.  Agricultural industries, including packing, canning and processing plants. 
3.  Aircraft and automobile factories (no foundries). 
4.  Automobile assembling, body and fender works, painting, upholstering, dismantling and used parts storage when operated or maintained wholly within a building. 
5.  Automobile and truck parking and storing. 
6.  Bakeries. 
7.  Blacksmith shops. 
8.  Boat building. 
9.  Bottling plants. 
10.  Breweries. 
11.  Building material storage yards. 
12.  Cabinet or carpenter shops. 
13.  Carpet, awning, blinds, mattress or upholstery shops, including cleaning and repair. 
14.  Contractors' plants or storage yards. 
15.  Creameries. 
16.  Distributing plants. 
17.  Draying, freighting or trucking yards or terminals. 
18.  Electric welding and electroplating. 
19.  Equestrian establishments, including stables or riding academies, schools or amusements. 
20.  Feed and fuel yards. 
21.  Flour mills. 
22.  Fruit, vegetable and meat canning, freezing, packing and preserving plants. 
23.  Ice and cold storage plants. 
24.  Laboratories, experimental and the like. 
25.  Laundries, cleaning and dyeing plants. 
26.  Lumber yards. 
27.  Machine shops (except punch presses of over twenty tons rated capacity, drop hammers and automatic screw machines). 
28.  Motion picture studios. 
29.  Paint mixing plants (not employing a boiling process). 
30.  Petroleum products storage, provided that no storage structures shall exceed fifty feet in height. 
31.  Planing mills. 
32.  Poultry and rabbit raising, slaughter or storage. 
33.  Public utilities service yards, electric transmission substations and gas transmission and compressor stations. 
34.  Rubber fabrication or products made from finished rubber. 
35.  Sheet metal shops. 
36.  Storage spaces for transit and transportation equipment. 
37.  Tire rebuilding, recapping and retreading plants. 
38.  Truck repairing and overhauling shops. 
39.  Manufacture of: 
a.  Batteries; 
b.  Billboards and advertising structures, electric or neon signs; 
c.  Ceramic products; 
d.  Clothing or garments; 
e.  Cosmetics, perfumes and toiletries, drugs and pharmaceuticals; 
f.  Electronic instruments and devices, radios, televisions and phongraphs; 
g.  Food products (except the rendering of fats or oils); 
h.  Furniture; 
i.  Musical instruments and toys; 
j.  Prefabricated buildings; 
k.  Shoes; 
l.  Soap (cold mix only); 
m.  Textiles. 
40.  Manufacturing, compounding, assembling, processing or treatment of articles or merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: bone, cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fibre, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, shell, textiles, tobacco, wood, yarns and paint not employing a boiling process. 
C.  The accessory buildings and structures necessary to such use located on the same lot or parcel of land. 
D.  Oil and gas drilling and production shall be permitted by the planning commission according to the provisions of Section 17.140.050. 
E.  Additional uses may be permitted by the planning commission according to the provisions of Sections 17.152.020 and 17.152.030. 
(Ord. 109 § 22.01, 1969)  
17.88.030 - Building height. 
Six stories and not to exceed seventy-five feet. 
(Ord. 109 § 22.02, 1969)  
17.88.040 - Front yard. 
A.  All buildings shall be located not nearer than forty feet from the centerline of a street. Provided, however, that along any secondary highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of forty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required, and along any major highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of fifty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required. 
B.  All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the provisions of the R-4 zone. 
(Ord. 109 § 22.03, 1969)  
17.88.050 - Side yard. 
None, except all buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the provisions of the R-4 zone. 
(Ord. 109 § 22.04, 1969)  
17.88.060 - Rear yard. 
None, except all buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the provisions of the R-4 zone. 
(Ord. 109 § 22.05, 1969)  
17.88.070 - Area requirements. 
None, except all buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the provisions of the R-4 zone. 
(Ord. 109 § 22.06, 1969)  
17.88.080 - Distance between buildings on same lot. 
None, except all buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the provisions of the R-4 zone. 
(Ord. 109 § 22.07, 1969)  
Chapter 17.92 - M-3 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.92.010 - Applicability. 
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply in the M-3 general manufacturing zone unless otherwise provided in this title. 
(Ord. 109 § 23.00, 1969)  
17.92.020 - Uses permitted. 
The uses permitted in the M-3 zone are as follows: 
A.  Any use permitted in the M-2 zone; provided, however, that no building shall be used as a dwelling except accessory buildings which are incidental to the use of the land. 
B.  Any of the following uses: 
1.  Acetylene gas manufacture or storage. 
2.  Alcohol and alcoholic beverage manufacture. 
3.  Ammonia, chlorine, and bleaching powder manufacture. 
4.  Bag cleaning. 
5.  Blast furnaces. 
6.  Boiler or tank works. 
7.  Brick, tile or terra cotta products manufacture. 
8.  Building materials manufacture. 
9.  Candle factories. 
10.  Celluloid or pyroxylin manufacture. 
11.  Cement and lime manufacturing plant equipped with dust-collecting equipment capable of collecting at least ninety-seven percent of all particulate matter from kiln gases. 
12.  Chewing tobacco manufacture. 
13.  Coke ovens. 
14.  Cotton gins or oil mills. 
15.  Crematories. 
16.  Creosote treatment or manufacture. 
17.  Disinfectant manufacture. 
18.  Distillation of coal, wood or tar. 
19.  Dye-stuffs manufacture. 
20.  Exterminator or insect poison manufacture. 
21.  Feed mills. 
22.  Forge plants. 
23.  Freight classification yards. 
24.  Iron, steel, brass or copper foundries or fabrication plants and heavy weight casting. 
25.  Lamp black manufacture. 
26.  Linoleum or oiled products manufacture. 
27.  Ore reduction. 
28.  Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine or varnish manufacture. 
29.  Paper or pulp manufacture. 
30.  Petroleum products storage. 
31.  Petroleum refining and reclaiming plants, if located more than one thousand three hundred twenty feet from any property classified other than as M-3 zone or U zone. 
32.  Pickle manufacture. 
33.  Plastic manufacture. 
34.  Potash works. 
35.  Quarry or stone mills, provided operations are not conducted closer than fifty feet to any public street or highway. 
36.  Railroad roundhouses and repair shops. 
37.  Rock, sand and gravel excavating, crushing and distribution, provided such operations are not conducted closer than fifty feet to any public street or highway. 
38.  Rolling mills. 
39.  Rubber or gutta percha manufacture. 
40.  Sauerkraut manufacture. 
41.  Saw mills. 
42.  Soap manufacture. 
43.  Sodium compounds manufacture. 
44.  Starch manufacture. 
45.  Stove or shoe polish manufacture. 
46.  Tar roofing or waterproofing or other tar products manufacture. 
47.  Wool pulling or scouring. 
C.  Any of the following uses provided that practical technological improvements subject to the approval of the planning commission are employed for the control of fumes, odors, dust, smoke, gas, noise, vibration or other conditions which are or may be detrimental to the public health, safety, convenience or general welfare of the community: 
1.  Acid manufacture. 
2.  Ammunition manufacture. 
3.  Except as provided in subdivision 11 of subsection B of this section, cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture. 
4.  Chemical manufacture. 
5.  Curing, tanning and storage of raw hides or skins. 
6.  Distillation of bones. 
7.  Drop forge industries manufacturing forgings with power hammers. 
8.  Explosives, manufacture or storage. 
9.  Fat rendering. 
10.  Fertilizer manufacture. 
11.  Garbage, offal or dead animal reduction or dumping. 
12.  Gas manufacture. 
13.  Gelatin or size manufacture. 
14.  Glass manufacture. 
15.  Glucose or dextrine manufacture. 
16.  Glue manufacture. 
17.  Nonmineral oil extraction plants. 
18.  Petroleum refining and reclaiming plants, if located within one thousand three hundred twenty feet from any property classified other than as an M-3 zone or U zone. 
19.  Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ores. 
D.  The accessory buildings and structures necessary to such use located on the same lot or parcel of land. 
E.  Oil and gas drilling and production shall be permitted according to the provisions of Section 17.140.050. 
F.  Additional uses may be permitted by the planning commission according to the provisions of Sections 17.152.020 and 17.152.030. 
(Ord. 109 § 23.01, 1969)  
17.92.030 - Building height. 
Thirteen stories and not to exceed one hundred fifty feet. 
(Ord. 109 § 23.02, 1969)  
17.92.040 - Front yard. 
A.  All buildings shall be located not nearer than forty feet from the centerline of a street. Provided, however, that along any secondary highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of forty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required, and along any major highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of fifty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required. 
B.  All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the provisions of the R-4 zone. 
(Ord. 109 § 23.03, 1969)  
17.92.050 - Side yard. 
None, except all buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the provisions of the R-4 zone. 
(Ord. 109 § 23.04, 1969)  
17.92.060 - Area requirements. 
Six thousand square feet minimum lot area. 
(Ord. 109 § 23.05, 1969)  
17.92.070 - Rear yard. 
None, except all buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the provisions of the R-4 zone. 
(Ord. 109 § 23.06, 1969)  
17.92.080 - Distance between buildings on same lot. 
None, except all buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the provisions of the R-4 zone. 
(Ord. 109 § 23.07, 1969)  
Chapter 17.96 - A-1 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.96.010 - Applicability. 
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply in the A-1 light agricultural zone unless otherwise provided in this title. 
(Ord. 109 § 24.00, 1969)  
17.96.020 - Uses permitted. 
A.  The uses permitted in the A-1 zone are any of the following: 
1.  All agricultural uses, including the keeping of poultry and rabbits or similar livestock, provided, however, that not to exceed one horse, hog, mule, cow, goat, sheep, or other similar animals shall be permitted for each one quarter acre of area of the parcel of land upon which the same are kept. 
2.  Accessory agricultural buildings, structures and uses, including farm buildings, housing for agricultural workers, garages and implement shelters, provided no livestock or any building or enclosure used in connection with livestock shall be located nearer than one hundred feet to the front lot line, nor nearer than fifty feet to any existing dwelling on any contiguous property, or to any public park or school. 
3.  Excavation and quarrying of natural materials, provided such operations are not conducted closer than one hundred fifty feet to any public street or highway or to any existing dwelling. 
4.  Animal hospitals, kennels and veterinaries. 
5.  Equestrian establishments, including stables or riding academies, schools or amusements. 
6.  Storage of petroleum products for use on the premises, but not for resale. 
7.  Two signs not to exceed twelve square feet in area, each advertising the products produced or sold on the premises or identifying the premises or occupants. 
8.  Temporary stands for the sale of agricultural, horticultural or farming products grown or produced on the premises, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  That the floor area of such stands does not exceed four hundred square feet; 
b.  That the stands be located not closer than fifty-five feet from the centerline of any public road, street or highway right-of-way; 
c.  That the stand is exclusively of wood frame construction and erected in such a manner that the stand can be readily moved by means of skids or some other device; 
d.  That the owner remove such stand at his own expense when the stand is not in use for a period of thirty days. 
9.  Accessory buildings, structures and uses, customary and incidental to the above uses. 
B.  Oil and gas drilling and production shall be permitted according to the provisions of Section 17.140.050. 
C.  Additional uses may be permitted by the planning commission according to the provisions of Sections 17.152.020 and 17.152.030. 
D.  Bees, provided that not more than six colonies may be maintained on one lot; provided, however, that if the owner/tenant thereof is growing almond trees and/or any other crop which necessitates the use of bees for pollination thereof, the amount of bees necessary for such pollination in excess of six colonies may be maintained during the applicable pollination period. 
(Ord. 179 § 6, 1979; Ord. 109 § 24.01, 1969)  
17.96.030 - Building height—Front, side and rear yards—Area requirements—Distance between buildings. 
All buildings used for housing purposes shall comply with the R-1 requirements; provided, further, that all buildings shall be located not nearer than sixty feet from the centerline of any public street or highway. 
(Ord. 109 § 24.02, 1969)  
Chapter 17.98 - A-2 GENERAL AGRICULTURAL ZONE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 031-2013, § 1, adopted May 23, 2013, renumbered Chapter 17.100 as Chapter 17.98. 
 
17.98.010 - Applicability. 
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply in the A-2 general agricultural zone unless otherwise provided in this title. 
(Ord. 109 § 25.00, 1969) 
(Ord. No. 031-2013, § 1, 5-23-13)  
17.98.020 - Uses permitted. 
The uses permitted in the A-2 zone are as follows: 
A.  Any use permitted in the A-1 zone. 
B.  All agricultural and grazing uses including cattle feed yards and animal sales yards. 
C.  Oil and gas drilling and production shall be permitted according to the provisions of Section 17.140.050. 
D.  Additional uses may be permitted by the planning commission according to the provisions of Sections 17.152.020 and 17.152.030. 
(Ord. 109 § 25.01, 1969) 
(Ord. No. 031-2013, § 1, 5-23-13)  
17.98.030 - Building height—Front, side and rear yards—Area requirements—Distance between buildings. 
All buildings used for housing purposes shall comply with the R-1 requirements; provided, further, that all buildings shall be located not nearer than sixty feet from the centerline of any public street or highway. 
(Ord. 109 § 25.02, 1969) 
(Ord. No. 031-2013, § 1, 5-23-13)  
Chapter 17.100 - PARK (P) ZONE DISTRICT 
 
17.100.010 - Regulations generally. 
The regulations set out in this chapter shall apply in all P districts and shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.100 of this title. 
(Ord. No. 031-2013, § 1, 5-23-13)  
17.100.020 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of the PR, parks and recreation district is to provide for existing and major planned public and private parks and recreational facilities and to encourage an orderly and harmonious development of these facilities which are performing services for residents of the city as a whole. The PR, parks and recreation district is intended to guide and regulate public and private parks and recreational facilities, and similar and compatible uses to provide: 
A.  Well-designed projects to protect adjacent property from unreasonable adverse impacts or intrusions on properties and improvements. 
B.  Adequate on-site parking and circulation to obviate the need for use of existing public right-of-way and streets for parking and internal circulation. 
(Ord. No. 031-2013, § 1, 5-23-13)  
17.100.030 - Principal uses permitted. 
The following principal uses shall be permitted in the PR, parks and recreation district: 
A.  Community based recreational facilities; 
B.  Courts (basketball, tennis, etc.); 
C.  Government office or building; 
D.  Greenbelts; 
E.  Picnic areas; 
F.  Public parks; 
G.  Playgrounds; 
H.  Sports arena, indoor; 
I.  Swimming pools, public; 
J.  Trails (riding, hiking, bicycling), etc.; 
K.  Wildlife or nature preserve; 
L.  Other similar parks and recreational uses which the commission finds to fall within the intent and purpose of this district, that will not be detrimental to the public welfare and which the commission finds to be of a comparable nature and of the same class as the uses enumerated in this section. 
(Ord. No. 031-2013, § 1, 5-23-13)  
17.100.040 - Accessory uses. 
Other uses and structures customarily appurtenant or incidental to a principal permitted use on the same parcel, subject to applicable laws and intended solely for use by the occupants of a principal permitted use or uses. No accessory structure shall be constructed prior to the construction of the main facility, or on a lot separate from the main facility. 
(Ord. No. 031-2013, § 1, 5-23-13)  
17.100.050 - Uses subject to administrative review and approval. 
The following uses may be permitted subject to administrative review and approval, pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.136.030 of this title: 
A.  Circus, carnivals, fairs, festivals, revivals, assemblies, temporary; 
B.  Temporary storage of materials and construction equipment used in construction or maintenance of streets and highways, sewers, storm drains, underground conduits, flood control works, pipelines and similar uses. 
(Ord. No. 031-2013, § 1, 5-23-13)  
17.100.060 - Uses permitted by conditional use permit. 
The following uses may be permitted in the PR, parks and recreation district subject to a conditional use permit provided for in Chapter 17.152 of this title: 
A.  Amusement park; 
B.  Archery range; 
C.  Athletic, swim and health clubs, private; 
D.  County clubs; 
E.  Equestrian Centers; 
F.  Freestanding signage; 
G.  Golf courses; 
H.  Golf driving ranges; 
I.  Museums; 
J.  Outdoor amphitheaters; 
K.  Refreshment stands for the sale of ice cream, beverages and similar items when conducted for city-approved recreational activities (not-for-profit organizations); 
L.  Swim clubs; 
M.  Sports arenas, outdoors; 
N.  Zoos; 
O.  Other similar uses which the commission finds to fall within the intent and purpose of this district, that will not be detrimental to the public welfare and which the commission finds to be of a comparable nature and of the same class as the uses enumerated in this section. 
(Ord. No. 031-2013, § 1, 5-23-13)  
17.100.070 - Building height. 
Maximum Building Height. No lot or parcel of land in the PR, parks and recreation district shall have a building or structure in excess of two stories or thirty-five feet in height, whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 031-2013, § 1, 5-23-13)  
17.100.080 - Front yard. 
All buildings shall be located not nearer than twenty-five feet from the property line. 
(Ord. No. 031-2013, § 1, 5-23-13)  
17.100.090 - Side yard. 
There shall be a side yard on each side of the main building of not less than five feet, except that on the street side of a corner lot there shall be a street side yard of not less than ten feet. 
(Ord. No. 031-2013, § 1, 5-23-13)  
17.100.100 - Rear yard. 
There shall be a rear yard of the main building of not less than fifteen feet. 
(Ord. No. 031-2013, § 1, 5-23-13)  
17.100.110 - Area requirements. 
There is no minimum lot area requirement. 
(Ord. No. 031-2013, § 1, 5-23-13)  
17.100.120 - Findings. 
Findings required to approve developments within the parks and recreation district shall be as follows: 
A.  That the development is consistent with the city general plan and this title. 
B.  That the development, accessory buildings, and facilities, located in established areas, have an adequate appearance, so as to be in harmony with the character and quality of surrounding development within the zone. 
C.  That the development as proposed, will not be detrimental to surrounding developments, or improvements, nor be inferior in construction, appearance or quality. 
D.  That the development as proposed, will provide quality development, including ample landscaping and screening, adequate parking and circulation, and other amenities necessary to preserve compatibility with surrounding development, and prevent nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 031-2013, § 1, 5-23-13)  
CHAPTER 17.102 - SPECIFIC USE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
Sections: 
 
17.102.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to identify land uses and activities which possess the potential to cause deleterious effects to the community in which they are located and to subject such uses to specific regulations with the intent of minimizing to the extent practical these deleterious effects. Further it is intended that in the zone districts in which these land uses are permitted they are conducted in a manner which is consistent with the protection of the public health safety and welfare in accordance with the goals policies objectives and implementation programs contained in the general plan. 
It is further determined that it is in the interest of public health safety and welfare of the citizens of the city to protect minors from viewing publicly displayed harmful matter and that pursuant to Penal Code Section 313.1(d) and (e) the city is authorized to adopt ordinances which restrict the display of harmful matter to minors by the use of blinder racks. It has also been found that there exists an increasing trend toward the display of harmful matter within the meaning of Penal Code Section 313, at grocery stores, convenience stores, video stores, and other retail outlets, as well as from news racks, and that restriction of public display of such harmful matter will keep the adverse impacts of such harmful matter upon minors to a minimum. 
(Ord. No. 001-2009, § 1, 6-11-09)  
17.102.020 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the activities and land uses specified by this chapter in addition to any standards and regulations established by this title which may also be applicable to these specified land uses or activities. 
(Ord. No. 001-2009, § 1, 6-11-09)  
17.102.030 - Adult entertainment. 
A.  Applicability. It is the intent of this chapter to prevent community wide adverse economic impacts, increased crime, decreased property values, and the deterioration of neighborhoods which can be brought about by the concentration of businesses in close proximity to each other or proximity to other incompatible uses such as schools for minors, churches, and residentially zoned districts or uses. The city council finds that it has been demonstrated in various communities that the concentration of businesses causes an increase in the number of transients in the area and an increase in the crime, and in addition the effects described above can cause other businesses and residents to move elsewhere. It is, therefore, the purpose of this title to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of adult oriented businesses or their close proximity to incompatible uses, while permitting the location of adult oriented businesses in certain areas. 
B.  Findings of the City Council. 
1.  The city council, in adopting the ordinance codified in this chapter, takes legislative notice of the existence and content of the following studies concerning the adverse secondary side effects of businesses in other cities: American Center for Law and Justice (1996); New York, New York (1994); State of New Jersey (1994); Garden Grove, California (1991); Tucson, Arizona (1990); Seattle, Washington (1989); Austin, Texas (1986); Oklahoma City, Oklahoma (1986); Indianapolis, Indiana (1984); Houston, Texas (1983); Beaumont, Texas (1982); Minneapolis, Minnesota (1980); Phoenix, Arizona (1979); Whittier, California (1978); Amarillo, Texas (1977); Cleveland, Ohio (1977); Los Angeles, California (1977). The City Council finds that these studies are relevant to the problems addressed by the City in enacting this ordinance to regulate the adverse secondary side effects of adult oriented businesses and more specifically finds that these studies provide convincing evidence that: 
a.  Adult-oriented businesses are linked to increases in the crime rates in those areas in which they are located and in surrounding areas. 
b.  Both the proximity of adult-oriented businesses to sensitive land uses and the concentration of adult-oriented businesses tend to result in the blighting and deterioration of the areas in which they are located. 
c.  The proximity and concentration of adult-oriented businesses adjacent to residential, recreational, religious, educational, and other adult-oriented business uses can cause other businesses and residence to move elsewhere. 
d.  There is substantial evidence that an increase in crime tends to accompany, concentrate around and be aggravated by adult-oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, an increase in the crimes of narcotics distribution and use, prostitution, pandering, and violence against persons and property. The studies from other cities establish convincing evidence that adult-oriented businesses which are not regulated as to permissible locations often have a deleterious effect on nearby businesses in residential areas, causing, among other adverse secondary effects, an increase in crime and a decrease in property values. 
2.  Based on the foregoing, the city council finds and determines that special regulation of adult-oriented businesses is necessary to ensure that their adverse secondary side effects will not contribute to an increase in crime rates or to the blighting or deterioration of the areas in which they are located or surrounding areas. The need for such special regulations is based upon the recognition that adult-oriented businesses have serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances or located in direct proximity to sensitive uses such as parks, schools, churches, thereby having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas. It is the purpose and intent of these special regulations to prevent the concentration of adult-oriented businesses and thereby prevent such adverse secondary side effects. 
3.  The locational requirements, established by this chapter, do not unreasonably restrict the establishment or operation of constitutionally protected adult oriented businesses that are provided by this chapter. 
4.  In developing the ordinance codified in this chapter, the city council has been mindful of legal principles relating to regulation of adult-oriented businesses and does not intend to suppress or infringe upon any expressive activities protected by the First Amendments of the United States and California Constitutions, but instead desires to enact reasonable time place and manner regulations that address the adverse secondary effects of adult-oriented businesses. The city council has considered decisions of the United States Supreme Court regarding local regulations of adult-oriented businesses including, but not limited to, Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc. 427 U S 50 (1976) Reh. Denied 475 U S 1132); FWIPBS, Inc. v. Dallas 493 U S 215 (1990); Barnes v. Glenn Theater 501 U S 560 (1991); United States Court of Appeals 9th Circuit decisions, including but not limited to: Topanga Press et al. v. City of Los Angeles 989 F. 2d 1524 (1993); several California cases including but not limited to: City of National City v. Wiener. 3 Cal4th 832 (1993); People v. Superior Court (Lucero) 149 Cal3d 14 (1989); and City of Vallejo v. Adult Books et al. 167 Cal App 3d 1169 (1985); and other federal cases including Lakeland Lounge v. City of Jacksonville (5th Cir. 1992) 973 F. 2d 1255; Hana On. Inc. v. Arlington (5th Cir 1995) 65 F. 3d 1248; Mitchell v. Commission on Adult Entertainment (3d Cir 1993) 10 F. 3d 123; International Eateries v. Broward County (11th Cir 1991) 941 F. 2d 1157; and Star Satellite v. City of Biloxi (5th Cir 1986) 779 F. 2d 1074. 
5.  The city council also finds that locational criteria alone do not adequately protect the health safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city and thus certain requirements with respect to the ownership and operation of adult oriented businesses are in the public interest. In addition to the findings and studies conducted in other cities regarding increases in crime rates decreases in property values and the blighting of areas in which such businesses are located the city council also takes legislative notice of the facts recited in the case of K. v. Inc. v. Kitsay County 793 F. 2d 1053 (1986), regarding how live adult entertainment results in secondary effects such as prostitution drug dealing and other law enforcement problems. 
6.  The city council finds the following in part based upon its understanding of the documents and judicial decision in the public record: 
a.  Evidence indicates that some dancers models and entertainers and other persons who publicly perform specified sexual activities or publicly display specified anatomical parts in adult oriented businesses collectively referred to as performers have been found to engage in sexual activities with patrons of adult-oriented businesses on the site of the adult oriented business. 
b.  Evidence has demonstrated that performers employed buy adult oriented businesses have been found to offer and provide private shows to patrons who for a price are permitted to observe and participate with the performers in live sex shows. 
c.  Evidence indicates that performers at adult oriented businesses have been found to engage in acts of prostitution with patrons of the establishment. 
d.  Evidence indicates that fully enclosed booths individual viewing areas and other small rooms whose interiors cannot be seen from public areas of the establishment regularly have been found to be used as a location for engaging in unlawful sexual activity. 
e.  As a result of the above and the increase in incidents of AIDS and hepatitis B which are both sexually transmitted diseases the city has a substantial interest in adopting regulations which will reduce to the greatest extent possible the possibility of the occurrence of prostitution and casual sex acts at adult oriented businesses. 
7.  Zoning licensing and other police power regulations are legitimate reasonable means of accountability to help protect the quality of life in the city and to help assure that all operators of adult oriented businesses comply with reasonable regulations and are located in places that minimize the diverse secondary effects which naturally accompany the operation of such businesses. 
8.  The city council recognizes the possible harmful effects on children and minors exposed to the effects of such adult oriented businesses and the deterioration of respect for family values and the need and desire of children and minors to stay away from and avoid such businesses which causes children to be fearful and cautious when walking through or visiting the immediate neighborhood of such businesses and the city council desires to minimize and control the adverse secondary side effects associated with the operation of adult oriented businesses and thereby protect the health safety and welfare of the citizens of the city protect the citizens from increased crime preserve the quality of life preserve the property values and the character of surrounding neighborhoods and businesses deter the spread of urban blight and protect against the threat to health from the spread of communicable and sexually transmitted diseases. 
9.  It is not the intent of the city council in enacting the ordinance codified in this chapter or any provision thereof to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material and the city council recognizes that state law prohibits the distribution of the obscene materials and expects and encourages law enforcement officials to enforce state obscenity statutes against such illegal activities in the city. 
10.  Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize legalize or permit the establishment operation or maintenance of any business building or use which violates any city ordinance or any statue of the state of California regarding public nuisances unlawful or indecent exposure sexual conduct lewdness obscene or harmful matter or the exhibition or public display thereof. 
11.  The city council finds the following in part based upon its understanding of the documents and judicial decisions in the public record. 
a.  Evidence indicates that some dancers models and entertainers and other persons who publicly perform specified sexual activities or publicly display specified anatomical parts in adult oriented businesses collectively referred to as performers have been found to engage in sexual activities with patrons of adult oriented businesses on the site of the adult oriented business. 
b.  Evidence has demonstrated that performers employed by adult oriented businesses have been found to offer and provide private shows to patrons who for a price are permitted to observe and participate with the performers in live sex shows. 
c.  Evidence indicates that performers at adult oriented businesses have been found to engage in acts of prostitution with patrons of the establishment. 
12.  In prohibiting public nudity in adult oriented businesses the city council does not intend to proscribe the communication of erotic messages or any other communicative element or activity but rather only to prohibit public nudity due to the secondary impacts associated with such public nudity. 
13.  The city council also finds as a wholly independent basis that it has a substantial public interest in preserving societal order and morality and that such interest is furthered by a prohibition on public nudity. 
14.  While the city council desires to protect the rights conferred by the United States Constitution to adult oriented businesses it does so in a manner that ensures the continued and orderly development of property within the city and diminishes to the greatest extent feasible those undesirable secondary effects which the aforementioned studies have shown to be associated with the development operation of adult oriented businesses. 
15.  In enacting a nudity limitation the city declares that the limitation is a regulatory licensing provision and not a criminal offense. The city has not provided a criminal penalty for a violation of the nudity limitation. The city adopts such a limitation only as a condition of issuance and maintenance of an adult oriented business permit issued pursuant to this code. 
16.  The city council finds that preventing the exchange of money between entertainers and patrons also reduces the likelihood of drug and sex transactions occurring in adult oriented businesses. 
17.  Requiring separations between entertainers and patrons reduces the likelihood that such persons will negotiate narcotics sales and or transact sexual favors within the adult oriented business. 
18.  Enclosed or concealed booths and dimly lit areas within adult oriented businesses greatly increase the potential for misuse of the premises including unlawful conduct of a type which facilitates transmission of disease. Requirements that all indoor areas be open to view by management at all times and that adequate lighting be provided are necessary in order to reduce the opportunity for and therefore the incidence of illegal conduct within adult oriented businesses and to facilitate the inspection of the interior of the premises thereof by law enforcement personnel. 
C.  Establishment of an adult oriented business as used herein shall mean and include any of the following: 
1.  The opening or commencement of any adult oriented business as a new business. 
2.  The conversion of an existing business whether or not an adult oriented business to any adult oriented business defined herein. 
3.  The addition of any of the adult oriented businesses defined herein to any other existing adult oriented business. 
4.  The relocation of any such adult oriented business. 
D.  Definitions. 
1.  Specified Anatomical Areas. As used herein, "specified anatomical areas" shall mean and include any of the following: 
a.  Less then completely and opaquely covered human (i) genitals or pubic region; (ii) buttocks; and (iii) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; 
b.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; 
c.  Any device, costume or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in subdivision (a) or (b) above. 
2.  Specified Sexual Activities. As used herein, "specified sexual activities" shall mean and include any of the following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering: 
a.  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast; 
b.  Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
c.  Masturbation, actual or simulated; 
d.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the other activities described in subdivisions (a) through (c) of this subsection. 
3.  Adult-Oriented Business. As used herein, "adult oriented business" shall mean any of the following: 
a.  Adult Arcade. The term "adult arcade" as used in this chapter, is an establishment where, for any form of consideration one or more still or motion picture projectors, video cassettes, or other similar image producing devices are maintained to show images for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are used to show films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slide or other photographic reproductions twenty-five percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
b.  Adult Bookstore. The term "adult bookstore" as used in this chapter, is an establishment that sells or rents books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter photographs, films, motion pictures, slides, tapes, video cassettes, records or any other form of visual or audio representation twenty-five percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
c.  Adult Cabaret. The term "adult cabaret" as used in this chapter, means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar business establishment which: (1) regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; and/or (2) which regularly features persons who appear semi nude; and/or (3) shows films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slide or other photographic reproduction twenty-five percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
d.  Adult Hotel or Motel. The term "adult hotel or motel" as used in this chapter, means a hotel or motel, or similar business establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions thirty percent (30%) or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
e.  Adult Motion Picture Theater. The term "adult motion picture theater" as used in this chapter, is a business establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown and twenty-five percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
f.  Adult Newsstands. The term "adult newsstands" as used in the chapter, shall mean the following: 
i.  Any coin operated machine or device that dispenses material substantially devoted to the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and 
ii.  Any shelf countertop or rack indoor or outdoor used for displaying for sale rental or other use to the public magazines newspapers video cassettes or other periodicals substantially devoted to the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas where twenty-five percent of the area is devoted to said uses in non adult businesses. This does not apply to interior display fixtures in approved adult entertainment businesses. 
g.  Adult Theater. The term "adult theater" as used in this chapter, means a theater, concert hall auditorium or similar establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
h.  Church. The term "church" as used in this chapter means an institution that people regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services, meetings, or other activities. The term "church" shall not carry a secular connotation and shall include buildings in which the religious services of any denomination are held. 
i.  Distinguished or Characterized by an Emphasis Upon. As used in this chapter, the term "distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon" shall mean and refer to the dominant or essential theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films, which are "distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon" the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are those whose dominant or predominant character and theme are the depiction of the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas. See Prinale v. City of Covina. 115 Cal. App.3 151 (1981). 
j.  Modeling Studio. The term "modeling studio" as used in this chapter means a business which provides, of pecuniary compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models who for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, display "specified anatomical areas" to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons paying such consideration. "Modeling studio" does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. "Modeling studio" further does not include a studio or similar facility owned, operated or maintained by an individual artist, or group of artists, and which does not provide permit or make available "specified sexual activities." 
k.  Regularly Features. The term "regularly features" with respect to an adult theater or adult cabaret means a regular and substantial course of conduct. The fact that live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities occurs on two or more occasions within a thirty-day period of four or more occasions within a one hundred eighty day period, shall to the extent permitted by law be deemed to be regular and substantial course of conduct. 
l.  School. The term "school" as used in this chapter, is any child or day care facility, or an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, offering instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education code and maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high school, senior high school or any special institution of education, but it does not include a vocational or professional institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, or university. 
m.  Semi Nude. The term "semi nude" means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
E.  General Provisions. Adult oriented businesses may be permitted in compliance with the provisions of this chapter where the land use designation of the general plan for the subject property is "industrial" and where the zone district in which the subject property is located is "industrial" subject to the limitations and design standards specified within said zone districts in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
F.  Development Standards. 
1.  Minimum Proximity Requirements. The distances provided in this section shall be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest point of the property upon which the proposed land use is to be located to the nearest point of the property from which the proposed land use is to be separated. 
2.  Adult oriented businesses shall not be established or conducted within: 
a.  One thousand feet of any residential use; 
b.  One thousand feet of any funeral parlor mortuary or similar facility; 
c.  One thousand feet of a public or private school for minors; 
d.  One thousand feet of a licensed day care facility for minors; 
e.  One thousand feet of a church synagogue or other place of worship; 
f.  One thousand feet from any other adult entertainment business; and 
g.  One thousand feet of any publicly used facility, such as parks, libraries, any civic buildings; however, this subsection shall not apply to such uses as public utility facilities such as the airports, utility plants, and similar uses. 
3.  Exterior Display. No adult entertainment business shall be operated in a way that permits observation of material depicting or describing "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities," as defined in this title from any location outside of the building in which an adult entertainment business is operating. 
4.  Advertising structures, advertisements displays or other promotional material depicting "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities" or displaying instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities" shall not be visible from the outside of a building. Further, no building shall be painted in garish colors or such other fashion that will effectuate the same purpose as a sign. 
5.  All building openings, entries and windows for adult-oriented businesses shall be located, covered, or screened in a manner to prevent a view into the interior from any exterior public or semipublic area. 
6.  No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used for adult-oriented businesses that can be discerned by the public from public and or semipublic areas. 
G.  An interior sign, with a minimum surface area of four square feet, shall be posted in a prominent location inside the adult entertainment business, stating, in English and Spanish as follows: 
"Penal Code Section 314 (Indecent exposures: Exhibitions: Penalty). Every person who willfully and lewdly either: 
1.  Exposes his person, or the private parts thereof, in any public place, or in any place where there are present other persons to be offended or annoyed thereby; or 
2.  Procures, counsels, or assists any person to expose himself or take part in any model artist exhibition, to make any other exhibition of himself to public view, to view any number of persons engaged in actions deemed an offense to decency, or be adapted to excite to vicious or lewd thoughts or acts, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
H.  Operational Requirements. 
1.  All activities pertaining to the operation of an adult entertainment business shall be conducted inside the walls of the proposed building and shall be out of sight and sound from any location outside the building. This shall not apply to approved outdoor signage, for the purpose of notifying potential customers of the business. 
2.  Within the adult entertainment business, all image producing devices shall be located so that the machines are open to view from any side and are without obstructions or separations that would block from open sight, any patrons using said machines. 
3.  A responsible adult shall be present on the premises at all times and shall observe and supervise the use of all image-producing devices and all areas of the business available to public access. Adult entertainment businesses containing over forty image-producing machines shall require the presence of two responsible adults to observe and supervise all areas of the business available to public access. 
4.  Facility Design Requirements. All adult entertainment businesses other than such businesses that are established as a tenant within an industrially zoned center containing multiple tenants shall be designed and constructed to blend into, and appear as an integral part of, the built environment that characterizes the surrounding area. 
5.  Exclusion of Minors. Access to any adult entertainment business by a minor shall be prohibited. A sign shall be posted on all entrances restricting inclusion or entrance of minors. No minors shall be employed by any adult entertainment business nor permitted entrance into the premises. 
6.  Minimum Lighting. No person shall operate an adult entertainment business, excluding adult motion picture theaters, unless alight level of not less than two foot candles at floor level is maintained in every portion of said establishment to which the public is admitted. 
7.  Maximum Occupancy Load. No person shall operate an adult entertainment business in which the number of persons in any room or partitioned portion of a room where an image-producing device is located exceeds one person per thirty square feet. The maximum occupancy permitted in any room or partitioned portion of a room in which any image-producing device is located shall be conspicuously posted by the operator and shall remain posted at the entrance of said room. 
8.  Maximum Number of Devices. No person shall operate an adult entertainment business in which the number of image-producing devices exceeds the maximum occupancy load permitted in any room or partitioned portion of a room in which an image-producing device is located. 
9.  Free Access to Law Enforcement, Fire, Health and Safety Personnel, City Inspectors. No person shall deny access to an adult entertainment business for the purpose of a reasonable inspection to enforce compliance with building fire, electrical, health, or plumbing regulations or California State Law. 
10.  Use of Terms. The term "sexually-oriented" and "adult-oriented" are synonymously used. 
11.  Other Remedies. The provisions of subsection (H)(10) of this section are to be construed as added remedies not in conflict with or derogation of any other actions or proceedings or remedies otherwise provided by law. 
I.  Nonconforming Establishments. 
1.  Any adult entertainment business established and conducted as a lawful business and a lawful use at the time this title became effective, has been in continuous operation since that time, and is not in conformance with the requirements of this title shall be recognized as a legal nonconforming use. 
2.  Any non-conforming adult entertainment use shall not be enlarged or changed by any of the following means unless such a change will bring the business into full compliance with the requirements of this section. 
a.  Increase in the size of the floor area or use area of a building or portion of a building in which the business is located; 
b.  Use of an adjacent building in whole or part, whether on the same lot or an adjacent lot; 
c.  Conversion of an existing adult entertainment business to any other adult entertainment business; and 
d.  Addition of another adult entertainment business to an existing adult entertainment business. 
3.  The establishment of any land use specified in Section 17.102.030(C)(2) of this chapter, within the prescribed distances to an existing adult-oriented business, shall not, by establishment of that land use, require the removal of the adult-oriented business, provided that the adult-oriented business is a legal use or a legal nonconforming use and is in conformance with all provision of this title and other applicable ordinances and statutes. 
J.  Amortization of Nonconforming Adult-Oriented Business Uses. Any use of real property existing on the effective date of this title, which does not conform to the provisions of this section but which was constructed, operated, and maintained in compliance with all previous regulations, shall be regarded as a nonconforming use which may be continued for ten years after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. On or before such date, all such non-conforming uses shall be terminated unless an extension of time has been approved by the city council in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
1.  Abandonment. Notwithstanding the above, any discontinuance or abandonment of the use of any lot or structure as an adult-oriented business shall result in a loss of legal nonconforming status of such use. 
2.  Amortization—Annexed Property. Any adult-oriented business which was a legal use at the time of annexation of the property and which is located in the, but which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter shall be terminated within ten years following the date of annexation unless an extension of time has been approved by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
K.  Extension of Time for Termination of Nonconforming Use. The owner or operator of a nonconforming use as described in this chapter may apply under the provisions of this section to the city council for an extension of time within which to terminate the nonconforming use. 
1.  Time and Manner of Application. An application for an extension of time within which to terminate a use made nonconforming by the provisions of this chapter may be filed by the owner of the real property upon which such use is operated, or by the operator of the use. Such an application must be filed with planning department at least ninety days but no more than one hundred eighty days prior to the time in which to terminate such use. 
2.  Content of Application—Fees. The application shall state the ground for requesting an extension of time. The filing fee for such application shall be the same as that for a variance as is set forth in the schedule of fees established by resolution from time to time by the city council. 
3.  Hearing Procedure. The city manager shall appoint a hearing officer to hear the application. The hearing officer shall set the matter for hearing within forty-five days of receipt of the application. All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; may be represented by counsel; and shall have the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and subject to judicial review pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
4.  Approval of Extension—Findings. An extension under the provisions of this section shall be for a reasonable period of time commensurate with the investment involved and shall be approved only if the hearing officer makes all of the following findings or such other findings as are required by law: 
a.  The applicant has made a substantial investment (including but not limited to lease obligations) in the property or structure on or in which the nonconforming use is conducted; such property or structure cannot be readily converted to another use; and such investment was made prior to the effective date of this Section 17.102.30 of this chapter. 
b.  The applicant will be unable to recoup said investment as of the date established for termination of the use; and 
c.  The applicant has made good faith efforts to recoup the investment and to relocate the use to a location in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
L.  Regulations Non-Exclusive. 
1.  Nothing in this section is intended to authorize, legalize or permit the establishment operation or maintenance of any business, building or use which violates any city ordinance or statute of the state of California regarding public nuisance sexual conduct. Lewdness, obscene or harmful matter, or the exhibition or public display thereof. 
2.  The regulations set forth in this section are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the operation of adult entertainment establishments set forth elsewhere in applicable ordinances. 
M.  Display of Harmful Material to Minors Prohibited. 
1.  It shall be unlawful to display, because to be displayed, or permit to be displayed for commercial purposes any harmful matter in any public place except for a public place from which minors are excluded. 
2.  Harmful matter is not considered to be displayed if it is located in an area that places such material reasonably beyond the reach of a minor and a device, commonly known as a blinder rack, is placed in front of such harmful matter. 
3.  Any person who sells or rents video recordings containing harmful matter shall comply with Penal Code Section 313.1.(e) which requires the creation of a separate area within a business establishment for the placement of such video recordings for display of any material advertising the sale or rental of such video recordings. Additionally, any harmful matter, placed or displayed in that separate area, must be obscured by a blinder rack if the harmful matter can be viewed by persons outside that area. 
4.  Any news rack, which offers harmful matter for sale, must place a blinder rack in front of such harmful matter so as to obscure the lower two-thirds of the material displaying said harmful matter. For purposes of this subsection, a wrapper which obscures the lower two-thirds of the material and which is fastened securely to the material may be used in-lieu of a blinder rack. 
(Ord. No. 001-2009, § 1, 6-11-09)  
17.102.035 - Tobacco, smoke shops and electronic/vapor substance inhalation shops. 
A.  Findings. The city council finds that: 
1.  The U.S. Center for Disease Control has found that at least four hundred thirty-four thousand Americans die each year from tobacco caused diseases; 
2.  The National Institute of Drug Abuse has concluded that there is a strong correlation between drug use and violence and that hookah bars and tobacco shops promote the use of illegal or illicit drugs. 
3.  Strong legislative action is needed to curtail the wide availability of all types of paraphernalia, tobacco and tobacco products. 
B.  Applicability. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the location and operation of retail purveyors of tobacco and tobacco products, electronic vapor devices, electronic vapor inhalation substances, hookahs, and electronic/vapor substance inhalation shops in the city of McFarland in order to address the health issues described in subsection A of this section and to maintain the city's character, the diversity and vitality of the community's commercial areas, and the quality of life of McFarland residents. 
C.  Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition shall apply: 
1.  "Electronic vapor device" means any device with a heating element, a battery, or an electronic circuit that provides nicotine or other vaporized liquids to the user in a manner that simulates smoking tobacco products, shisha, herbs or any other product that produces smoke. 
2.  "Electronic vapor inhalation substance products" means cartridges, cartomizers, e-liquid, smoke juice, tanks, tips, atomizers, vaporizers, electronic smoking device batteries, electronic smoking device chargers, and any other item specifically designed for the preparation, charging, or use of electronic vapor devices. 
3.  "Electronic/vapor substance inhalation lounges" are defined as those businesses where customers can smoke or inhale vapor from electronic/vapor substance inhalation products, commonly known as "electronic cigarettes," "e-cigarettes," "e-cigars," "e-cigarillos," "e-pipes," "e-hookahs," "electronic nicotine delivery systems," and other similar devices. 
4.  "Electronic/vapor substance inhalation shops" are defined as those businesses that devote at least fifteen percent or more of floor space, for the display of electronic/vapor substance inhalation products, commonly known as "electronic cigarettes," "e-cigarettes," "e-cigars," "e-cigarillos," "e-pipes," "e-hookahs," "electronic nicotine delivery systems," and other similar devices, as well as such cartridges, substances and additives used to experience the sensation of smoking vapors, tobacco and non-tobacco substances. 
5.  "Hookah bar" means a business location that provides for the ingestion, inhalation or consumption of pipe tobacco, flavored tobacco, non-flavored tobacco, shisha, dried fruits, or other substances in which vapor or smoke is passed through a water basin before inhalation. 
6.  "Minor" means any individual who is less than eighteen years old. 
7.  "Person" means any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity. 
8.  "Public playground/park/recreation area" means an area to which the public, and particularly minors, come to participate in athletic or recreational activities, whether or not such activities are supervised or organized. Such areas include, but are not limited to, publicly owned and maintained parks, athletic fields, playgrounds, picnic areas, any outdoor premises or grounds owned or operated by the city, a public or private school, child care center, and any youth or recreational facilities such as the Boys' and Girls' Club, YMCA and YWCA, that contains any play or athletic equipment used or intended to be used by minors. 
9.  "School" means an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which offers instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code or which is maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education, or which is maintained for preschool or day care services. This definition includes a day care center, nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of learning under the jurisdiction of the State Department of Education, but it does not include a vocational or professional institution or an institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college, or university. 
10.  "Self-service merchandising" means open display of tobacco products and point-of-sale tobacco-related promotional products that the public has access to without the intervention of an employee. 
11.  "Tobacco product" means: (1) any product containing tobacco leaf including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco; and (2) any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human lungs or mouth; (3) any electronic vapor device, electronic vapor inhalation substance, and hookah; (4) any plant, weed, or plant product that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human lungs or mouth in smoke or vapor form, using any tobacco paraphernalia as defined in Chapter 8.33 of this code, but does not include any product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependence. 
12.  "Tobacco retailer" means any person or governmental entity that operates a store, stand, booth, concession, or other place at which sales, rentals, or other give-aways of tobacco products, electronic vapor devices, electronic vapor inhalation substances, and hookahs are made to purchasers for consumption or use. 
13.  "Tobacco or smoke shop" means any store, stand, booth, concession, or other place that either devote at least ten percent or more of floor space of its display area, for the display or sale of tobacco or drug paraphernalia to purchasers for consumption or use. This definition includes electronic vapor devices, electronic vapor inhalation substances and hookahs. 
14.  "Tobacco vending machine" means any electronic or mechanical device or appliance the operation of which depends upon the insertion of money, whether in coin or paper currency, or other things representative of value, that dispenses or releases a tobacco product. 
D.  Development Standards. 
1.  The tobacco or smoke shop, electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop or hookah bar shall be located within the following permitted zones, the C-1 neighborhood commercial zone, the C-2 commercial zone, the H-C highway commercial zone, the M-1 light industrial zone, and the M-2 medium industrial zone. No such establishment shall be permitted to locate in any area outside such zoning classifications. 
2.  The tobacco or smoke shop, electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop or hookah bar shall meet the following minimum spacing and proximity requirements: 
a.  No tobacco or smoke shop, electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop or hookah bar shall be located within one thousand feet of any other such shop. 
b.  No tobacco or smoke shop, electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop or hookah bar shall be located within five hundred feet of any parcel of land that contains any one or more of the following specific land uses: 
i.  Church or other religious facility; 
ii.  Child care center; 
iii.  Public playground/park/recreation area; 
iv.  School. 
3.  No tobacco or smoke shop, electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop or hookah bar located in a building sharing one or more common walls with another retail or commercial establishment, or sharing common attic space with any other use, shall permit smoking anywhere on the premises. 
4.  The tobacco or smoke shop, electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop or hookah bar shall be in substantial compliance with the requirements of all health and safety codes, including, but not limited to, the building code, fire code, electrical code, mechanical code and plumbing code. Substantial compliance shall be verified no later than thirty days following the application or the applicant shall be deemed not to be in substantial compliance with such requirements for the purposes of permit issuance. 
5.  The tobacco or smoke shop, electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop or hookah bar shall be in substantial compliance with the development standards for the commercial zone in which the establishment is to be located, and with the general provisions of Chapter 17.134 of the McFarland Municipal Code (MMC) relating to development standards and of Chapter 17.142 of the MMC relating to sign regulations, except that, to the extent that provisions of this chapter may conflict or be more restrictive, this chapter shall control. 
6.  The tobacco or smoke shop, electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop or hookah bar shall meet the following minimum specific standards: 
a.  No person or business shall engage in the sale of tobacco and electronic vapor device products without first posting a plainly visible sign at the point of purchase of tobacco products that has wording similar to: 
"THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS, HOOKAHS, AND ELECTRONIC VAPOR DEVICES AND PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW AND SUBJECT TO PENALTIES. PHOTO IDENTIFICATION IS REQUIRED OF PURCHASERS APPEARING TO BE 26 YEARS OF AGE AND YOUNGER." 
   The letters of the sign shall be at least one-quarter inch high. 
b.  No person, business, tobacco retailer or other establishment shall sell or offer for sale cigarettes or other tobacco or smoking products not in the original packaging provided by the manufacturer and with all required health warnings. 
c.  It shall be unlawful for any person, business or tobacco retailer to sell, permit to be sold, offer for sale or display for sale any tobacco product by means of self-service merchandising or by means other than vendor-assisted sales. 
d.  No person, business or tobacco retailer shall locate, install, keep, maintain, or use, or permit the location, installation, keeping, maintenance, or use on his, her or its premises, any tobacco vending machine for the purpose of selling or distributing any tobacco product. 
e.  It shall be unlawful for any person, business or tobacco retailer to distribute free tobacco products or promotional items, except in enclosed areas where minors are not permitted. 
E.  Distance, without regard to intervening structures, shall be: 
1.  A straight line measured from the closest exterior structural wall of any two tobacco retailers; and 
2.  A straight line measured from the closest exterior structural wall of a tobacco retailer to the closest property line of a church or other religious facility, child care center, public playground/park/recreation area, school or vocational or professional institution. 
(Ord. No. 079-2017, § 1, 12-14-17)  
17.102.040 - Enforcement. 
The city of McFarland may enforce any provision of this chapter by mandamus, injunction or any appropriate civil remedy in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 001-2009, § 1, 6-11-09)  
17.102.050 - Separability. 
Every section, provision or part of this chapter is declared separable from every other section, provision or part of this chapter. If any section, provision or part of this chapter is adjudged to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not invalidate any other section, provision, or part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 001-2009, § 1, 6-11-09)  
Chapter 17.104 - P ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.104.010 - Classification of land—Applicability. 
Land classified in a P zone may also be classified in either an A, E or R zone and the regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply in the P automobile parking zone unless otherwise provided in this title. 
(Ord. 109 § 26.00, 1969)  
17.104.020 - Uses permitted. 
A.  Any use permitted in the A, E, or R zone in which the land is classified and when so used subject to all of the provisions contained in the sections defining the zone. 
B.  1.  Open air, temporary parking of transient automobiles, except trucks of over one thousand five hundred pounds capacity. All such parking areas shall be surfaced with a bituminous surface treatment or other surfacing of a higher type and adequate drainage shall be provided. Where such parking area abuts property classified for R or E uses, it shall be separated therefrom by a solid masonry wall six feet in height, provided the wall, from the front property line to a depth equal to the required front yard on the abutting R or E classified property, shall be four feet in height. Where such parking area abuts a street, it shall be separated therefrom by an ornamental fence, wall or compact eugenia or other evergreen hedge having a height of not more than four feet. Such fence, wall or hedge shall be maintained in good condition. 
2.  Each entrance and exit to a parking lot shall be constructed and maintained so that any vehicle entering or leaving the parking lot shall be clearly visible at a distance of not less than ten feet to a person approaching such entrance or exit on any pedestrian walk or footpath. Exits from parking lots shall be clearly posted with "Stop" signs, and it shall be unlawful for a motorist to fail to stop at such sign before leaving the parking lot. Appropriate bumper guards, entrance and exit signs and directional signs shall be maintained where needed. Any lights used to illuminate such parking area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises and streets. 
(Ord. 109 § 26.01, 1969)  
Chapter 17.108 - D ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.108.010 - Zone regulations to be combined with other classifications. 
Land classified in a D zone shall also be classified in another zone and the regulations set forth in this chapter shall also apply in the D architectural design zone unless otherwise provided in this title. 
(Ord. 109 § 27.00, 1969)  
17.108.020 - Architectural standards. 
In order that buildings, structures, signs and landscaping will be in harmony with other structures and improvements in the area, and not of obnoxious, undesirable or unsightly appearance, the following items may be considered in approving plans of proposed improvements in the architectural design zone: 
A.  The height, bulk and area of buildings; 
B.  The setback distances from all property lines; 
C.  The colors and materials on the exterior; 
D.  The type and pitch of roofs; 
E.  The size and spacing of windows, doors and other openings; 
F.  The size, type and location of signs; 
G.  Towers, chimneys, roof structures, flagpoles, radio and television masts; 
H.  Plot plan landscaping and automobile parking areas; 
I.  The relation to the existing buildings and structures in the general vicinity and area; 
J.  Lighting of buildings, signs and grounds. 
(Ord. 109 § 27.01, 1969)  
17.108.030 - Procedure. 
A.  Plans of the exterior architectural design and appearance of all buildings and structures, plot plans, advertising sign plans, parking area plans and building setback plans shall be subject to the approval of the planning commission or its designated representative in order that the proposed buildings, structures, signs and landscaping will be in harmony with other structures and improvements in the area, and not of obnoxious, undesirable or unsightly appearance. 
B.  In the event it is determined that such proposed structures are inharmonious or unsightly in appearance, the planning commission, or its designated representative, shall confer with the applicant in an endeavor to have the plans changed so that the structures will be harmonious and attractive in appearance. In case the applicant is not satisfied with the action of the planning commission or its designated representative, he may, within thirty days after such action, appeal in writing to the city council. The city council shall hold a public hearing on the appeal and shall render its decision thereon within thirty days after the filing thereof. Upon approval of the city council, the building permit shall be issued provided all other requirements of law have been complied with. 
(Ord. 109 § 27.02, 1969)  
17.108.040 - Applicability. 
The provisions of the D architectural design zone shall be applicable only in the vicinity of civic centers, public parks and public buildings and grounds as provided in Section 65800(d) of the Government Code (Conservation and Planning Law); provided, however, that it may be applied elsewhere if requested by the owner or owners of property involved. 
(Ord. 109 § 27.03, 1969)  
Chapter 17.112 - H ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.112.010 - Zone regulations to be combined with other classifications. 
Land classified in an H zone shall also be classified in another zone and the additional regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply in the H airport approach height zone unless otherwise provided in this title. 
(Ord. 109 § 28.00, 1969)  
17.112.020 - Airport zoning commission. 
The planning commission is appointed as the airport zoning commission of the city with all of the powers and duties specified by the Airport Approaches Zoning Law of the state (Chapter 1741, Statutes of 1953), now included in Sections 50481 to 50485.14, inclusive, of the Government Code, or any amendment thereto. 
(Ord. 109 § 28.01, 1969)  
17.112.030 - Procedure. 
A.  No building or structures, including all superstructures and appurtenances, shall be erected, moved, altered or reconstructed, nor shall any plant or tree be allowed to grow in such a manner so that the height thereof will constitute a hazard to the safe landing or take-off of aircraft using the airport in the district subject to these regulations. The height limit thus imposed shall be determined in each case by the planning commission and shall be governed by and not more restrictive than those imposed by Civil Aeronautics Administration Technical Standard Order N18, "Criteria for Determining Obstructions to Air Navigation," dated April 26, 1950, as amended. A copy of said Technical Standard Order N18, with amendments shall be on file in the office of the planning commission. In no event shall the provisions of this section prevent the erection or maintenance of a building, structure or tree, no part of which exceeds thirty-five feet in height. Permits issued for buildings and structures in areas subject to airport approach zones shall specify the height limitations of such buildings or structures as set forth in this section. 
B.  The procedure for classifying any land in the H airport approach height zone shall comply with the provisions of the Airport Approaches Zoning Law. 
(Ord. 109 § 28.02, 1969)  
Chapter 17.116 - B ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.116.010 - Zone regulations may be combined with other classifications. 
Land classified in a B zone may also be classified in another zone, except in the C and M zones, and the regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply to the B buffer zone unless otherwise provided in this title. 
(Ord. 109 § 29.00, 1969)  
17.116.020 - Uses permitted. 
The uses permitted in the B zone are as follows: 
A.  Any use permitted in the other respective zones in which the land is classified and with which the B zone is combined; provided, however, as follows: 
1.  No outdoor advertising sign or outdoor advertising structure shall be placed and/or maintained in any B zone; provided, however, that there may be displayed on the premises occupied by any permitted business use which is located in any B zone outdoor advertising structures for the advertising only of such business; and the total area for all outdoor advertising signs and outdoor advertising structures in the aggregate displayed by or for any one place of business shall not exceed the equivalent of one square foot for each one foot of frontage actually occupied by such business, including the widths of driveways directly appurtenant thereto. 
2.  No junk, salvage or auto wrecking yard shall be established in any B zone unless the same is completely enclosed within a building or within a fence approved by the planning commission. 
B.  The following additional uses, if not permitted in the other zone, may be permitted in the B zone upon the granting of a conditional use permit: 
1.  Automobile parking areas. 
2.  Automobile service stations. 
3.  Directional or informational signs of a public or quasi-public nature. 
4.  Drug stores. 
5.  Garages, public, including repairing and servicing. 
6.  Grocery, fruit and vegetable stores. 
7.  Hotels, apartment houses and multiple residences. 
8.  Motels, auto courts and tourist courts. 
9.  Meat markets or delicatessen stores. 
10.  Restaurants, tea rooms and cafes. 
(Ord. 109 § 29.01, 1969)  
17.116.030 - Building height-Front, side and rear yards-Area requirements-Distance between buildings. 
None, except that on parcels or lots of less than ten thousand square feet in area, the regulations shall be the same as required in the R-3 zone; and provided that all buildings, except temporary stands, shall be located not nearer than ninety feet from the centerline of any public highway. 
(Ord. 109 § 29.02, 1969)  
Chapter 17.120 - M-H MOBILE HOME ONE-FAMILY DWELLING ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.120.010 - Applicability. 
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply in the M-H mobile home one- family dwelling zone unless otherwise provided in this title. 
(Ord. 113 § 2(part), 1970: Ord. 109 § 30.00(A), 1969)  
17.120.020 - Uses permitted. 
The uses permitted in the M-H zone are as follows: 
A.  A one-family independent mobile home unit, together with the accessory building or structure as defined in the Health and Safety Code of the state relating to mobile homes and mobile home parks. 
B.  Any uses permitted in the other respective zones in which the land is classified with which the M-H zone is combined, but there shall not be more than one mobile home used for living purposes on any one lot or parcel of land of record. 
C.  Quasi-home occupations upon the granting of a special permit by the planning commission, which permit shall not be granted unless the planning commission finds that the proposed quasi-home occupation complies with the definition of this title. 
D.  Maintaining mail address for commercial and business license purposes only, provided no stock in trade, supplies, professional equipment, apparatus or business equipment are kept on the premises and provided that no employees or assistants are engaged for said services on the premises, and except as otherwise provided in this section, no signs are displayed. 
E.  One unlighted sign of not to exceed one-half square foot in area attached to and parallel with the front wall of the building or mobile home, and containing only the name and title or occupation of the occupant. 
F.  One sign of not to exceed four square feet in area advertising the premises for sale, lease or rent, located not nearer than ten feet to adjoining premises, nor nearer than five feet to a street line. 
G.  One temporary sign of not to exceed six square feet in area giving the name of the contractors, engineers and architects during construction period. 
H.  Agricultural and horticultural uses for domestic purposes, including nurseries, greenhouses, orchards or the raising of field crops, tree crops, berry or bush crops, or vegetable or flower gardening. 
I.  Poultry, rabbits, or similar small fowl or animals raised for food, scientific or fur-bearing purposes, provided that not more than twelve of any one or combination of such animals may be maintained on one lot. The keeping of such fowl and animals shall conform to all other provisions of law governing the same, and no fowl or animals, nor any pen or coop, shall be kept or maintained within thirty feet of any window or door of any residence, dwelling or mobile home used for human habitation, or within one hundred feet of the front lot line of the lot upon which it is located, or within twenty-five feet of the street side of a corner lot, or within one hundred feet of any public park, school, hospital or similar institution. 
J.  Where a dwelling exists, prior to the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter, on the rear half of the lot and at least seventy-five feet back of the front line, an additional dwelling or mobile home may be constructed and maintained on the front half of the lot, provided there shall be a minimum distance of twenty feet between the mobile home and the dwelling. 
K.  Additional uses may be permitted by the planning commission according to the provisions of Section 17.152.020. 
L.  Oil and gas drilling and production shall be permitted by the planning commission if a conditional use permit has been secured from the planning commission for such purposes, as provided in Section 17.140.040. Provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to require the planning commission to issue such a permit, except as provided in Section 17.140.040. 
(Ord. 113 § 2(part), 1970: Ord. 109 § 30.01(A), 1969)  
17.120.030 - Building height. 
One story and not to exceed fifteen feet. 
(Ord. 113 § 2(part), 1970: Ord. 109 § 30.02(A), 1969)  
17.120.040 - Minimum lot width. 
Fifty feet at building setback line. 
(Ord. 113 § 2(part), 1970: Ord. 109 § 30.03(A), 1969)  
17.120.050 - Front yard. 
A.  There shall be a front yard of not less than fifteen feet, except where lots comprising forty percent or more of the frontage on one side of a street between intersecting streets are developed with mobile homes or buildings having an average front yard with a variation of not more than ten feet, no building or mobile home hereafter erected or altered shall project beyond the average front yard line so established. In determining such front yard depth, mobile homes or buildings located more than thirty-five feet from the front property line of mobile homes or buildings facing a side street on a corner lot shall not be counted. 
B.  The front yard shall be measured from the front property line except that where there is an official plan line or a future street line the front yard shall be measured from the official plan line or future street line. Provided, however, that along any secondary highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of forty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required, and along any major highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of fifty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required, with the further exception that where the front property line is the center of the street or easement in which case the front yard shall be a minimum setback of fifty-five feet. 
(Ord. 113 § 2(part), 1970: Ord. 109 § 30.04(A), 1969)  
17.120.060 - Side yard. 
There shall be a side yard on each side of a mobile home of not less than five feet, except that on the street side of corner lots there shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet. The side yard shall be measured from the side lot line except where the lot line is the center of a street or easement in which case the side setback shall be forty feet. With the further exception, that where there is an official plan line or a future street line, the side yard shall be measured from the official plan or future street line. Provided, however, that along any secondary highway, as designated by the city or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of forty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required, and along any major highway, as designated by the city's or county's highway plan, a minimum setback of fifty-five feet from the centerline of the highway shall be required. 
(Ord. 113 § 2(part), 1970: Ord. 109 § 30.05(A), 1969)  
17.120.070 - Rear yard. 
There shall be a rear yard behind every mobile home or main building of not less than five feet. 
(Ord. 113 § 2(part), 1970: Ord. 109 § 30.06(A), 1969)  
17.120.080 - Area requirements. 
The minimum lot area shall be six thousand square feet per dwelling unit; provided, however, that when a lot has less area than required in this section and was recorded at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the lot may be occupied by not more than one dwelling unit. In no case shall more than forty-five percent of any lot be covered by buildings or structures. 
(Ord. 113 § 2(part), 1970: Ord. 109 § 30.07(A), 1969)  
17.120.090 - Distance between buildings on the same lot. 
There shall be a minimum distance of six feet between a building used for dwelling purposes and an accessory building, and a minimum distance of ten feet between a mobile home used for dwelling purposes and a detached accessory building other than those accessory buildings referred to in the Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 113 § 2(part), 1970: Ord. 109 § 30.08(A), 1969)  
17.120.100 - Additional regulations. 
A.  A concrete slab or raised platform, depending on the terrain, and containing at least one hundred eighty square feet shall be installed on each lot and the mobile home shall be placed adjacent thereto. 
B.  A sewage disposal system and a water supply acceptable to the Kern County health department shall be provided on each lot. Prior to construction on the lot, the owner shall obtain a building permit as may be required by the city's building inspection department. 
C.  The mobile home lot shall be well graded and drained. 
D.  All mobile homes shall be kept mobile and shall carry a state license. 
E.  Camping and boat trailers may be stored on the property provided they are kept on the rear half of the lot. All other materials shall be maintained within a completely enclosed storage structure. 
F.  Off-Street Parking. For each mobile home unit there shall be provided and maintained on such lot a well- surfaced off-street parking space with bituminous surfacing or other surfacing of a higher type and covering an area of not less than nine feet wide and twenty feet long, with adequate means of ingress and egress provided at all times. 
G.  Only independent mobile homes displaying the insignia of approval in accordance with the Department of Housing and Community Development of the state, as set forth in the Health and Safety Code will be permitted. 
H.  Installation of concrete curb, gutter and sidewalk shall be required for all mobile homes approved under this chapter within the city. 
I.  All construction and installations of plumbing, gas piping, electrical equipment and wiring to the mobile home shall be in compliance with the applicable provisions of Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code of the state, known as the State Housing Act, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended, and all regulations adopted by the State Commission of Housing and Community Development, and all other city and county regulations pertaining thereto. 
(Ord. 113 § 2(part), 1970: Ord. 109 § 30.09(A), 1969)  
17.120.110 - Mobile home permits. 
In those situations authorized by the provisions of this chapter and all other duly qualified mobile homes now existing in the city by prior approval of the city council, the city clerk may issue a mobile home permit as provided in this section: 
A.  Such permit shall be issued for a specified mobile home and a specified parcel of land. 
B.  For all mobile homes granted permits subsequent to the enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the permit shall be for a fiscal year. 
C.  The initial permit may be prorated by fiscal year quarters. 
D.  All permits shall expire on June 30th of each year. 
(Ord. 113 § 2(part), 1970: Ord. 109 § 30.10(A), 1969)  
17.120.120 - Permit fees. 
All mobile homes issued permits in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be required to pay a fee based upon the following: 
A.  Square footage of mobile home living area times $.034 per square foot. 
B.  Subsequent to payment of the initial fee, there shall thereafter be payable an annual fee on each mobile home in the amount as computed above, the fee to be payable on or before July 15th of each year. 
(Ord. 113 § 2(part), 1970: Ord. 109 § 30.11(A), 1969)  
17.120.130 - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the city building department, planning commission, and any other designated officer of the city and the Kern County health department to enforce this chapter and all its provisions. For purposes of the enforcement of this chapter, the building department, planning commission and any other designated officer of the city and the county health department shall have police powers. 
(Ord. 113 § 2(part), 1970: Ord. 109 § 30.12(A), 1969)  
17.120.140 - Violation-Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy a mobile home or to knowingly permit a mobile home to be occupied on land in his possession. It shall also be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable therefor as provided in this section. 
(Ord. 113 § 5, 1970)  
Chapter 17.124 - M-S MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.124.010 - Applicability. 
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply in the M-S mobile home subdivision zone, unless otherwise provided in this title. 
(Ord. 149 § 3(part), 1976: Ord. 109 § 30.00(B), 1969)  
17.124.020 - Uses permitted. 
Only the following uses shall be permitted: 
A.  Mobile homes for residential use together with the normal accessory uses such as cabana, ramada, patio slab, carport or garage, and a storage or washroom building. In no event shall more than one mobile home be used for residential purposes on a lot, with occupancy, limited to one family. 
B.  Community recreation facilities for the use of individual lot owners within the subdivision may be developed after provisions for their continued and proper operation have been submitted to and approved by the city council. The maintenance of the community recreation and services area shall be assured by provisions in the deeds, such as covenants running with the land, providing for participation by the individual lot owners in the responsibility thereof. 
C.  Temporary real estate tract offices, to be used only for and during the original sale of lots within the subdivision, but not to exceed a period of one year. Such period of time may be extended for one additional year upon the granting of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.152. 
(Ord. 149 § 3(part), 1976: Ord. 109 § 30.01(B), 1969)  
17.124.030 - Uses expressly prohibited. 
The following uses are expressly prohibited: 
A.  A building constructed or used as a dwelling unit whether it contains kitchen facilities or not. 
B.  More than one mobile home unit on any mobile home lot. 
C.  The placement or use of any mobile home accessory building or structure without a mobile home properly placed and service-connected on the mobile home lot. 
D.  The use of substandard mobile homes; only mobile homes approved by the Division of Housing of the state are permitted to be used. 
(Ord. 149 § 3(part), 1976: Ord. 109 § 30.02(B), 1969)  
17.124.040 - Development standards. 
The following shall be the minimum standards of development within the M-S zone: 
A.  No M-S zone shall be applied to any parcel of land except in connection with a subdivision map recorded pursuant to all of the provisions of Title 16 of this code, as presently written or hereinafter amended, including those of dedication, improvements and exceptions. A recommended change of zone to the M-S zone shall not become final until the final map of a subdivision is presented to the city council for final approval and recordation. 
B.  Building Height. Two and one-half stories and not to exceed thirty-five feet. 
C.  Yard Setback Requirements. Mobile home and accessory buildings and uses on individual lots shall be: 
1.  Front yard: twenty-five feet. 
2.  Side yard: Five feet, except on a street side yard the setback shall be ten feet. Accessory buildings or designated parking having direct vehicular access from a side street shall have a setback of twenty feet. 
3.  Rear yard: five feet. Accessory buildings or designated parking having direct vehicular access from a side street shall have a setback of twenty feet. 
D.  Lot Size. 
1.  The average lot size shall be the number of square feet indicated immediately proceeding the M-S zone designation as follows: 
a.  M-S 5000: Five thousand square feet; 
b.  M-S 6000: Six thousand square feet; 
c.  M-S 7200: Seven thousand two hundred square feet; 
d.  M-S 10000: Ten thousand square feet; 
e.  M-S 18000: Eighteen thousand square feet. 
No lot or parcel shall exceed in length, three times the lot width. 
2.  Regardless of the average lot size, no single lot shall have a minimum lot size of less than three thousand two hundred fifty square feet, not shall more than fifty percent of the lots have less square footage than the average lot size as indicated in subdivision 1 of this subsection. 
3.  No lot recorded by the final subdivision map as required by subsection A of this section shall thereafter be further divided by any means including subdivision or parcel map provisions. 
4.  For the purposes of this chapter, average lot size shall be defined as the total number of square feet of all lots in the proposed subdivision as required in subsection A of this section, divided by the total number of lots in the subdivision. 
E.  Maximum Coverage. The maximum coverage permitted on any lot shall be forty percent thereof. In determining the maximum coverage, all mobile homes, accessory buildings and required parking spaces shall be included. 
F.  The following permanent improvements shall be installed on each lot prior to placing a mobile home on the lot: 
1.  A concrete slab or raised platform, depending on the terrain, and containing at least one hundred eighty square feet. 
2.  A sewage disposal system and a potable water supply acceptable to the Kern County health department. Prior to construction on the mobile home lot, the owner shall obtain a building permit from the city building department. 
3.  The mobile home lot shall be well graded and drained. 
G.  A total of five hundred square feet for each mobile home site shall be devoted to open areas. Such open areas shall not include, but be in addition to the required setback areas and designated parking areas. 
H.  Off-street parking shall be provided as required in Chapter 17.144. 
I.  Minimum Development Site. The minimum site that may be zoned for this purpose (mobile home subdivision) shall be nine acres. 
(Ord. 149 § 3(part), 1976: Ord. 109 § 30.03(B), 1969)  
17.124.050 - Other regulations. 
A.  No M-S zone shall be applied to any area containing structures that do not conform to the provisions of the M-S zone. 
B.  The M-S zone shall not be applied to any property where any portion of the property would fall within one thousand three hundred twenty feet of property zoned or used for R-1, R-2, R-S and E (estate) zones. This requirement may be modified or disregarded if the legislative body is satisfied from evidence presented during the zoning hearings that both of the following conditions exist: 
1.  An artificial or natural barrier or other physical feature exists between the R-1, R-2, R-S and E (estate) zones and the proposed M-S zone; and 
2.  The nature of the barrier or feature is such as to assure that the R-1, R-2, R-S and E (estate) zones will not be detrimentally affected by the granting of the M-S zone classification. 
C.  Camping and boat trailers may be stored on the property provided they are kept on the rear half of the lot. All other material shall be maintained within a completely enclosed storage structure. 
D.  All trailers and mobile homes shall be kept mobile. 
E.  All trailers and mobile homes shall carry a current state license. 
F.  Community sewage disposal systems, if desired, other than that operated by the city, may be developed if provisions for their maintenance are approved by the city council after a report from the Kern County health department on the system. The minimum standards shall be: 
1.  A legal entity, such as a corporation or community association, shall be responsible for the maintenance of the system. 
2.  The owners of the individual lots shall, as a condition of ownership of the lots, be required to participate in the legal entity, or be otherwise responsible to the entity for the cost of performing the necessary maintenance. 
3.  If a public, special district or community sewage system is installed, all mobile homes in the subdivision shall be connected to the system. 
G.  The provisions of this chapter shall be considered supplemental to all applicable state regulations and to other city ordinances. 
(Ord. 149 § 3(part), 1976: Ord. 109 § 30.04(B), 1969)  
17.124.060 - Violation-Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars or be imprisoned in the county jail for a period of not exceeding six months, or by both fine and imprisonment. Every day upon which a violation of this chapter exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 149 § 6, 1976)  
Chapter 17.128 - M-P MOBILE HOME PARK ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.128.010 - Applicability. 
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply in the M-P mobile home park zone unless otherwise provided in this title. 
(Ord. 154 § 2 (part), 1976: Ord. 109 § 30.00(C), 1969)  
17.128.020 - Uses permitted. 
Only the following uses shall be permitted in the M-P zone: 
A.  Licensed mobile home parks. 
B.  A travel trailer park may be made a part of an approved mobile home park as a secondary use, provided that such mobile home park abuts and gains entrance from a major highway, as designated on the city circulation plan, and further provided that the area of the travel trailer park does not exceed twenty-five percent of the combined area of the mobile home park and the secondary travel trailer park. However, any area designated on the development plan for use as a travel trailer area shall thereafter be used for mobile homes unless such area conforms to all applicable regulations for mobile home use. 
C.  Accessory uses which are clearly incidental to the operation of the park, and which are for the exclusive use of the residents of the park, including, but not limited to, such typical uses as recreation and laundry buildings, swimming pools, saunas, storage areas for recreational vehicles, boats and trailers, and vending machines. 
(Ord. 154 § 2 (part), 1976: Ord. 109 § 30.01(C), 1969)  
17.128.030 - Uses expressly prohibited. 
The following uses are expressly prohibited in the M-P zone: 
A.  Home occupations or quasi-home occupations. 
B.  Business or commercial activities of any type. 
C.  Any conventional building used for or intended for use as a dwelling. 
(Ord. 154 § 2(part), 1976: Ord. 109 § 30.02(C), 1969)  
17.128.040 - Building height. 
Building height shall not exceed two and one-half stories or thirty-five feet. 
(Ord. 154 § 2(part), 1976: Ord. 109 § 30.03(C), 1969)  
17.128.050 - Front yard. 
There shall be a front yard of not less than ten feet; provided, however, that where a mobile home abuts any property classified in an R, E or A zone, the depth of the front yard shall correspond with the required front yard of the abutting zone. 
B.  No building, structure or mobile home shall occupy a required front yard area. 
C.  The required front yard shall be measured from the front property line, except that where an official plan line has been adopted under the circulation plan, the required front yard shall be measured from such plan line. 
D.  Along any major or secondary highway as designated on the circulation plan, the required front yard shall be measured from the property line established under Section 17.128.100. 
E.  Along any planned local street alignment the required front yard shall be measured from a point which is thirty feet from the planned centerline of such local street. 
(Ord. 154 § 2(part), 1976: Ord. 109 § 30.04(C), 1969)  
17.128.060 - Side and rear yards. 
A.  There shall be a side yard on each side of a mobile home park of not less than five feet. 
B.  There shall be a rear yard on each side of a mobile home site of not less than five feet. 
C.  No building, structure or mobile home shall occupy a required side yard or rear yard. 
(Ord. 154 § 2(part), 1976: Ord. 109 § 30.05(C), 1969)  
17.128.070 - Distances between buildings and between buildings and mobile homes. 
A.  There shall be a minimum distance of ten feet between each building. 
B.  There shall be a minimum distance of ten feet between each mobile home and any building, excepting mobile home accessory structures as defined in the Mobile Home Parks Act of the state. 
(Ord. 154 § 2(part), 1976: Ord. 109 § 30.06(C), 1969)  
17.128.080 - Distances between mobile homes. 
The minimum distance required for the separation of a mobile home from any other mobile home shall be ten feet from side to side and rear to side and six feet from rear to rear. 
(Ord. 154 § 2(part), 1976: Ord. 109 § 30.07(C), 1969)  
17.128.090 - Parking and access drive and access re quirements. 
A.  Parking shall be provided as required in Section 17.144.020. 
B.  All access drives within a mobile home park shall be not less than twenty-five feet. 
C.  All mobile home spaces shall have a frontage on internal private drives. No mobile home space shall have direct access to a public street or public alley. 
D.  All mobile home park sites shall gain access from an abutting, improved and dedicated city street or highway. 
(Ord. 154 § 2(part), 1976: Ord. 109 § 30.08(C), 1969)  
17.128.100 - Public street and highway dedication and improvements. 
A.  For the protection of the public health, safety and welfare it is necessary, in the development of mobile home parks, that streets and highways of adequate width be provided adjacent thereto, and that the same be properly improved, relative to implementation of the city's circulation plan and protection of planned local streets. 
B.  Street and highway dedication shall be provided adjacent to mobile home parks when the same should be required in the reasonable judgment of the city engineer in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  When the park is adjacent to a major highway, as shown on the city's circulation plan, the owner shall dedicate, or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all property lying within fifty-five feet of such highway for public highway purposes, at no cost to the city. 
2.  When the park is adjacent to a secondary highway, as shown on the city's circulation plan, the owner shall dedicate, or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all property lying within forty-five feet of such highway for public highway purposes, at no cost to the city. 
3.  When the subject park lies adjacent to the projected alignment of a planned local street which is necessary for circulation with the general area or neighborhood, the owner shall dedicate, or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all property lying within thirty feet of such street for public highway purposes, at no cost to the city. 
C.  Street and highway improvements shall be provided when the same should be required in the reasonable judgment of the city engineer, and shall be furnished by the owner and as a part of the required mobile home park improvements, without cost to the city, with respect to any adjacent street or highway as may be dedicated or offered for dedication in conformity with standards on file in the office of the city clerk and the office of the city engineer. Such standards shall include, but not be limited to, installation of curb, gutter, sidewalks, concrete driveway approach and asphaltic concrete roadway. 
D.  Required street and highway improvements shall include any necessary tie to existing pavement, and shall be under permit of the city or the State Division of Highways, as appropriate. 
(Ord. 154 § 2(part), 1976: Ord. 109 § 30.09(C), 1969)  
17.128.110 - Area requirements. 
The minimum area which may be zoned and developed into a mobile home park shall be five acres. 
(Ord. 154 § 2(part), 1976: Ord. 109 § 30.10(C), 1969)  
17.128.120 - Recreational area requirements. 
A.  In the event a mobile home park contains twenty-five or more mobile home spaces, or in the event a mobile home park combined with a travel trailer park contains a combination of twenty- five or more mobile home spaces and travel trailer spaces, there shall be provided within the park an open area of land, landscaped for and devoted to recreational facilities. 
B.  The recreational area shall be not less than five thousand square feet, plus an additional one hundred square feet for each space in excess of twenty-five spaces. 
C.  Required recreational area may be divided into more than one location, provided no single location shall contain less than one thousand square feet. 
D.  No building or mobile home shall occupy a required recreational area, excepting buildings and structures necessary or used and devoted to recreational uses, such as recreation buildings, swimming pools, swimming pool accessory buildings, saunas and playgrounds with or without equipment or picnic areas. 
E.  In no event shall the required front yard, side yard or rear yard of the park, not any mobile home space, travel trailer space or storage area be counted as fulfilling the requirement for recreation space. 
F.  The required recreational space shall be accessible to all occupants of the park and shall not be used for any other purpose than recreational use of the occupants of the park. 
(Ord. 154 § 2(part), 1976: Ord. 109 § 30.11(C), 1969)  
17.128.130 - Enclosure requirements. 
A.  Each mobile home park shall be completely enclosed within a solid masonry fence. 
B.  The enclosure may have driveway or pedestrian way openings, subject to approval of the city planning commission. 
C.  Within any required front yard, a required enclosure shall be four feet in height. 
D.  Within any other portion of the park, a required enclosure shall be six feet in height. 
E.  When deemed necessary in the reasonable judgment of the city planning commission in order to maintain standards compatible with existing development of adjacent properties, specific types of fences may be required to be constructed. 
(Ord. 154 § 2(part), 1976: Ord. 109 § 30.12(C), 1969)  
17.128.140 - Sign regulation. 
A.  No sign shall be erected in the M-P zone except as approved in the reasonable judgment of the city planner as to design, size, location and height. 
B.  Signs erected in the M-P zone shall contain information related only to the name of the owner, the mobile home park name, if any, and the address of the premises. 
C.  No sign shall exceed a maximum height of ten feet, measured from grade to top of sign. 
D.  No sign allowed by this section shall be erected over any city right-of-way. 
E.  Notwithstanding any contrary provision in this section, in the event a mobile home park is combined with a travel trailer park as a secondary use, one double-faced or single-faced sign may be constructed at the park entrance at a point adjacent to the major highway only. Such sign shall not exceed a total area of fifty square feet, and shall not exceed a maximum height of twenty-four feet, measured from grade to top of sign. Such sign may be illuminated excepting neon lighting and shall comply with the provisions of subsections D and E of this section. 
(Ord. 154 § 2(part), 1976: Ord. 109 § 30.13(C), 1969)  
17.128.150 - Fire protection requirements. 
A.  Fire protection equipment shall be installed prior to occupancy of the park, and shall be continuously maintained, the type of facility and location thereof to be approved by the Kern COunty fire department. 
B.  Required fire protection equipment shall be shown on the development plan. 
(Ord. 154 § 2(part), 1976: Ord. 109 § 30.14(C), 1969)  
17.128.160 - Utility installation requirements. 
A.  All public utility transmission lines located within the park shall be placed underground. 
B.  Utility connections to each mobile home space shall be placed underground. 
(Ord. 154 § 2(part), 1976: Ord. 109 § 30.15(C), 1969)  
17.128.170 - Drainage requirements. 
A.  A drainage system shall be installed prior to occupancy of the park and shall be continuously maintained, in accordance with a plan approved by the city engineer. 
B.  The plan shall include, but is not limited to, the following provisions: 
1.  All drainage originating on the park site shall be contained on the site, unless specific plans for acceptance of such drainage to offsite sumps has been approved by the city council upon recommendation of the city engineer. 
2.  The method for transporting through a mobile home park of drainage originating outside the site shall be approved by the city engineer. 
3.  In the event any drainage sump area located within the park has a water holding capacity of more than two feet in depth, the same shall be completely enclosed within a chain link fence six feet in height with vertical redwood slats. 
(Ord. 154 § 2(part), 1976: Ord. 109 § 30.16(C), 1969)  
17.128.180 - Water distribution system-Sewage disposal. 
A.  A water distribution system shall be installed prior to occupancy of the park and shall be continuously maintained, in accordance with a plan approved by the city council. 
B.  A sewage disposal system shall be installed prior to occupancy of the park and shall be continuously maintained, in accordance with a plan approved by the city council. 
(Ord. 154 § 2(part), 1976: Ord. 109 § 30.17(C), 1969)  
17.128.190 - Landscaping requirements. 
A.  The park shall be landscaped prior to occupancy, in accordance with a plan approved by the city council. 
B.  Landscaping shall include sprinklers and bubblers to assure adequate maintenance. 
C.  Landscaping shall include trees in number not less than a ratio of one tree for each mobile home space within the park. Trees may be grouped for landscape effect. 
(Ord. 154 § 2(part), 1976: Ord. 109 § 30.18(C), 1969)  
17.128.200 - Development plan. 
The developer of a mobile home park, with or without a travel trailer park as a secondary use, shall submit to the city council a detailed development plan showing compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The development plan shall be in a form and shall contain information as may be necessary for the council to make a determination as to compliance with this chapter and as the council may require. 
(Ord. 154 § 2(part), 1976: Ord. 109 § 30.19(C), 1969)  
17.128.210 - Maintenance agreement. 
The developer, as a condition of occupancy, shall be required to execute an agreement with the city council, binding himself, his heirs, lawful successor, transferee, assignee or future owners of the mobile home park. Such agreement shall be in a form approved by the city attorney. 
(Ord. 154 § 2(part), 1976: Ord. 109 § 30.20(C), 1969)  
17.128.220 - Violation-Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not exceeding six months, or by both fine and imprisonment. Every day upon which a violation of this chapter exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 154 § 5, 1976)  
Chapter 17.132 - P-D ZONES AND P-D PLANS 
Sections: 
 
17.132.010 - Requirements for establishment of zone. 
A precise development zone may be established for any area which is suitable for the type of uses provided for in the zones defined in this title, if the area is so located with respect to surrounding zoned area uses and conditions that said uses may not, in the opinion of the city council and the planning commission, be established therein without being detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, and without being detrimental or injurious to property or improvements within the vicinity unless a precise plan therefor has been approved by the planning commission with respect to the matters set forth in this section as follows: the location, height and bulk of buildings and other improvements; traffic control; arrangement, design and dimensions of streets, alleys and parking areas; screening of uses from visibility from adjacent areas of public highways by fencing or landscaping; and such other matters as in the opinion of the planning commission may be necessary to accomplish the aforestated purposes. 
(Ord. 109 § 30.00, 1969)  
17.132.020 - Method of establishment-Permitted uses. 
A precise development zone shall be established in the same manner as other zones created under this title are established, and the uses permitted in such zone shall be by reference to any one of the zones established in this title, in which case the permitted uses shall be as provided for the zone of reference. When such a zone has been established it shall be designated in the official zone map by appropriate symbol for the zone of reference followed with the letters "P-D" (for example, C-2 P-D). No P-D zone shall be established, nor shall any precise plan be adopted therefor, except upon the written request of all owners of all property to be located therein. 
(Ord. 109 § 30.01, 1969)  
17.132.030 - Precise development plan. 
No permit shall be issued for the grading of land, nor for the construction, erection or moving in of any building or structure, nor for the use of any land in a P-D zone until a P-D (precise development) plan therefor has been approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 109 § 30.02, 1969)  
17.132.040 - Precise development plan-Method of adop tion. 
A.  The precise plan for a P-D zone may be adopted simultaneously with and as a part of the same proceeding for the establishment of such zone or by separate proceeding commenced any time after the establishment of the zone. Action for adoption of a P-D plan shall be commenced by submission of the original linen of a P-D plan to the planning department. The P-D plan shall include: 
1.  A plot plan of the proposed development drawn to scale showing the boundaries of the property, topography and a proposed grading plan; the width, location and names of surrounding streets; the location, dimensions and uses on adjacent property of all existing buildings within fifty feet of the boundary line of the subject property; the location, dimensions, ground floor area and uses of all existing and proposed buildings and structures on the subject property; landscaping; parking areas, including the size and number of the stalls and the internal circulation pattern; signs, including location, size and height; pedestrian, vehicular and service ingress and egress; location, height and material of walls and fences; and other specific uses of the property. 
2.  Statistical information including the following: 
a.  Acreage or square footage in the property. 
b.  Height, ground floor area and total floor area. 
c.  Number of dwelling units in each building. 
d.  Building coverage expressed as a percent of the total area of the property. 
e.  Parking ratio expressed as the ratio of the number of dwelling units to the area devoted to the off-street parking stalls, parking aisles and driveways, but excluding walkways, landscaped areas and unused land. 
f.  Area of land devoted to landscaping and/or open space usable for recreation purposes and its percentage of the total land area. 
B.  Upon receipt of a P-D plan the planning commission will schedule the plan for consideration by the planning commission at the next earliest commission meeting at which it is estimated by the planning commission, the reports of the city departments concerned will be ready for presentation to the commission. Not less than ten days before the date of planning commission consideration of the plan, written notice of the time and place of planning commission consideration shall be given to the applicant and to the owners of all property within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property included in the proposed P-D plan. The planning commission shall correlate city departmental recommendations and shall consider the plan and shall approve, conditionally approve, or reject the proposed plan. The P-D plan as approved or conditionally approved shall be retained as a permanent record of the planning commission. 
C.  1.  A conditional approval may specify the limits within which the dimensions shown on the P-D plan may vary. The planning commission's action shall be final subject to appeal to the city council. Upon approval or conditional approval of the P-D plan permits may be issued for grading, uses and buildings and structures which are in conformity with the approved P-D plan and the conditions imposed. 
2.  No grading shall be commenced nor shall any building or structure be erected, moved, altered, enlarged or rebuilt on property in a P-D zone except in substantial conformity with the approved P-D plan and the conditions. "Substantial conformity" shall be determined by the building inspector, or in case of any disagreement with the developer, by the planning commission. 
3.  Revised P-D plans may be submitted and processed in the same manner as the original P-D plan. When approved, the revised plan shall automatically supersede any previously approved plan. 
(Ord. 109 § 30.03, 1969)  
17.132.050 - Nonconforming uses-Conflicts. 
No use shall be permitted in a P-D zone, except as may be established as a nonconforming use or except in strict conformance with the precise plan therefor. In the event of any conflict between the uses permitted in the zone of reference and in the precise plan for a P-D zone, the precise plan shall prevail. 
(Ord. 109 § 30.04, 1969)  
17.132.060 - Fees. 
The filing fee for a precise development zone is seventy-five dollars. 
(Ord. 176 § 2, 1979: Ord. 109 § 30.05, 1969)  
Chapter 17.134 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 032-2013, § 1, adopted August 8, 2013, amended Chapter 17.134 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Chapter 17.134, §§ 17.134.010—17.134.070, pertained to similar material, and derived from Ord. No. 331-2008, adopted May 8, 2008; Ord. No. 002-2010, adopted February 11, 2010 and Ord. No. 029-2013, adopted April 11, 2013. 
 
17.134.010 - Purpose and application. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable and necessary development standards for multifamily, commercial, industrial, and other similar uses to ensure that development subject to this chapter includes public improvements and is compatible with surrounding uses. The development standards specified in this chapter shall apply to all multifamily development in the medium density residential (R-2), high density residential (R-3), residential professional (RP), professional office (C-O), neighborhood commercial (C-1), commercial (C-2), limited manufacturing (M-1) light manufacturing (M-2) and general manufacturing (M-3) zone districts, and precise development (P-D) district except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 032-2013, § 1, 8-8-13)  
17.134.020 - General development standards. 
All new development or existing uses that are substantially improved as defined is Chapter 17.04 (Definitions) shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  Parking shall not be allowed in the front or street side yard setbacks in any zone with the exception of a single-family dwelling and shall be fully landscaped herein; 
B.  All access drives, parking areas and vehicle maneuvering areas shall be surfaced with a minimum of two inches of asphaltic concrete paving or material of higher quality; 
C.  All new on-site utility services shall be placed underground; 
D.  Prior to the issuance of any new building permits, a plan for the disposal of drainage waters originating onsite and from adjacent road rights-of-way shall be approved by the city engineer, if required. Easements or grant deeds shall be given to the city for drainage purposes or access thereto, as necessary; 
E.  Prior to the issuance of any building permits, the method of water supply and sewage disposal shall be as required and approved by the city of McFarland and Kern County Health Department; 
F.  Fire flows, fire protection facilities and access ways shall be as required and approved by the city's fire department; 
G.  When construction in excess of one story is proposed adjacent to property zoned for single-family residential use, all windows above the first story shall contain glass that is opaque or translucent or shall be screened in a manner approved by the planning commission; 
H.  No on-site lighting shall directly or indirectly illuminate adjacent properties or the public street which provides access. The lights and standards shall be approved by the planning director. 
I.  All trash receptacles shall be screened so that they are not visually obtrusive from any offsite location. The location and method of screening for all trash receptacles shall be approved by the planning commission; 
J.  Architectural design of the proposed building shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood; 
K.  When adjacent to property zoned for residential purposes, a six-foot high solid masonry wall set in a planter a minimum of five feet wide and planted with trees spaced at twenty-foot intervals shall be constructed between the proposed development and the adjacent property. The wall height shall be reduced to four feet within the required front yard setback area. The design and materials shall be approved by the planning commission prior to construction of such wall. 
L.  Screening and Storage. The following shall apply to all developments: 
1.  All roof mounted air conditioners, roof vents, etc., should be screened from view from ground level wherever possible. Such screening shall be of a style and material such that it is an integral part of the building architecture; 
2.  Approved uses that are not conducted entirely within a completely enclosed structure, on a site across the street or alley from a residential district shall be screened by a concrete block or masonry wall and be landscaped along the frontage of the wall to a height to be determined by the planning director. No materials or equipment shall be stored to a height greater that of the wall or fence; 
3.  In the C-O (professional office), C-1 (neighborhood commercial) or C-2 (commercial) zones all business, services and processes shall be located entirely within an enclosed structure, except for off-street parking and loading areas, gasoline service stations, outdoor dining areas, nurseries and garden shops. 
M.  For industrial developments utilizing outside storage, the areas devoted to outside storage shall be paved as required by the planning commission. 
N.  Fencing or wall materials, colors, textures and design of the fence or wall shall be compatible with on-site development of adjacent properties. Fencing shall not be chain link, metal or other materials not normally used for fencing, except in the M-1 (limited manufacturing), M-2 (Light Manufacturing) or M-3 (general manufacturing) zones. 
O.  Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.146; 
P.  Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.144; 
Q.  Signs may be provided as specified by the applicable zoning district regulation and Chapter 17.142; 
R.  The planning commission may waive any of the above listed requirements where a documented hardship, not involving economics, exists or where there are unusual circumstances that prevent compliance with any of the required development standards. Additionally, street improvements and construction of curb, gutter and sidewalks will not be required for individual or cumulative additions constituting less than twenty-five percent expansion of development existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 032-2013, § 1, 8-8-13)  
17.134.030 - Development standards—Single-family residential. 
All new single-family residential developments in the R-R, E, and R-1 zones shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  Houses within new residential subdivisions situated on lots feet shall have a variation in the front yard setback from twenty to thirty feet. Any houses with a front yard setback of less than twenty-five feet shall be required to have a side loaded garage. No more than two houses with the same front yard setback shall be placed on adjacent lots; 
B.  The use of roof forms including shed, gable, and hip roofs, alone or in combination shall be used to achieve a variety of roof lines for houses adjacent to public streets. All such roofs shall be of a concrete tile, approved shake or a twenty-five-year minimum architectural style compositional shingle with dimensional variations. A minimum of fifteen percent of the houses within an approved subdivision shall have concrete or approved tile roofs; 
C.  All exterior wall elevations of buildings and screen walls shall have architectural treatments enhancing building appearance. Uniform materials and consistent style should be evident within a development in all exterior elevations. Secondary materials should be used to highlight building features and to provide visual interest; 
D.  All houses within new subdivisions shall provide decorative lighting on both sides of the garage; 
E.  Residential and mechanical equipment shall not be visible from any street frontage; 
F.  The second story of a two-story residence shall be situated to the rear of the house and is permitted in a new subdivision. The addition of a second story of an existing residence or the construction of a new two-story home in an established neighborhood shall be subject to a conditional use permit that the design of the second story will provide privacy for the adjacent single-family residence; 
G.  Fencing materials, colors, textures and design shall be compatible with on-site development and adjacent properties. Fencing shall not be chain link; 
H.  If custom homes are not proposed, subdividers/developers of residential subdivision tracts shall provide a variety of floor plans and building elevations as follows: 
Dwelling Units 	Min. # of Floorplans 	Min. # of 
Elevations per 
Floorplan 
1—3 	1 	1 
4—8 	2 	2 
9—18 	3 	2 
19—36 	3 	3 
37—60 	3 	4 
61—99 	4 	4 
>100 	4 for the first 100 houses plus 1 for each 20 houses over 100 	4 
 
;adv=7;I.  No two identical elevations shall be placed side by side within a subdivision; 
J.  Color: 
1.  The use of monochromatic and complementary accent and trim colors is considered to meet the intent of this chapter; 
2.  The use of bright or garish colors (i.e., fluorescent "hot" or "day-glo" colors) shall not be permitted; 
3.  Using building materials in their natural states, such as brick or stone, is strongly recommended. 
(Ord. No. 032-2013, § 1, 8-8-13)  
17.134.040 - Development standards—Multifamily residential districts. 
All multifamily residential development in the R-2 and R-3 districts shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  Multifamily developments shall provide fifteen percent usable open space for passive and active recreational uses. Usable open space areas shall not include: rights-of-way, vehicle parking or maneuvering areas, areas adjacent to or between any structures less than fifteen feet apart, setbacks, patio or private yards; 
B.  Each dwelling shall have a private (walled) patio or balcony not less than fifty square feet in area or ten percent of the dwelling unit (whichever is less), and the patio or balcony shall not be used for storage; 
C.  All multifamily developments shall provide recreational amenities within the site which may include: a swimming pool; spa; clubhouse; tot lot with play equipment; picnic shelter/BBQ area; court game facilities such as tennis, basketball or racquetball; improved softball or baseball fields; or day care facilities. The type and number of amenities shall be approved by the planning director and provided in accordance with the following schedule: 
Dwelling Units 	Amenities 
0—4 	0 
5—11 	1 
12—50 	2 
51-100 	3 
>100 	3 plus 1 additional amenity required for every 50 additional units above 100 
 
D.  If laundry hookups are not provided in each dwelling unit, common laundry facilities of sufficient number and accessibility consistent with the number of living units and the Uniform Building Code shall be provided at a rate of at least one washer and one dryer for each five dwelling units; 
E.  Management and security plans shall be submitted for review and approval by the local law enforcement agency for multifamily developments with fifteen or more dwelling units. These plans shall be comprehensive in scope; 
F.  Multifamily Site Planning. 
1.  Building Articulation. Long, unbroken facades and box like forms shall be avoided. Building facades shall be broken up to give the appearance of a collection of smaller structures. To the extent possible, each of the units shall be individually recognizable. This can be accomplished with use of balconies, setbacks and projections which help articulate individual dwelling units or collections of units, and by the pattern and rhythm of windows and doors. Wall planes shall be offset no less frequently than every thirty-two feet and rooflines shall be articulated with varying heights. 
2.  Clustering of Units. The following design techniques shall be considered and implemented whenever possible: 
a.  Varying front setbacks within same structure; 
b.  Staggered and jogged unit planes; 
c.  Use of reverse building plans to add variety; 
d.  Maximum of two adjacent units with identical wall and rooflines. 
3.  Project Entries. Project entries shall provide direct visibility to the project with landscaping, recreational facilities and project directories. Special attention is to be given to the hardscape and landscape treatments to enhance the overall project image at project entries. 
4.  Entry Drives. The principal vehicular access into a multifamily housing project shall be through an entry drive rather than a parking drive. 
5.  Garages. 
a.  Individual parking garages within residential structures shall be enclosed behind garage doors; 
b.  Garages with parking aprons less than twenty feet in length or width shall have automatic garage door openers and/or sectional roll-up doors. 
6.  Carports. Where carports are utilized, they shall follow the same criteria for spatial arrangement as parking courts. Carports may be incorporated with patio walls or used to define public and private open space, but incorporating carports into exterior project walls adjacent to streets shall be prohibited. The ends of each cluster of carports shall be landscaped. 
7.  Pedestrian Access from Parking. Landscape bulbs shall align with major building entrances to provide pedestrian access to the building entrance from a parking court or drive. Bulbs that align with entrances shall include a pathway as well as a vertical landscape or architectural element, for example, a trellis or a tree. 
8.  Open Space. Residents of housing projects shall have safe and efficient access to usable open space, whether public or private, for recreation and social activities. The design and orientation of these areas shall take advantage of available sunlight and shall be sheltered from the noise and traffic of adjacent streets or other incompatible uses. 
   Required common open spaces shall be conveniently located for the majority of units. Private open spaces shall be contiguous to the units they serve and screened from public view. Projects shall have secure open spaces and children's play areas that are visible from the units. 
9.  Refuse Storage/Disposal. Trash bins shall be fully enclosed in accordance with the city of McFarland improvement standards. Said enclosures shall be landscaped on their most visible sides. Locations shall be conveniently accessible for right-hand-side trash collection and maintenance and shall not block access drives during loading operations. 
10.  Support Facilities. Any support structures within multifamily residential projects such as laundry facilities, recreation buildings and sales/lease offices shall be consistent in architectural design and form with the rest of the complex. Temporary sales offices shall also be compatible with these guidelines. 
11.  Mailboxes. Where common mailbox services are provided, they shall be located close to the project entry, or near recreational facilities. The architectural character shall be in similar form, materials and colors to the surrounding buildings. Mailbox locations must be approved by the U.S. Postal Service. 
12.  Security. Multifamily projects shall be designed to provide a maximum amount of security for residents and visitors. Parking areas shall be well lit and located so as to be visible from residential units. Landscaping shall be planned and maintained to provide views into open space areas; 
G.  Multifamily Architecture. The design of multifamily developments shall comply with the requirements of the underlying zone district and the following: 
1.  Facade and Roof Articulation. Structures containing three or more attached dwellings in a row shall incorporate at least one of the following: 
a.  For each dwelling unit, at least one architectural projection not less than two feet from the wall plane and not less than four feet wide shall be provided. Such projections shall extend the full height of single-story structures, at least one-half the height of a two-story building, and two-thirds the height of a three-story building; 
b.  A change in wall plane of at least two feet in depth for at least twelve feet in length for each two units shall be provided. 
2.  Materials. Piecemeal embellishment and frequent changes in materials shall be avoided. 
3.  Balconies, Porches and Patios. Balconies, porches and patios shall be required. These elements shall be integrated to break up large wall masses, and to offset floor setbacks. 
4.  Dwelling Unit Access. The use of long, monotonous access balconies and corridors which provide access to five or more units shall be avoided. Instead, access points to units shall be clustered in groups of four or less. To the extent possible, the entrances to individual units shall be plainly visible from nearby parking areas. The use of distinctive architectural elements and materials to denote prominent entrances shall be used. 
5.  Exterior Stairs. Simple, clean, bold projections of stairways shall be used to complement the architectural massing and form of the multifamily structure. Stairways shall be of smooth stucco, plaster or wood, with accent trim of complimentary colors. Thin-looking, open metal, prefabricated stairs are prohibited. 
6.  Carports, Garages and Accessory Structures. Carports, detached garages, and accessory structures shall be designed as an integral part of the architecture of projects. They shall be similar in materials, color and detail to the principal structures of the development. Carports may utilize flat roofs but shall not project above any exterior walls adjacent to public streets, and shall be located in parking courts to the rear of buildings. Prefabricated metal carports shall not be used unless the exterior facade is made to match the exterior facade of the buildings. 
   Where garages are utilized, doors shall appear to be recessed into the walls rather than flush with the exterior wall. Their design shall be simple and unadorned. 
7.  Solar Panels. Solar panels, when used, shall be integrated into the roof design, flush with the roof slope. Frames shall be colored to match the roof colors. Natural aluminum finish is strongly discouraged. Any mechanical equipment shall be enclosed and completely screened from view. 
8.  Mechanical and Utility Equipment. All mechanical equipment whether mounted on the roof or ground shall be screened from view. Utility meters and equipment shall be placed in locations where they are not exposed to view from the street or they shall be suitably screened. All screening devices shall be compatible with the architecture and color of the adjacent structures. 
9.  Antennas. All antennas shall be placed in attics or building interiors. All new units shall be pre-wired to accept cable reception. Satellite dish antennas are specifically prohibited on roofs and shall be considered early in the design process in terms of location and any required screening; 
H.  Multifamily Infill in Single-Family Neighborhoods. If multifamily projects are located in existing neighborhoods, they shall be compatible with adjacent structures and fit within the context of the existing neighborhood. Minimum requirements include the following: 
1.  Front Yard Setbacks. Front yard setbacks for new multifamily projects are pursuant to the requirements of the base zone district and if setback average is used, the setback shall be equal to or greater than the average setbacks for the two adjacent properties. 
2.  Architectural Compatibility. New multifamily development in existing neighborhoods shall incorporate architectural characteristics and maintain the scale of existing structures on the property and surrounding development, by incorporating window and door detailing, facade decoration, materials, color, roof style and pitch, porches and other features that are compatible. 
(Ord. No. 032-2013, § 1, 8-8-13)  
17.134.042 - Development standards—Emergency shelters. 
A.  In addition to the development standards in the underlying zoning district, the following standards apply to single room occupancy facilities. In the event of a conflict between these standards and the underlying zoning district regulations, the provisions of this section shall apply. 
1.  Occupancy. An emergency shelter shall contain no more than twenty beds and shall provide shelter for no more than twenty people per night. 
2.  Parking. One vehicle parking space shall be provided per every five beds. 
3.  Lighting. Adequate exterior lighting shall be provided for security purposes. The lighting shall be stationary and designed, arranged and installed so as to confine direct rays on the premises and to direct light away from adjacent structures and public rights-of-way. External lighting shall be of an intensity compatible with the neighborhood. 
4.  Waiting and Intake Area. A client waiting and intake area shall be provided and contain a minimum of ten square feet per bed provided at the facility. The waiting and intake area shall be screened from the public right-of-way by an opaque wall or fence. 
5.  Support Facilities. An emergency shelter shall provide one or more of the following common facilities for the exclusive use of the residents: 
a.  Central cooking and dining room. 
b.  Recreation room. 
c.  Laundry facilities to serve the occupants of the shelter. 
d.  A private area for providing referral services to assist shelter clients. 
6.  On-site Staff. At least one manager shall be on-site during all hours of operation of the facility. Such manager shall be an individual who does not utilize the shelter's beds or other services and who resides off-site. 
7.  Concentration of Uses. No more than one emergency shelter shall be permitted in a radius of three hundred feet from another emergency shelter. 
8.  Length of Stay. Each emergency shelter resident shall stay no more than ninety days (cumulative not consecutive) in a three hundred sixty-five-day period. Extensions up to a total of one hundred eighty days in a three hundred sixty-five-day period may be provided if no alternative housing is available. 
(Ord. No. 042-2014, § 1, 2-12-15)  
17.134.044 - Development standards—Single room occupancies. 
A.  Single Room Occupancy Facilities. In addition to the development standards in the underlying zoning district, the following standards apply to single room occupancy facilities. In the event of a conflict between these standards and the underlying zoning district regulations, the provisions of this section shall apply. 
1.  Density. A single room occupancy facility is not required to meet density standards of the general plan. 
2.  Common Area. Four square feet of interior common space per unit shall be provided, with at least two hundred square feet in area of interior common space, excluding janitorial storage, laundry facilities and common hallways. 
3.  Bathroom Facilities. If private bathing facilities are not provided for each unit, shared shower or bathtub facilities shall be provided in accordance with the most recent edition of the California Building Code for congregate residences with at least one full bathroom (including toilets, sinks and bathing facilities) per every three units on a floor. The shared shower or bathtub facility shall be accessible from a common area or hallway. Each shared shower or bathtub facility shall be provided with an interior lockable door. 
4.  Laundry Facilities. Laundry facilities shall be provided in a separate room at the ratio of one washer and dryer for every ten units with at least one washer and dryer per floor. 
5.  Cleaning Supply Room. A cleaning supply room or utility closet with a wash tub with hot and cold running water shall be provided on each floor of the SRO facility. 
6.  Management Plan. A management plan shall be submitted with the development application for an SRO facility and shall be approved by the community development director. The management plan must address management and operation of the facility, rental procedures, safety and security of the residences and building maintenance. 
7.  Facility Management. As SRO facility with ten or more units shall have an on-site manager. An SRO facility with less than ten units shall provide a management office on-site. 
8.  Parking. Parking shall be provided for an SRO facility at a rate of one parking space per unit plus an additional space for the on-site manager. 
9.  Accessibility. All SRO facilities shall comply with all applicable ADFA accessibility and adaptability requirements. 
10.  Existing Structures. An existing structure may be converted to an SRO facility, consistent with the provisions of this section. 
B.  Single Room Occupancy Units. The following standards apply to single room occupancy units. In the event of conflict between these standards and the underlying zoning district regulations, the provisions of this section apply. 
1.  Unit Size. The minimum size of a unit shall be one hundred fifty square feet and the maximum size shall be four hundred square feet. 
2.  Bathroom Facilities. An SRO unit is not required to but may contain partial or full bathroom facilities. A partial bathroom facility shall have at least a toilet and sink; a full facility shall have a toilet, sink and bathtub, shower or bathroom/shower combination. If a full bathroom facility is not provided, common bathroom facilities shall be provided in accordance with the California Building Code for congregate residences with at least one full bathroom for every three units on a floor. 
3.  Kitchen. An SRO unit is not required to but may contain a partial or full kitchen facility. A full kitchen includes a sink, a refrigerator, and a stove, range top or oven. A partial kitchen is missing at least one of these appliances. If a full kitchen is not provided, common kitchen facilities shall be provided with at least one full kitchen per floor. 
4.  Closet. Each SRO shall have a separate closet. 
5.  Code Compliance. All SRO units shall comply with all requirements of the California Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 042-2014, § 1, 2-12-15)  
17.134.050 - Site development plan review and approval—Required. 
Except as provided in this chapter, no permitted use shall be established, no permitted development shall occur, and no building permit or grading permit shall be issued for any permitted use or development subject to this chapter until an application for site development plan review has been submitted to and approved by the planning commission in accordance with the procedures set out in Sections 17.134.040 through 17.134.060. 
(Ord. No. 032-2013, § 1, 8-8-13)  
17.134.060 - Site development plan review and approval—Application—Contents. 
An application for site development review shall include the following: 
A.  Name and address of applicant. 
B.  Name(s) and address(es) of property owner(s). 
C.  Assessor's parcel number(s). 
D.  Legal description of the property. 
E.  A site development plan drawn at the scale specified by the planning director, which includes the following information: 
1.  Topography and proposed grading. 
2.  Location of all existing buildings and structures. 
3.  Location of all proposed buildings and structures. 
4.  Proposed vehicular circulation and parking areas. 
5.  City fire department approval for all access ways and safety setbacks. 
6.  Proposed landscaping as required by Chapter 17.146. 
7.  North arrow. 
F.  Elevations of proposed buildings and structures. 
G.  Phasing or development schedule. 
H.  A detailed description of facility improvements, including: 
1.  Curb, gutter, sidewalks and street improvements. 
2.  Water supply system. 
3.  Sewage collection and disposal system. 
4.  Public utilities. 
5.  Fencing. 
6.  Trash enclosures and method of screening. 
I.  Any and all reports, approvals, or requirements which may be required by mitigation measures incorporated into an environmental document adopted for implementation of this district for specific parcels, including a plan for implementation of recommendations contained in such reports. 
(Ord. No. 032-2013, § 1, 8-8-13)  
17.134.070 - Site development plan application—Review and approval. 
The site development plan application required by this chapter shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with procedures set out in Sections 17.134.040 through 17.134.060. No application for site development plan review shall be required where a use is allowed subject to securing a conditional use permit. The planning director may waive the requirement for formal site development plan review for minor structural additions, including building additions of four hundred square feet or less, or for changes of use to a less intensive use as determined by the planning director. 
(Ord. No. 032-2013, § 1, 8-8-13)  
17.134.080 - Permit revocation and modification. 
Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked pursuant to Section 17.148.100. 
(Ord. No. 032-2013, § 1, 8-8-13)  
Chapter 17.136 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.136.010 - Generally. 
The regulations specified in this title shall be subject to the following interpretations and exceptions. 
(Ord. 109 § 32.00, 1969)  
17.136.020 - Less restrictive use prohibited. 
The express enumeration and authorization in this title of a particular class of building, structure, premises or use in a designated zone shall be deemed a prohibition of such building, structure, premises or use in all zones of more restrictive classification, except as otherwise specified. 
(Ord. 109 § 32.01, 1969)  
17.136.030 - Additional permitted uses. 
Uses other than those specifically mentioned in this title as uses permitted in each of the zones may be permitted therein, provided such uses are similar to those mentioned and are, in the opinion of the city council, evidenced by a resolution in writing, after a report and recommendation by the planning commission, not more obnoxious or detrimental to the welfare of the community than the permitted uses specifically mentioned in the respective zones. 
(Ord. 109 § 32.02, 1969)  
17.136.040 - Additional excluded uses. 
Uses other than those specifically mentioned in this title as uses excluded from any zone may be excluded therefrom provided such uses are, in the opinion of the city council, as evidenced by a resolution in writing, after a report and recommendation by the planning commission, not less obnoxious or detrimental to the welfare of the community than the excluded uses specifically mentioned in any zone. 
(Ord. 109 § 32.03, 1969)  
17.136.050 - Nonconforming buildings and uses. 
The following regulations shall apply to all nonconforming buildings and structures or parts thereof and uses existing at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title: 
A.  Any such nonconforming building or structure may be continued and maintained provided there is no physical change other than necessary maintenance and repair in such building or structure except as permitted in other sections of this title. 
B.  Any such nonconforming use may be maintained and continued provided there is no increase or enlargement of the area, space or volume occupied or devoted to such nonconforming use, except as otherwise provided in this title. 
C.  Any part of a building, structure or land occupied by such a nonconforming use, which is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the provisions of this title shall not thereafter be used or occupied for a nonconforming use. 
D.  Any part of a building, structure or land occupied by such a nonconforming use, which use is abandoned, shall not again be used or occupied for a nonconforming use. Any part of a building, structure or land occupied by such a nonconforming use, which use has ceased for a period of one year or more, shall not again be used or occupied for a nonconforming use. 
E.  If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a building may be changed to another nonconforming use of a more restrictive classification. 
F.  Every nonconforming use of land (where no main building is involved) existing at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall be discontinued within three years from said effective date of this title, except that this provision shall not apply to public utility structures of companies under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of the state. 
G.  Any sign, billboard, commercial advertising structure or statuary which is lawfully existing and maintained at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall be controlled by and conform to the requirements set forth in Chapters 5.28 and 15.24, and any amendments heretofore or hereafter adopted relating thereto and any other ordinance heretofore or hereafter adopted pertaining to such structures. 
H.  Anything in this title to the contrary notwithstanding, land which is being used or heretofore has been used for the drilling, production of or handling of oil, gas and other hydrocarbons, may continue in such use regardless of the land zone in which it is located, and such use shall not be considered a nonconforming use in said zone, provided that this exception to the nonconforming use provisions of this title shall not apply to oil wells, oil well structures, appurtenances or equipment which has been abandoned and the use thereof discontinued for a period of twelve successive months. 
(Ord. 109 § 32.04, 1969)  
17.136.060 - Subsequent nonconformance. 
The provisions of Section 17.136.050 shall also apply to buildings, structures, land or uses which hereafter become nonconforming due to any reclassification of zones under this title or any subsequent change in the regulations of this title; provided, however, that wherever a period of years is specified in Section 17.136.050 for the removal of nonconforming buildings, structures or uses, the period shall be computed from the date of such reclassification or change. 
(Ord. 109 § 32.05, 1969)  
17.136.070 - Buildings under construction. 
Any building or structure for which a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title may be completed and used in accordance with the plans, specifications and permits on which the building permit was granted, if construction is commenced within sixty days after the issuance of the permit and diligently prosecuted to completion. 
(Ord. 109 § 32.06, 1969)  
17.136.080 - Reconstruction of damaged nonconforming building. 
Nothing in this title shall prevent the reconstruction, repairing or rebuilding and continued use of any nonconforming building or structure partially damaged by fire, collapse, explosion or acts of God, subsequent to the effective date of this title, wherein the expense of such reconstruction does not exceed one hundred fifty percent of the assessed value of the building or structure at the time such damage occurred. All such reconstruction shall be performed under one building permit, started within a period of one year from the date of damage and diligently prosecuted to completion. 
(Ord. 109 § 32.07, 1969)  
17.136.090 - Nonconforming uses resulting from amend ments. 
The provisions of this title shall apply to uses which become nonconforming by reason of any amendments to this title, as of the effective date of the amendment. 
(Ord. 109 § 32.08, 1969)  
17.136.100 - Modernization. 
Nothing in this chapter or otherwise in this title shall be construed or applied so as to prevent the expansion, modernization, replacement, reconstruction, repair or rebuilding and continued use of public utility buildings, structures, equipment and facilities where there is no change of use or increase in area of the land so used. 
(Ord. 109 § 32.09, 1969)  
17.136.110 - Location of dwelling. 
Except where otherwise provided for in this title, every dwelling shall face or have frontage upon a street or permanent means of access to a street, by way of a public or private easement or passageway other than an alley. 
(Ord. 109 § 32.10, 1969)  
17.136.120 - Height of buildings. 
No penthouse or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment, towers, steeples, roof signs or other structures shall exceed the height limits provided in this title. Radio and television masts, flagpoles, chimneys and smokestacks may extend not more than forty-five feet above the height limits provided in this title, provided that the same may be safely erected and maintained at such height in view of the surrounding conditions and circumstances. 
(Ord. 109 § 32.11, 1969)  
17.136.130 - Dwellings in buildings with other occu pancies. 
Where a dwelling is located, placed or erected above another type of use in zones other than R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-S, E, E-1, E-2, E-3, E-4, E-5, E-6 or E-7, the rear and side yards for the floors occupied for dwelling purposes shall comply with the provisions of the R-4 zone. 
(Ord. 109 § 32.12, 1969)  
17.136.140 - Accessory buildings. 
The following regulations shall apply to the location of accessory buildings unless otherwise provided in this title: 
A.  No detached accessory buildings in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-S, E, E-1, E-2, E-3, E-4, E-5, E-6 or E-7 zones may exceed two stories or thirty-five feet in height. 
B.  No detached accessory buildings in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-S, E, E-1, E-2, E-3, E-4, E-5, E-6 or E-7 zones shall be located at a distance less than sixty percent of the depth of the lot from the front property line, or ninety feet, whichever is less. 
C.  On a corner lot, no detached accessory buildings in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-S, E, E-1, E-2, E-3, E-4, E-5, E-6 or E-7 zones shall be located at a distance less than ten feet from the side street line. 
D.  No accessory buildings in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-S, E, E-1, E-2, E-3, E-4, E-5, E-6 or E-7 zones, if two stories in height, shall be located nearer than five feet to any interior property line. 
E.  No accessory buildings on the rear twenty-five feet of a reverse corner lot in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-S, E, E-1, E-2, E-3, E-4, E-5, E-6 or E-7 zones shall be located nearer to the side lot line on the street side of such reversed corner lot than the front yard depth required on the key lot in the rear. 
F.  A private garage of not to exceed six hundred square feet may be a part of the main building if the garage and the main building have a common wall of not less than five feet in length, or if not more than four feet from the main building and connected thereto by a roof of not less than five feet in width. 
G.  One detached accessory building for use as a private garage may be permitted to occupy the required front yard of an interior lot in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-S, E, E-1, E-2, E-3, E-4, E-5, E-6 or E-7 zones, when the slope of the front half of such lot is greater than one foot rise or fall in the horizontal distance of four feet from the established street elevation at the front property line; provided, however, that no portion of any such building shall be less than five feet from the side or front line of the lot and further provided that no such building shall exceed ten feet in height. 
(Ord. 109 § 32.13, 1969)  
17.136.150 - Additional dwelling units. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, where a lot in the R-1 zone has an area of twelve thousand square feet or more and with adequate provisions for ingress and egress, a conditional use permit may be granted by the planning commission for the construction of additional one-family dwellings and allowable accessory buildings; however, the minimum site area shall be six thousand square feet of lot area per each one-family dwelling. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, where a lot in the R-2 zone has an area of nine thousand square feet or more and with adequate provisions for ingress and egress, a conditional use permit may be granted for the construction of additional family dwelling units and allowable accessory buildings; however, the minimum site area shall be three thousand square feet of lot area per each family dwelling unit. 
B.  The procedure for filing of applications, filing fees, investigation, notices, public hearings and findings shall be the same as provided in this title for variances. 
(Ord. 109 § 32.14, 1969)  
17.136.160 - Through lots. 
On through lots, either line separating such lot from a public thoroughfare may be designated by the owner as the front lot line. In such cases, the minimum rear yard shall be the average of the yards on lots next adjoining. If such lots next adjoining are undeveloped, the minimum rear yard shall conform to the front yard setback for the zone in which the property is located. 
(Ord. 109 § 32.15, 1969)  
17.136.170 - Yard encroachments. 
Where yards are required in this title, they shall not be less in depth or width than the minimum dimension specified for any part, and they shall be at every point open and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as follows: 
A.  Cornices, canopies, eaves or other similar architectural features not providing additional floor space with the buildings may extend into a required front, side or rear yard not to exceed three feet. 
B.  Open, unenclosed, uncovered porches, platforms or landing places which do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building, may extend into any front, side or rear yard not more than six feet; provided, however, that an open work railing, not more than thirty inches in height, may be installed or constructed on any such porch, platform or landing place. 
C.  Detached accessory buildings may occupy front, side and rear yards except as provided in Section 17.36.140. 
(Ord. 109 § 32.16, 1969)  
17.136.180 - Fences, walls and hedges. 
A.  In the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-S, E, E-1, E-2, E-3, E-4, E-5, E-6 or E-7 zones no fence, wall or hedge located in the rear or side yards shall exceed a height of six feet; provided, however, that approved public utility uses which are under the jurisdiction of a state agency may be approved to a greater height. 
B.  In the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-S, E, E-1, E-2, E-3, E-4, E-5, E-6 or E-7 zones no fence, wall or hedge located in the required front yard shall exceed a height of four feet. 
C.  In the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-S, E, E-1, E-2, E-3, E-4, E-5, E-6 or E-7 zones no fence, wall or hedge located within twenty-five feet of the rear line of a reversed corner lot between the street and the established setback line on the key lot, to the rear, shall exceed a height of four feet. 
D.  In the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-S, E, E-1, E-2, E-3, E-4, E-5, E-6 or E-7 zones no barbed wire shall be used or maintained in or about the construction of a fence, wall or hedge along the front, side or rear lines of any lot, or within three feet of the lines, and no sharp wire or points shall project at the top of any fence or wall less than six feet in height. 
E.  Fences, walls or hedges shall be allowed to be located or encroach upon any city, easement or right-of-way subject to the issuance of a city of McFarland encroachment permit. 
(Ord. 109 § 32.17, 1969) 
(Ord. No. 068-2017, § 1, 6-27-17)  
17.136.190 - Storage in yards. 
No portion of any required front yard, or side yard on the street side of a corner lot shall be used for the permanent storage of motor vehicles, trailers, airplanes, boats, parts of the foregoing or building materials (except building materials for use on the premises stored thereon during the time a valid permit is in effect for construction on the premises). "Permanent storage," as used in this section, means the presence for a period of forty-eight consecutive hours in the required front or side yard. 
(Ord. 109 § 32.18, 1969)  
17.136.200 - Public utility uses. 
The provisions of this title shall not be construed to apply to the construction, installation, operation and maintenance of public utility distribution and transmission lines, towers and poles and underground facilities for providing gas, water, electricity or telephone and telegraph services by public utility companies under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of the state; provided, however, before any right-of-way for transmission lines is acquired, the proposed route shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. 
(Ord. 109 § 32.19, 1969)  
Chapter 17.138 - AGRICULTURAL PRESERVES/WILLIAMSON ACT MANAGEMENT 
 
17.138.010 - Purpose and description. 
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize the city to designate suitable areas of the city as agricultural preserves by resolution of the city council pursuant to the Williamson Act of 1965 (Government Code Section 51200 et seq.) for the purpose of establishing agricultural and compatible land uses. 
(Ord. No. 033-2013, § 1, 8-22-13)  
17.138.020 - Administration. 
Agricultural preserves shall be administered pursuant only to those portions of the Williamson Act of 1965 that apply to the preservation of agricultural lands, as now enacted or hereafter amended, and pursuant to the uniform rules, as defined under this chapter, which shall apply in all agricultural preserves now or hereafter established. Other aspects of the legislation, as defined by Section 51205 of the Government Code, can be included only if they are secondary to the primary agricultural use of the land. 
(Ord. No. 033-2013, § 1, 8-22-13)  
17.138.030 - Filing of map. 
On or before September 1st of each year, the city shall file with the director of conservation a map of the city and designate thereon all contracted parcels at the end of the preceding fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 033-2013, § 1, 8-22-13)  
17.138.040 - Uniform rules and use restrictions. 
Uses permitted under this section shall be consistent with the principles of compatibility set forth in Government Code Section 51238.1(a), (b), (c), and the following uses: 
A.  Agricultural Uses. 
1.  Agricultural and horticultural uses, including, but not limited to, greenhouse, orchard, the raising of field, tree, vine, berry, and bush crops, vegetables, flowers, and other plants; 
2.  Harvesting, curing, processing, packaging, and storage incidental to such agricultural uses; shipping of agricultural products produced upon the premises, or where such activity is carried on in conjunction with or as a part of an agricultural use in the immediate vicinity; 
3.  Farms devoted to the grazing of cattle, horses, sheep, hogs, or other farm stock, including the supplementary feeding thereof, but not including slaughter houses; 
4.  Farms or establishments for the selective or experimental breeding of cattle, horses, sheep, hogs, or other farm stock; 
5.  Farms devoted to the hatching, breeding, raising, butchering, processing, and shipping of chickens, turkeys, or other fowl or poultry, including eggs; 
6.  Dairies and the production of dairy products from milk produced on the premises, excluding retail sales therefrom; 
7.  Contract harvesting and agricultural services where such use is incidental and secondary to the use of the premises for agricultural purpose. 
B.  Compatible Uses. 
1.  Farm dwellings, mobile homes, and other residential uses occupied by the owner/operator or help employed on the premises, including accessory buildings and farm buildings incidental to the farming operation on the premises; 
2.  Labor camps intended for use by and occupied as housing for laborers employed directly on the farmland upon which the labor camp is located; 
3.  Recreational uses subordinate to the primary agricultural use; 
4.  Oil and gas drilling and production in accordance with the provisions of the state and local standards and ordinances; 
5.  The erection, construction, alteration, operation, and maintenance of gas, electric, water, and communication utility facilities and similar public service facilities by corporations and companies under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California and by public agencies; 
6.  Any use not conforming to the agricultural or compatible uses specified in this chapter, which use preexisted the date the land was included within an agricultural preserve (such use discontinued for two years shall not be resumed unless it then constitutes an agricultural or compatible use permitted under the uniform rules); 
7.  Any use required to be permitted by any amendment to the California Land Conservation Act of 1965 which maybe hereafter adopted; 
8.  Any use determined to be a compatible use in all agricultural preserves established by the city council after public hearing or published notice and such other notice, if any, as the council may specify; 
9.  Any use of a specific parcel of land in an agricultural preserve which is determined to be a compatible use as related to differences in the location and circumstances of the owners of land in agricultural or compatible uses within an agricultural preserve and which is based on character, location, or other particular circumstances of the specific parcel which are not applicable generally to other lands within that agricultural preserve (such determination maybe made by the city council only after public hearing or published notice and such other notice, if any, as the council may specify). 
C.  Additional Uses Permitted in Specific Preserves as Approved by the City Council. 
1.  The conservation, development, and use of water resources located within the lands covered by this preserve, and exploration conducted by scientific means on the lands located within this preserve for the purpose of determining the existence, location, and extent of any commercial mineral deposits; 
2.  Uses related to or incidental to the construction, operation, and maintenance of public or private transmission or conveyance facilities; 
3.  Uses related to or incidental to the establishment, maintenance, and repair of routes for ingress and egress over and through the lands included within this preserve; 
4.  Any use required to be permitted by any amendment to the California Land Conservation Act of 1965 which may be hereafter adopted; 
5.  Commercial fish farms and fishponds and accessory buildings. 
D.  Any land included in an agricultural preserve may be zoned for urban development provided however that urban development does not occur until such time as the subject property is unencumbered by the Williamson Act and removed from the agricultural preserve. 
(Ord. No. 033-2013, § 1, 8-22-13)  
17.138.050 - Contracts. 
It is the intent of the city to continue, contracts in force at the time the property is annexed into the city consistent with general plan policy. No new agricultural preserves will be initiated for property within the city and the city will request Kern County not to create new agricultural preserves within its sphere of influence. The city, after acquiring land in a preserve by annexation, shall have all rights and responsibilities specified in Government Code Section 51235. 
(Ord. No. 033-2013, § 1, 8-22-13)  
17.138.060 - Notice of non-renewal—Renewal—Recording requirements. 
A.  Nonrenewal Process. 
1.  Filing. 
a.  Initiation. Notice of nonrenewal may be initiated by either of the following, in compliance with state law (Government Code Section 51245): 
i.  Council. The council may initiate a notice of nonrenewal; or 
ii.  Property Owner(s). The property owner(s) may initiate a notice of nonrenewal. 
b.  A copy of the notice shall be filed with the planning division of the community development department. 
c.  Contents. The notice shall contain the following materials: 
i.  Notice Form. One copy of the completed notice form; 
ii.  Preliminary Title Report. One copy of a current preliminary title report. Reports more than six months old are not considered current and shall not be accepted; and 
iii.  Deadline. The written notice shall be served on the city by the property owner(s) at least ninety days, or on the property owner(s) by the city at least sixty days, before the annual renewal date of the contract. 
2.  Recordation. The notice of nonrenewal shall be recorded in the following manner: 
a.  Document Preparation. Once the notice is deemed complete and acceptable per subsection (A)(1)(c) of this section, the city clerk shall prepare all documents for recordation; 
b.  Forwarded for Recordation. The city clerk shall forward the notice to the county recorder's office for recordation; 
c.  Mailing of Copies. A copy of the recorded notice shall be mailed to the following: 
i.  The property owner(s), 
ii.  The director of conservation, and 
iii.  The county assessor; 
d.  December Deadline. The notice shall be recorded in the county recorder's office before December 1st in order to be processed for the following March 1st lien date, in compliance with state law (Government Code Section 51245). 
B.  Terminates in Ten Years. The notice of nonrenewal terminates the contract in ten years, in compliance with state law (Government Code Section 51246(a)). 
C.  Assessment. During this ten-year nonrenewal period, the assessment of the subject property may incrementally increase. 
(Ord. No. 033-2013, § 1, 8-22-13)  
17.138.070 - Cancellation. 
A.  Filing. 
1.  Initiation. A petition for cancellation may only be initiated by the property owner(s), consistent with Government Code Section 51281. 
2.  The petition for cancellation shall be filed with the planning division of the city's community development department. 
3.  Contents. The petition for cancellation shall contain the following materials: 
a.  Petition Form. One complete copy of the city's required form; 
b.  Preliminary Title Report. One copy of a current preliminary title report. Title reports more than six months old at time of application are not considered current and shall not be accepted; 
c.  A copy of the contract under which the parcel(s) are encumbered; 
d.  A current assessor's parcel map showing the contracted parcels; and 
e.  Additional Information. Any additional information the director determines to be necessary to process the petition. 
f.  A proposal for a specified alternative use of land. 
B.  Tentative Cancellation of Contract. 
1.  Notice. Notice of a public hearing shall be given as follows: 
a.  Notice to Director of Conservation. Notice shall be provided to the director of conservation, along with the required findings, at least thirty days prior to a public hearing at which the city council will take action on the tentative cancellation; 
b.  Published Notice. A notice shall be published at least once in a local newspaper of general circulation within the city at least ten days before the hearing; and 
c.  Mailed Notice. Notice shall be mailed to owners of contracted property within one mile, property owners within five hundred feet, other concerned agencies, and the department of conservation. 
2.  Review Procedure. The council shall conduct a public hearing for a tentative cancellation of the contract. 
3.  Findings. The council may grant cancellation of the contract only if all the findings in subsection (B)(3)(a) or (B)(3)(b), below, can be made in a positive manner: 
a.  The cancellation is consistent with the purposes of the Williamson Act. This finding can only be made if the cancellation is: 
i.  For property on which a notice of nonrenewal has been served in compliance with state law (Government Code Section 51245) (Nonrenewal of Williamson Act Contract), above; 
ii.  Not likely to result in the removal of adjoining lands from agricultural use; 
iii.  For an alternative use of land which is consistent with the land uses, objectives, policies, and programs of the general plan and any applicable PD zoning; 
iv.  Intended to ensure/maintain a contiguous pattern of urban development; and 
iv.  In an area which has no noncontracted land available and suitable for the proposed use which is intended for the subject property or development of the contracted land would provide for a more contiguous pattern of urban development than would development of the available noncontracted land. 
b.  The cancellation is in the public interest. This finding can only be made if: 
i.  Other public considerations substantially outweigh the objectives of the Williamson Act; and 
ii.  There is no proximate noncontracted land in the area which is available and suitable for the proposed use which is intended for the subject property, or development of the contracted land would provide for a more contiguous pattern of urban development than would development of any proximate noncontracted land. 
4.  Notice of Decision. A notice of the decision on the tentative cancellation of the contract shall be published within thirty days of the council's decision, with a copy to the director of the department of conservation, in compliance with Government Code Section 51284, and to the county assessor's office. 
5.  Recordation. The city clerk shall record the certificate of tentative cancellation with the county recorder in compliance with Government Code Section 51283.4(a). 
(Ord. No. 033-2013, § 1, 8-22-13)  
17.138.080 - Fees. 
Prior to giving approval to any contract cancellation, the city council shall determine and certify the cancellation fee pursuant to Section 51283 or Section 51297 of the Government Code. Cancellation fees that are not paid within one year of the recording of the certificate of tentative cancellation will be recomputed as of the date of notice (Government Code Section 51283.4(a) and (b)). 
A.  Cancellation Fee Waiver. If it finds that it is in the public interest, the city council may waive any payment or any portion of a payment by the landowner. It may extend the time for making the payment, or a portion of the payment, contingent upon the future use made of the land, and its economic return to the landowner for a period of time not to exceed the unexpired period of the contract, had it not been cancelled, if all of the following occur: 
1.  The cancellation is caused by an involuntary transfer or change in the use which may be made of the land and the land is not immediately suitable, nor will be immediately used, for a purpose which produces a greater economic return to the owner; 
2.  The city council has determined it is in the best interest of the program to conserve agricultural land use that the payment be either deferred or not required; and 
3.  The waiver or extension of time is approved by the secretary of the resources agency. The secretary will approve a waiver or extension of time only on the finding that the granting of the waiver or extension of time by the local agency is consistent with the policies of the Williamson Act and that the local agency complied with the Act in approving the cancellation. In evaluating a request for a waiver or extension of time, the secretary shall review the findings of the city council, the evidence in the record of the council, and any other evidence received concerning the cancellation, waiver, or extension of time (Government Code Section 51283(c)). 
B.  Recordation. The cancellation of a contract shall not be final until the community development director is satisfied that any required conditions have been fulfilled and the certificate of cancellation is recorded pursuant with Section 51283.4(a) of the Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 033-2013, § 1, 8-22-13)  
17.138.090 - Precedence. 
If any part of this chapter is found to conflict with any part of state law governing Land Conservation Act of 1965 contracts, the applicable section of state law shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 033-2013, § 1, 8-22-13)  
Chapter 17.140 - OIL AND GAS PRODUCTION 
Sections: 
 
17.140.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
A.  It is declared to be the purpose of this chapter to establish reasonable limitations, safeguards and controls with respect to the future drilling for, development and production of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances within the city. 
B.  Such limitations, safeguards and controls are deemed necessary in the public interest to insure practices which will permit the economic recovery of the maximum amount of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances but which will also take into consideration the surface uses of land as such uses are indicated by the value and character of the existing improvements in or near localities where oil and gas operations are conducted, the desirability of the area for residential or other uses, and other factors relating to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
C.  It is recognized that in regulating the surface use of land for the development of such natural resources it is in the public interest that such regulations be of a character designed to impose the minimum burdens consistent with the maximum enjoyment of each use. 
(Ord. 109 § 31.00, 1969)  
17.140.020 - Oil drilling permitted in specific zones. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other part of this title, oil wells or well holes for the exploration for, development and production of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances may be drilled, operated and maintained, together with the installation and use of such equipment, structures and facilities as are necessary or convenient for such purposes, including but not limited to the initial separation of the oil, gas and water, and for the storage, handling, recycling and transportation of such oil, gas and water to and from the premises in the city, and the owner or operator thereof shall not be required to obtain any permit or variance as a condition precedent therefor, except as provided in this chapter. However, a variance may be granted to the provisions of this chapter according to the provisions of Chapter 17.148. 
(Ord. 109 § 31.01, 1969)  
17.140.030 - Unrestricted drilling. 
In the M-3 general manufacturing zone, the A-2 general agricultural zone and the A-1 light agricultural zone, the following conditions shall apply: No review or permit shall be required for the drilling of any well hole for the exploration for, development and production of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances, or the installation of equipment, structures and facilities incidental thereto provided that all drilling installations and operations shall conform to state law and to fire and safety ordinances or regulations of the county and the city in force and effect and applicable; provided, further, that drilling shall not be commenced within one hundred feet of any residence then in existence without the written consent of the owner thereof. 
(Ord. 109 § 31.02, 1969)  
17.140.040 - Drilling by conventional use permit. 
In the R-1 one-family dwelling zone, R-2 two-family dwelling zone, R-3 limited multiple-family dwelling zone, R-4 multiple-family dwelling zone, R-S suburban residential zone, E estate zone, E-1 estate zone, E-2 estate zone, E-3 estate zone, E-4 estate zone, E-5 estate zone, E-6 estate zone, E-7 estate zone, C-O professional office zone, C-1 neighborhood commercial zone and C-2 commercial zone, the following conditions shall apply: 
No person, firm or corporation shall conduct the drilling of any well, hole or holes for the exploration for, development and production of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances, or install any equipment, structures and facilities incidental thereto, in or upon lands within the zones specified in this section without first having applied for and obtained, by payment of the fee provided in this chapter, a conditional use permit from the planning commission so to do. No plant for the refining of petroleum products from such operation shall be permitted under this title. The procedure for the filing of applications, investigation, notices, public hearings, findings and appeal shall be the same as provided in this code for variances, in Sections 17.148.050, 17.148.070, 17.148.080, 17.148.090 and 17.148.100, except that the planning commission may waive public hearing if all of the owners of surface rights within three hundred feet of the proposed site consent in writing. Such permit shall provide that all drilling and producing operations conform to conditions No. 1 through No. 10, inclusive, as hereinafter set forth, and one or more of conditions No. 11 through No. 15, inclusive, if applicable and determined as hereinafter set forth, except that upon request of the applicant, at or subsequent to the time the permit is issued, the planning commission, by specific action in each instance, may waive any one or more of such conditions if it finds that such waiver will not result in material detriment to the public welfare or to the property of other persons located in the vicinity thereof. 
1.  That no oil or gas well shall be drilled within one hundred feet of any public highway or within one hundred fifty feet of any residence constructed prior to the commencement of such drilling, without the written consent of the owner thereof. 
2.  That all drilling and producing shall conform to all applicable fire and safety regulations. 
3.  That no signs, other than directional and warning signs and those required for identification of the well shall be constructed, erected, maintained or placed on the premises or any part thereof except those required by law or ordinance to be displayed in connection with the drilling or maintenance of the well. 
4.  That suitable and adequate sanitary toilet and washing facilities, approved by the Kern County department of health, shall be installed and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. 
5.  That proven technological improvements generally accepted and used in drilling and production methods shall be adopted as they may become from time to time available if capable of reducing factors of nuisance and annoyance. 
6.  That the derrick, all boilers and all other drilling equipment used pursuant to this section to drill any well hole or to repair, clean out, deepen or redrill any completed or drilling well, shall be removed within ninety days after completion of production tests following completion of such drilling, or after abandonment of any well, unless such derrick, boilers and drilling equipment are to be used, within a reasonable time limit determined by the planning commission, for the drilling of another well or wells on the premises. 
7.  That after any well has been placed on production, no earthen sumps shall be used for storage of petroleum. 
8.  That within ninety days after any well has been placed on production or after its abandonment earthen sumps used in drilling or production, or both, unless such sumps are to be used within a reasonable time limit determined by the planning commission for the drilling of another well or wells, shall be filled and the drilling site restored as nearly as practicable to a uniform grade. 
9.  That any derrick used for servicing operations shall be of the portable type; provided, however, that upon presentation of proof that the well is of such depth or has such other characteristics, or for other cause, that a portable type derrick will not properly service such well, the planning commission may approve the use of a standard type derrick. 
10.  That prior to the drilling or deepening of any well, the permittee shall file with the city council a satisfactory corporate bond in favor of the city in the sum of five hundred dollars per well or two thousand five hundred dollars for five or more wells, executed by the permittee as principal and by an authorized surety company as surety, conditioned that the principal named in the bond shall faithfully comply with all the provisions of this section in drilling, redrilling or deepening any well or wells covered by the bond, and shall secure the city against all losses, charges and expenses incurred by it to obtain such compliance by the principal named in the bond. 
The following additional conditions, Nos. 11 through 15, inclusive, may be added by the planning commission if deemed necessary or desirable to protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare: 
11.  That all oil or gas produced shall be carried away by pipelines or, if produced into and shipped from tanks located on the premises, such tanks shall be surrounded by shrubs or trees, planted and maintained so as to develop attractive landscaping and, insofar as practicable, screen such tanks from public view. 
12.  That except in case of emergency, no materials, equipment, tools or pipe used for either drilling or production operations shall be delivered or removed from the drilling site, except between the hours of eight a.m. and eight p.m. of any day. 
13.  That adequate fire fighting apparatus and supplies, approved by the county fire department, shall be maintained on the drilling site at all times during drilling and production operations. 
14.  That pumping wells shall be operated by electric motors or muffled internal combustion engines, and the height of all pumping units shall be not more than twenty feet. All permanent equipment shall be painted and kept in a neat condition. All producing operations shall be as free from noise as possible with modern oil operations. 
15.  That the drilling site shall be fenced or landscaped as prescribed by the planning commission. 
If a producing well is not secured upon land subject to the permit within twelve months from the date of issuance of the permit, or within any extended period thereof, the permit shall expire and the premises shall be restored to their original condition as nearly as practicable so to do. No permit shall expire, however, while the permittee is continuously conducting drilling, redrilling, completing or abandoning operations, or related operations, in a well on the lands covered by the permit, which operations were commenced while the permit was otherwise in effect. For the purposes hereof, "continuous operations" are operations suspended not more than thirty days. If at the end of the twelve-month period the permittee has not completed his drilling program on the lands covered by the permit, the planning commission may, upon a written request of the permittee, extend the permit for the additional time requested by the permittee for the completion of the drilling program. 
(Ord. 109 § 31.03, 1969)  
17.140.050 - Drilling by counter permit. 
In the M-1 limited manufacturing zone and the M-2 light manufacturing zone, the following conditions shall apply: 
A.  No person, firm or corporation shall drill any well hole for the exploration for, development and production of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances, or install any equipment, structures and facilities incidental thereto, without first having applied for and obtained, by payment of the fee provided in this chapter, an oil well counter permit from an authorized employee of the planning commission. The permit shall provide that all drilling and producing operations conform to conditions Nos. 1 through 10, inclusive, as specified in Section 17.140.040, except that upon request of the applicant, at or subsequent to the time the permit is issued, the planning commission, by specific action in each instance, may waive any one or more of such conditions if it finds that such waiver will not result in material detriment to the public welfare or to the property of other persons located in the vicinity thereof. No plant for the refining of petroleum products from such operation shall be permitted under this chapter. 
(Ord. 109 § 31.04, 1969)  
17.140.060 - Filing fee for oil well drilling. 
A.  No filing fee shall be collected for unrestricted drilling under the provisions of Section 17.140.030. 
B.  The city shall charge and collect the following fees for the purpose of defraying the expenditures incidental to the proceedings described in this chapter: 
1.  A fee of thirty-five dollars shall be collected for each conditional use permit granted under the provision of Section 17.140.040. An additional fee of thirty-five dollars shall be paid by the permittee for each well (after the first well) drilled upon lands covered by a conditional use permit. 
2.  A fee of five dollars shall be collected for each counter permit issued under the provisions of Section 17.140.050. An additional fee of five dollars shall be paid by the permittee for each well (after the first well) drilled upon lands covered by a counter permit. 
(Ord. 109 § 31.05, 1969)  
CHAPTER 17.142 - OUTDOOR SIGNS 
Sections: 
 
17.142.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to promote the growth of the city in an orderly and attractive manner and to provide minimum standards to safeguard life, health, property, aesthetics and public welfare by regulating and controlling the type, number, area, height, quality of materials, design, construction, illumination, location and maintenance of all signs and sign structures in compliance with the Outdoor Advertising Act as codified in Business and Professions Code sections 5200 et seq. Signs that cause distraction and represent potential safety hazards as well as aesthetic problems are either discouraged or prohibited. 
The city of McFarland has had ordinances regulating signs since at least 1961. Recently the constitutionality of city Ordinance Nos. 36, 57, 74, 86 and 143 regulating signs and advertising signs within the city of McFarland have been questioned. Additionally, recent efforts to plan for and revitalize the downtown area have been initiated and undertaken. Based thereon, this chapter is hereby declared to be an chapter for the preservation of the public peace, safety, health and welfare. 
A 1980 Federal Highway Administration Study found a positive correlation between billboards and accident rates and Federal and State courts have long cited aesthetics, traffic and safety as a legitimate basis for the regulation of advertising displays. The California Supreme Court in the case of Metromedia, Inc. v. City of San Diego, 453 U.S. 490 (1981) held that billboards are large, immobile and permanent structures which like other structures are subject to regulation. They are designed to stand apart from their surroundings and they create unique problems for land use and planning. It has been recognized by the federal government, the state government, the California and U.S. Supreme Court, and other courts, that billboards by their very nature can be perceived as an aesthetic harm. This chapter is necessary to protect the public health needs of the community because the proliferation of signs constitutes visual blight, which reduces the quality of life within the community would adversely effect the city of McFarland's current efforts to redevelop and beautify its downtown corridor and the city as it grows. 
B.  The sign regulations contained herein are not designed to regulate any speech based on the content of the speech or based upon who is speaking. The sign regulations are intended to accomplish the following results: 
1.  Protect and enhance the character of residential neighborhoods and property values by prohibiting obtrusive or incompatible signs; 
2.  Promote and maintain healthy commercial centers and property values for effective identification and communication of the nature of goods and services and avoidance of wasteful and unsightly competition signs; 
3.  Attract and direct persons to various activities and enterprises, in order to provide for public convenience; 
4.  Provide a reasonable system of sign control throughout the city; 
5.  Encourage signs which are well designed and pleasing in appearance and to provide incentive and latitude for variety, good design relationship and spacing; 
6.  Encourage a desirable urban character; 
7.  Enhance the economic value of the community and each are thereof through reasonable regulation of such things as type, number, area, height, location and illumination of signs; 
8.  Encourage signs which are harmonious with adjacent land uses and projects and to encourage architectural compatibility; 
9.  Reduce traffic and safety hazards through regulation of the type, number, area, height, location and illumination of signs; 
10.  Provide a reasonable amortization period for the removal of non-conforming signs. 
(Ord. No. 312-2006, § 1, 7-20-06)  
17.142.020 - Repeal of all other ordinances regulating outdoor advertising signs. 
Ordinance Nos. 36, 57, 74, 143, 308-2006, and 309-2006 are repealed. 
(Ord. No. 312-2006, § 1, 7-20-06)  
17.142.030 - Definitions. 
A.  For the purposes of this chapter the following terms as used herein are defined as follows: 
1.  Sign: Any card, Cloth, paper, metal, painted, stone, concrete or wooden surface of any character placed for purposes of delivering a message on or affixed to the ground or any wall, tree, bush, rock, fence, building, structure or thing, either publicly or privately owned, which includes advertising signs as defined herein. 
2.  Advertising Sign: Shall mean a rigidly assembled sign, display, or device attached or affixed to the ground or attached to the building or other inherently permanent structure, including the advertising display's supporting structure, which constitutes or is used for the display of a commercial message to the public which may or may not exclusively pertain to the premises on which the display is located. 
3.  Single Display: For purposes of this chapter, a single display shall be a one sided display, a two sided back to back display or a "V" shaped display which does not exceed an angle of ninety degrees. 
4.  Display Surface: Is the area made available by the sign structure for the purpose of displaying the advertising message. 
5.  Outdoor Advertising Business: Shall mean the business or occupation of placing, erecting, constructing or maintaining of advertising signs. 
6.  Off-Site Advertising Sign: All signs intended or used to advertise, inform, or attract the attention of the public to activities conducted on property other than the property where the sign is located. 
7.  Nonconforming Signs: Signs that were lawfully placed, but that do not conform to the provisions of this chapter that were enacted subsequent to the date of placing said sign. This also encompasses signs that were lawfully in existence outside the city limits prior to annexation of that property where the sign is located into the city and signs that where lawfully in existence prior to any zoning changes or amendments to this chapter rendering the signs not in compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 312-2006, § 1, 7-20-06)  
17.142.040 - Permits and permitting process. 
A.  The permit requirement procedures are: 
1.  Permits. A sign, except for those identified in Section 17.142.050 of this chapter, shall not hereafter be painted, placed, pasted, posted, printed, tacked, fastened, constructed, erected, re-erected, installed, altered or otherwise constructed or maintained without first obtaining a permit from the planning commission of the city of McFarland in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. A permit shall be required for signs as set forth in this chapter and a separate permit shall be required for each group of signs on a single supporting structure. Additionally, electrical permits shall also be obtained from the building inspector for all electrified signs. 
2.  Application for Permit. Application for a permit shall be made in writing on forms furnished by the city clerk. The application shall contain the location by street and number of the proposed sign structure, as well as the name and address of the owners of the sign structure and the real property where it is to be located and the sign contractor or erector. All sign applications shall include a scale drawing and be prepared in such a manner as to accurately reflect the final product. The Planning Commission may require the filing of plans or other pertinent information when such information is necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
3.  Permit Fees. A sign permit fee shall be paid to the city clerk at the same time the permit application is submitted for consideration. The amount of the fees be in accordance with the fee schedule established by resolution of the city council. 
4.  Timing of Decision on Permit Application. All applications for permits to erect, re-erect, construct, alter, or re-locate a sign within the city of McFarland will be voted on by the planning commission within one hundred twenty days of the receipt of the completed application and full payment of the application fees. 
a.  The applicant will be notified by the planning commission's decision in writing within fourteen days of this vote. Said notification will be sent via U.S. mail to the address stated in the application. 
b.  Should the planning commission request additional information or documentation from the applicant said time for voting will not commence to run until the applicant has complied in full with the planning commission's requests. 
c.  The failure of the planning commission to vote and/or to mail the notice of decision to the applicant as stated above will result in the automatic denial of the application which is immediately appealable to the city council of the city of McFarland. 
5.  Permit Denial—Permit Revocation and Appeals: 
a.  All rights and privileges acquired under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter or any amendment thereto, are mere licenses revocable at any time by the planning commission and all such permits shall contain this clause. 
b.  Any permit issued in accordance with this chapter shall be revoked by the planning commission if it is found that the permit holder has erected and maintained any sign in violation of this chapter. 
c.  Should any applicant who has had his application for a permit denied or any permit holder who has had his permit revoked is dissatisfied with the planning commission's decision, may, no later than ten days after the notice of such decision was deposited in the United States mail, make written objection to the city council. Said objection will be set on the agenda and addressed at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council of McFarland no later than ninety days following the filing of the objection with the city clerk of the city of McFarland. The applicant or permit holder shall be given written notice of the hearing no less than three days prior to the hearing. The city council may sustain, suspend or overrule the decision of the planning commission, which decision shall be final and conclusive. 
d.  Pending the hearing, any sign existing pursuant to a permit that has been revoked may remain in place until a final decision is rendered by the City Council. 
6.  Signs Erected Pursuant to Permit. All signs constructed pursuant to a permit issued by the planning commission shall be subject to the requirements of the Building Codes and Ordinances of the City of McFarland. 
(Ord. No. 312-2006, § 1, 7-20-06)  
17.142.050 - Exemptions from the permit requirements. 
A.  Regardless of Section 17.142.040, permits are not required for the following signs: 
1.  Signs other than off site advertising signs not exceeding twelve square feet of display surface and six feet in height as measured from the ground, placed on the property subject to such sign. This includes signs expressing political, social, religious or other non-commercial messages, but does not include political election signs governed by this chapter. Advertising signs must comply with the distance requirements of Section 17.142.080 of this chapter; 
2.  Changing of the copy or message on a theater marquee, reader board, menu board, painted or printed sign or similar such sign; 
3.  Changing of copy or messages on all signs, unless a structural change is made to the sign which brings it within the signs subject to the permit process under this chapter. 
4.  Traffic control signs, approved highway directional signs, railroad signal signs, public utility signs and other signs as required by law to regulate traffic and promote the public safety so long as the sign does not include a commercial business name or logo. 
5.  Signs on registered and licensed vehicles; provided, however, that such vehicles shall not be utilized as parked or stationary outdoor display signs. 
6.  Flags that have a display surface of twelve square feet or less. 
7.  Banners that are used on the property to which their message pertains and banners containing non-commercial messages that do not exceed fifty square feet in area may be used for a single period not to exceed thirty days. Banners however, may not be displayed for more than sixty days in a single calendar year without first obtaining a permit pursuant to this chapter. 
8.  Interior signs within a public or private structure, including a stadium, ballpark or other similar private or public recreational use, not intended to be seen from a public street or adjacent property. 
9.  Notices posted on public bulletin boards or public kiosk designed for such notices. 
10.  Community Message Signs. The city council may establish and erect, or have established and erected, on publicly owned non-residential property, other than a right-of-way, a community message sign. 
11.  Political Election Signs. Political election signs are permitted to be placed on private property in the city subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Signs shall not be erected sooner than sixty days before the election and shall be removed within ten days following the election; 
b.  The owner of the property on which the sign is placed shall be responsible for removal; 
c.  Signs shall not be placed on private property without the consent of the property owner. No such sign, either free-standing or posted on any object, shall be placed or erected on public property, within a public right-of-way, or by any maintained parkway-landscaped area; 
d.  Signs shall not exceed an area of twelve square feet and a height of six feet in residential districts, and twenty-four square feet and a height of eight feet in commercial/industrial/agricultural districts. 
(Ord. No. 312-2006, § 1, 7-20-06)  
17.142.060 - Specialized signs. 
A.  In recognition of the fact that provisions need to be allowed for temporary signs and signs notifying the public of necessary services, events and activities, the following specialized signs are allowed under the conditions stated: 
1.  Event Signs. Event signs may be approved by the planning commission as a means of publicizing events, such as grand openings, carnivals, parades, charitable events, community holiday activities, and other events. The events can be commercial or non-commercial. Special event signs shall be limited to the following provisions: 
a.  Special event signs within windows shall be limited to covering no more than twenty-five percent of the window area per building elevation of the ground floor only; 
b.  Signs shall be limited per business or property owner to forty-five days per calendar year. This time may be utilized in any combination of durations; however, the number of special events shall not exceed five per calendar year, and those single events shall not exceed a duration of fifteen consecutive days. 
2.  Copy shall not exceed a total area of one hundred feet, and may include the name, symbol or logo of the business or sponsor, but in no event shall such name or logo exceed one-fourth the total committed copy area. 
a.  The planning commission shall determine whether or not sign comports to the purpose of the city's sign ordinance and the neighborhood surrounding it's location and may limit the size and location of the sign to achieve the purpose of the sign ordinance. 
3.  Freeway Oriented Signs. The planning commission may approve freeway oriented signs identifying a premise where food, lodging and places of business engaged in supplying goods and services essential to the normal operation of motor vehicles, and which are directly dependent upon an adjacent freeway. These signs shall be subject to the following regulations in addition to the other regulations contained within this chapter: 
a.  The signs shall be within C1, C2, PCD, M1, M2 or M3 zone districts; and shall be within a close proximity to an off-ramp from State Highway 99; 
b.  The planning commission shall determine if the location and business and service offered satisfy the criteria and intent of this section, and the definition of a freeway oriented sign; 
c.  The planning commission shall also determine whether or not the sign comports with the purpose of the city's sign ordinance and the neighborhood surrounding its location and may limit the size and location of the sign to achieve the purpose of the sign ordinance; 
d.  The sign may be illuminated upon approval of the Planning Commission provided that the illumination does not adversely effect neighboring properties or streets. 
e.  The signs must comply with Section 17.142.080 of this code. 
4.  Temporary Signs The Planning Commission May Approve. Two temporary signs, not to exceed fifty square feet in area per face, or one sign not to exceed fifty square feet in area per face, may be located in the city of McFarland closer than the location and place requirements found in Section 17.142.080 for a twelve-month period of time. 
a.  A total of three offsite advertising signs for a twelve-month period containing any commercial or non-commercial message may also be approved by the planning commission. 
b.  The planning commission shall also determine whether or not the sign comports with the purpose of the city sign ordinance and the neighborhood surrounding its location and may limit the size and location of the signs to achieve the purposes of the sign ordinance. 
c.  No temporary sign can be approved, which adversely affects neighboring properties. 
(Ord. No. 312-2006, § 1, 7-20-06)  
17.142.070 - Prohibited signs. 
A.  The following signs are prohibited: 
1.  No sign exceeding six hundred square feet in display surface shall be allowed within the city limits of the city of McFarland. 
2.  No sign exceeding fifty feet in height as measured from ground level shall be allowed within the city limits of the city of McFarland. 
3.  Any sign exceeding twelve square feet of display surface and/or six feet in height measured from the ground, placed on the property subject to such sign for which a permit has not first been obtained as provided by this chapter. 
4.  Roof signs of any type. 
5.  Signs which simulate in color or design a traffic sign or signal, or which make use of words, symbols or characters in such a manner to interfere with, mislead, or confuse pedestrian or vehicular traffic, as determined by the planning commission. 
6.  Signs utilizing paper, cloth, plastic or any other material that is permitted to hang loose or dangle from any sign. 
7.  Any advertising sign permanently attached or affixed to the ground that does not contain the name of the person owning or maintaining the same plainly displayed thereon. 
8.  Vehicle Signs of Any Type. Vehicles, including trailers, wagons and similar utility vehicles shall not be utilized as support for any mobile, portable or stationary signs, or conspicuously parked or left standing so as to constitute a sign. There shall not be maintained on any vehicle or trailer parked in a public right of way, or on public or private property so as to be visible from a public right of way, which is attached to, located on or leaning against such vehicle or trailer, any sign for the purpose of providing advertisement of a business, service or products, directing people to a business activity located on the same or other property for any purpose. This prohibition shall not apply to standard advertising or identification practices where such signs or advertising devices are painted on or permanently attached to a commercial or business vehicle used in the conduct of such business provide it is not parked on the site being advertised abutting a public right of way, to bumper stickers, to placards identifying the vehicle itself as being for sale, or to window stickers on vehicles in any vehicle sales lot. 
9.  Other than allowed under Section 17.142.060, no sign shall be placed or maintained on property adjacent to a freeway, highway or interstate highway within the city limits of the city of McFarland if the sign is designed to be viewed primarily by persons traveling on such freeway. 
a.  The sign will be deemed to be designed to be viewed primarily by persons traveling on such freeway, highway or interstate highway if the display surface is angled ninety degrees or less to the centerline of the subject freeway, highway or interstate highway. 
b.  Centerline of the freeway, highway or interstate highway means a line equidistant from the edges of the median separating the main traveled way of a divided highway or freeway, or the centerline of the main traveled way of a nondivided highway or freeway. 
c.  For purposes of this chapter, the terms freeway, highway and interstate highway are defined by the California Outdoor Advertising Act, Business and Professions Code sections 5212 (Freeway); 5213 (Highway) and 5215 (Interstate Highway). For the purposes of this chapter, these definitions are incorporated herein as though fully set forth. 
10.  Offsite advertising signs as defined in Section 17.142.030 other than allowed by Section 17.142.060. 
(Ord. No. 312-2006, § 1, 7-20-06)  
17.142.080 - Location and placement of signs. 
A.  Minimum distance between signs and other signs: 
Display surface of Proposed Sign 	Display Surface of Existing Sign 	Minimum Distance between Existing Sign and Proposed New Sign 
Greater than 150 square feet 	Greater than 150 square feet 	1,000 feet 
Greater than 150 square feet 	Greater that 80 square feet and not exceeding 150 square feet 	500 feet 
Greater than 150 square feet 	Greater than 12 square feet but not exceeding 80 square feet 	300 feet 
Greater that 80 square feet and not exceeding 150 square feet 	Greater than 150 square feet 	500 feet 
Greater that 80 square feet and not exceeding 150 square feet 	Greater that 80 square feet and not exceeding 150 square feet 	500 feet 
Greater that 80 square feet and not exceeding 150 square feet 	Greater than 12 square feet but not exceeding 80 square feet 	300 feet 
Greater than 12 square feet but not exceeding 80 square feet 	Greater than 150 square feet 	300 feet 
Greater than 12 square feet but not exceeding 80 square feet 	Greater that 80 square feet and not exceeding 150 square feet 	300 feet 
Greater than 12 square feet but not exceeding 80 square feet 	Greater than 18 feet but not exceeding 80 square feet 	300 feet 
Signs not exceeding 18 square feet 	any size 	20 feet 
 
1.  For purposes of this section the method of measuring distances is the radial method of measurement. 
2.  All advertising signs shall be limited to the areas with the zoning classifications agricultural zone, C-1, C-2, M-1, M-2 and M-3 unless the sign is used to advertise, inform, or direct the public to activities conducted on the property where the sign is located. 
3.  Advertisements for tobacco, alcoholic beverages, adult telephone messages, escort services, nude entertainment or any picture or illustration of any human figure in such forms as to offend public morality to be located: (1) within a residential zone; or (2) within three thousand feet of any school, park, playground, recreational facility, youth center, child center, entertainment park or church. 
4.  Signs shall not be placed on any curb, sidewalk, post, pole, light standard, hydrant, bridge, tree or other surface located on public property and shall not be located within, over or across any public right of way or public parkway including street median islands, except as may be authorized by this chapter. This includes, but is not limited to, political election signs. Any such sign hereby prohibited constitutes a nuisance, and shall not become a legal non-conforming sign. This prohibition does not apply to signs erected or maintained by a public agency that identify public facilities or services. Any signs on public property will be removed at the expense of the owner. 
5.  Signs are not permitted near the intersection of any street, pedestrian crosswalks, alley or any vehicle access in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision of motor vehicle operators, or at any location where by reason of its shape, illumination, or color, it may interfere with or be confused with any authorized sign, signal or device, or which makes use of a work, symbol, phrase illumination, shape or color in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. Any such sign hereby prohibited constitutes a nuisance, and shall not become a legal non-conforming sign. 
6.  No Sign shall be located less than six feet horizontally or twelve feet vertically from overhead electrical conductors that are energized in excess of seven hundred fifty volts. 
a.  The term "overhead conductor" as used in this subsection means an electrical conductor, either bare or insulated, installed above ground. 
(Ord. No. 312-2006, § 1, 7-20-06)  
17.142.090 - Construction and maintenance. 
A.  All signs shall be constructed in compliance with all applicable building codes and electrical codes pertaining to construction and setbacks. 
1.  Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist wind and seismic forces as specified in this subsection. Bracing systems shall be designed and constructed to transfer lateral forces to the foundations. 
a.  Wind Loads. Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist wind forces of twenty pounds per square foot of exposed surface. 
b.  Seismic Loads. Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist seismic forces in compliance with the city of McFarland's Building Codes. 
2.  Materials. Materials utilized for signs and sign structures shall be of the quality and grade specified for buildings in the Building Code. 
3.  The space below or surrounding the base of any sign erected pursuant to this chapter shall be kept clear of any debris, cables, loose materials other than those reasonably necessary to support the structure. 
4.  All signs and sign support structures, together with their supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in repair and in a proper state of preservation. The display surface of all signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted at all times. 
(Ord. No. 312-2006, § 1, 7-20-06)  
17.142.100 - Non-conforming signs. 
A.  The following provisions are applicable to non-conforming signs: 
1.  Unless specified otherwise in this chapter, Sections 17.142.040 and 17.142.070 shall not immediately apply to existing non-conforming signs, nonconforming signs that are under construction and to nonconforming signs to be constructed by permission of the city council of the city of McFarland granted prior to the passage of this chapter, if the city council of the city of McFarland or its duly authorized agent has approved the construction thereof. 
2.  A non-conforming sign shall not be replaced, altered, reconstructed, relocated or expanded in any manner unless and until the sign is made to conform with the provisions of this chapter. This shall not be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance and minor repairs as required by the building inspector. 
3.  A non-conforming sign destroyed or damaged to an extent exceeding fifty percent of its replacement cost immediately prior to destruction or damage, shall not be continued in use or maintained thereafter and shall be removed or made to conform with the provisions of this chapter within thirty days of the date of said destruction or damage. 
a.  If a non-conforming sign reaches a stage of disrepair or dilapidation and is not removed or made to conform to the provisions of this chapter within thirty days of the date of said damage or destruction, whereby the same constitutes or tends to constitute a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city of McFarland the same shall be declared a public nuisance and after due notice and opportunity for a hearing thereon be abated by removal thereof. 
4.  Each non-conforming sign shall be made to conform the provisions of this chapter or removed at the sole cost of the owner thereof when any of the following events occur: 
a.  There is a change in ownership of the property; inheritance by a member of a deceased owner's family shall not be deemed to constitute a change in ownership; 
b.  There is a change in ownership of the sign or advertising sign. If the sign is owned by an outdoor advertising business, any change of forty-nine percent or more of the ownership interest in the outdoor advertising business shall constitute a change in ownership of the sign or advertising sign; 
c.  A sign permit has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter permitting the installation or construction of a new or additional sign on the property; 
5.  Nothing in this chapter prohibits the city of McFarland from enforcing the provisions of this chapter against non-conforming signs and conforming signs by exercising its power to remove the sign pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 5412. 
(Ord. No. 312-2006, § 1, 7-20-06)  
17.142.110 - Inspections. 
Signs for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building inspector. The building inspector shall inspect annually, or at such other times as he deems necessary, each sign and sign structure that is regulated by this chapter for the purpose of ascertaining whether the same is secure or insecure, and whether it is in need of removal or repair. The building inspector may order the removal of any sign that is not in compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 312-2006, § 1, 7-20-06)  
17.142.120 - Violation and abandonment. 
A.  Code violations and abandoned signs will be subject to the following: 
1.  Any sign that has been abandoned or installed illegally is hereby declared to be a danger to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of McFarland. Any sign which is partially or wholly obstructed by the growth of dry vegetation or weeds, or by the presence of debris or litter, also presents a danger to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of McFarland. 
2.  It shall be the duty of the owner and occupant to make immediate repair to any sign or advertising sign deemed to be a public nuisance pursuant to this chapter or other wise deemed by the building inspector to be imminently dangerous or perilous to the public safety. A sign maintained in violation of this chapter, unless provided for in Section 17.142.090 constitutes a public nuisance. Upon written notice from building inspector of a sign deemed unsafe and dangerous to public safety, necessary repairs shall be made immediately but no later than ten days from the date the notice from the building inspector is placed in the U.S. mail. In the event the owner or person in lawful possession fails to maintain, alter or repair in accordance with the notice, in addition to any other penalty or remedy provided for in this chapter, such sign may be abated at the direction of the planning commission as provided for by the provisions of this chapter. 
3.  Any signs which are not removed within the required periods specified within this section, shall constitute a public nuisance and shall be subject to summary abatement at the expense of the owner and the person in lawful possession of such sign pursuant to the provisions of Section 38773-3877.3 of the Government Code; the expenses of abatement of such nuisances are a lien against the property on which they are maintained and a personal obligation against the property owner. Said property owner or person in lawful possession shall first be served with a ten-day notice to abate the nuisance by removing the sign and shall be given an opportunity to explain to the planning commission why such sign has not been removed. If, after such opportunity to explain, the planning commission orders the removal of the sign, the agents of the city of McFarland shall have authority to enter upon private property to remove the sign constituting the nuisance. The provisions of this subsection may be utilized separately from, as an alternative to, or in conjunction with, any other remedy provided in this chapter or otherwise provided by law. 
4.  In the event any person erects, installs, alters, relocates or maintains any sign after the effective date of this chapter, which sign is in violation of any provision of this chapter, and the same is not removed after notice as specified in this chapter, the same is a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement at the expense of the person creating, causing, committing, or maintaining it, pursuant to the provisions of Section 38773-3877.7 of the Government Code. 
5.  The city of McFarland, through its agents, may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter whenever the permit is issued in error on the basis of incorrect information supplied by the applicant which results in there being a violation of any chapter, regulation or law. 
6.  With the exception to those signs deemed non-conforming as set forth in Section 17.142.080, the owner or person in lawful possession of any sign which is not operational or not used for a period of ninety days, or which was used to advertise or identify that which has been moved or discontinued for ninety days, shall cover or remove all display copy from such sign immediately upon the expiration of such period. If said display copy is removed, any bulbs or other mechanical equipment that becomes exposed shall be covered or removed. If said display copy is not covered or removed within thirty days after notice by the building inspector, the city of McFarland may cause said display copy to be removed or covered and the cost shall become a lien against the property on which the sign is located. Extensions of thirty day periods may be granted by the planning commission. The provisions of this subsection may be utilized separately from, as an alternative to, or in conjunction with, any other remedy provided in this chapter or otherwise provided by law. 
7.  All non-conforming signs which do not conform with the provisions of this chapter, are public nuisances and shall be removed at the owner's sole expense within sixty days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. If said sign is not removed within said period, the city may cause said sign to be removed and the cost shall become a lien on the property on which the sign is located. Extensions for thirty-day periods may be granted by the planning commission. The provisions of may be utilized separately from, as an alternative to, or in conjunction with, any other remedy provided in this chapter or otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 312-2006, § 1, 7-20-06)  
17.142.130 - Sign inventory program. 
A sign program will be established to inventory and identify pre-existing illegal and abandoned signs as required by California Business and Professions Code Section 5491.1. The program will begin within six months of the date of the final adoption of the ordinance codified in this title. 
(Ord. No. 312-2006, § 1, 7-20-06)  
17.142.140 - Interpretation and enforcement. 
A.  The following shall apply to interpretation and enforcement of this chapter: 
1.  It shall be the duty of the city of McFarland and the police department to cause all signs to be regularly inspected and to report to the planning commission when such signs, or conditions surrounding the same, are found to be unsafe or otherwise maintained in a manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  Any decision or interpretation of this chapter shall be final and conclusive by the city council. 
3.  Any sign erected or maintained, or any use of signs contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be, and the same is, unlawful and a public nuisance, and the planning commission in conjunction with the city attorney may immediately commence actions for the withholding and/or revocation of permits, abatement, and removal in the manner provided by law. Those found to be in violation will be liable for all enforcement costs incurred by the city of McFarland. 
4.  This chapter may also be enforced by injunction issued out of the Superior Court of Kern County upon suit of the city, or the owner or occupant of any real property affected by such action. 
5.  Permits issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void. 
6.  Any city official or employee for the purpose of processing an application for a permit, permit review, complaint, or enforcement of this chapter, shall have the right to enter upon the premises for inspection. 
7.  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of five hundred dollars for the first violation and one thousand dollars for each additional violation. 
(Ord. No. 312-2006, § 1, 7-20-06)  
Chapter 17.144 - AUTOMOBILE PARKING REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 038-2014, § 1, adopted July 24, 2014, repealed the former Chapter 17.144, §§ 17.144.010—17.144.100, and enacted a new Chapter 17.144 as set out herein. The former Chapter 17.144 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 109, 1969; Ord. No. 149, 1976; Ord. No. 154, 1976 and Ord. No. 191 § 3, 1982. 
 
17.144.010 - Purpose and application. 
The purpose of this chapter is to reduce street congestion and promote parking for the safety and convenience of the residents of the city of McFarland by requiring adequate requirements and well-designed parking areas. Parking required by this chapter shall be provided prior to the occupancy of a new building or structure, the enlargement or intensification of a structure, or when use is established, changed or expanded. Projects which involve an increase or intensification of use shall comply with these standards for the expansion or intensification. The standards of this chapter are minimum standards. The regulations and standards of this chapter are intended to achieve the following: 
A.  To provide accessible, attractive, secure, properly lighted, and well-maintained and screened off-street parking facilities; 
B.  To reduce traffic congestion and hazards; 
C.  To protect neighborhoods from the effects of vehicular noise and traffic generated by adjacent nonresidential land use districts; 
D.  To assure the maneuverability of emergency vehicles; 
E.  To provide appropriately designated parking facilities in proportion to the needs generated by varying types of land use. 
(Ord. No. 038-2014, § 1, 7-24-14)  
17.144.020 - Required parking spaces. 
Uses permitted by this chapter shall provide off-street parking spaces according to Table 17-144(A). 
(Ord. No. 038-2014, § 1, 7-24-14)  
17.144.030 - Parking space dimensions. 
A.  All parking spaces shall comply with city-adopted improvement standards in Title 16 of the municipal code. 
B.  Up to thirty percent of the spaces in a parking facility with ten or more spaces may be designed and designated for compact cars. 
(Ord. No. 038-2014, § 1, 7-24-14)  
17.144.040 - Handicapped parking. 
Handicapped parking spaces shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 2.71 of Title 24 of the California Administrative Code. Handicapped parking requirements herein shall be established by the state of California. Any change in the state's handicapped parking requirements shall preempt the affected requirements of this section. 
A.  Handicapped parking for residential uses shall be provided at the rate of one space for each dwelling unit that is designed for occupancy by the handicapped. 
B.  Handicapped parking spaces shall be provided for all uses other than residential at the following rate: 
Total Number of 
Parking Spaces 
Provided 	Number of Handicapped Parking 
Spaces Required 
1—25 	1 van accessible space 
26—50 	2 including 1 van accessible space 
51—75 	3 including 1 van accessible space 
76—100 	4 including 1 van accessible space 
101—150 	5 including 1 van accessible space 
151—200 	6 including 1 van accessible space 
201—300 	7 including 1 van accessible space 
301—400 	8 including 1 van accessible space 
401—500 	9 including 2 van accessible space 
501—1,000 	2% of total parking provided in each lot 
Over 500 	7 + 1 for each 200 additional parking spaces provided 
 
C.  Handicapped parking spaces shall be designed in a manner consistent with the city standard drawings approved by the city engineer. 
D.  Handicapped parking spaces required by this section shall count toward fulfilling off-street parking requirements. 
(Ord. No. 038-2014, § 1, 7-24-14)  
17.144.050 - Off-street loading spaces. 
For every building or facility which requires the receipt or distribution of vehicles or merchandise and which are engaged in the following: manufacturing, storage, warehouse, wholesale or retail store, market, passenger terminal, theatre, hotel, motel, restaurant, hospital, laundry, dry cleaning plant, school or other similar use, adequate space for standing, loading, and unloading shall be provided and maintained on the same lot in addition to the automobile parking required by Table 17.144(A). 
Every nonresidential land use shall have permanently maintained off-street loading areas pursuant to the following provisions: 
A.  The following minimum number of loading spaces shall be provided for each use: 
   Commercial, industrial, office, institutional, hospital, hotels and schools: 
Gross Floor Area 	Spaces Required 
Less than 25,000 sf. of gross floor area 	1 
25,001 + sf. of gross floor area 	1 + additional as required by director 
 
B.  Design Standards. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided in the following manner: 
1.  Access. When the lot upon which the loading space is located abuts an alley, the loading space shall have access from the alley. 
2.  Dimensions. Required freight and equipment loading spaces shall not be less than fifteen feet in width and twenty feet in length or as determined by the planning director, with fourteen feet of vertical clearance. 
3.  Lighting. Loading areas shall have lighting capable of providing adequate illumination for security and safety. Lighting standards shall be energy efficient and in scale with the height and use of the structure. Any illumination, including security lighting, shall be directed away from adjoining properties and public right-of-way. 
4.  Location. Loading spaces shall be located and designed as follows: (i) adjacent to, or as close as possible to the main structure; (ii) situated to ensure that all loading and unloading takes place on-site and in no case within adjacent public rights-of-way, or other traffic areas on site; (iii) situated to ensure that all vehicular maneuvers occur on site. 
5.  Passenger Loading. Passenger loading spaces shall be provided in addition to any required freight and equipment loading spaces whenever required by a development permit. Passenger loading spaces shall not be less than ten feet wide and twenty feet long, shall be located in close proximity to the structure entrance, and shall not require pedestrians to cross a driveway, parking aisle, alley or street in order to reach the structure entrance. Required spaces shall not count as required parking spaces. 
6.  Screening. All loading areas abutting residentially designated property shall have architectural screening similar to the primary structure and of a height that is adequate to screen noise and parking areas. In addition, along the outer sound wall of the loading area, adequate area shall be provided to accommodate a permanently maintained and irrigated landscaped area. The required landscaping shall include trees. 
7.  Security. All loading facilities shall be designed, constructed, and maintained with security as a priority to protect safety of users. 
8.  Striping. Loading and unloading areas shall be striped indicating the loading spaces and identifying the spaces for loading only. The striping shall be permanently maintained in a clear and visible manner. 
(Ord. No. 038-2014, § 1, 7-24-14)  
17.144.060 - Location of parking. 
A.  Required residential off-street parking facilities shall be located on the premises they are intended to serve. 
B.  Off-street parking for other than residential uses shall be located on the premises they are intended to serve. Where required parking is provided on a site other than that of the principal use, the property owner shall file on a form provided by the city of McFarland planning department with the Kern County recorder's office a covenant approved by the planning director that provides for the maintenance of the parking facility as long as the associated principal use is maintained. 
C.  Parking shall not be allowed in the front or street side yard setbacks in any zone with the exception of a single-family dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 038-2014, § 1, 7-24-14)  
17.144.070 - Joint use of parking areas. 
If more than one user required to provide parking spaces in accordance with this chapter occupies the same or adjacent buildings, off-street parking shall be provided in an amount equal to the total number of spaces required for the separate uses; provided, however, that upon written request the planning director may reduce the number of spaces required in such cases by up to fifty percent if it can be determined based on substantial evidence that the combination of uses in the same or adjacent buildings or premises will, at periods of peak weekly hour use, necessitate provision of a lower number of parking spaces than if the uses were developed independently. 
Parking facilities may be shared if multiple uses cooperatively establish and operate the facilities and if these uses generate parking demands primarily during hours when the remaining uses are not in operation. The applicant shall have the burden of proof for a reduction in the total number of required off-street parking spaces, and documentation shall be submitted substantiating their reasons for the requested parking reduction. Public rights-of-way and/or on street parking shall not be used or counted to reduce the number of shared on-site parking spaces. Shared parking may be approved only if: 
A.  A sufficient number of spaces are provided to meet the greater parking demand of the participating uses; 
B.  Satisfactory evidence, as deemed so by the director, has been submitted by the parties operating the shared parking facility, describing the nature of the uses and the times when the uses operate as to demonstrate the lack of potential conflict between them; and 
C.  Additional documents, covenants, deed restrictions, or other agreements as may be deemed necessary by the director are executed to assure that the required parking spaces provided are maintained and uses with similar hours and parking requirements as those uses sharing the parking facilities remain for the life of the commercial/industrial development. 
(Ord. No. 038-2014, § 1, 7-24-14)  
17.144.080 - Parking area design and development standards. 
Off-street parking areas required to be provided by this chapter shall be designed and developed in accordance with Table 17.144(A) and the following standards: 
A.  All off-street parking areas and ingress and egress to parking areas, including areas occupied by automobile sales lots, service stations, drive-in establishments, residential, recreation, entertainment and tourist facilities, commercial, industrial, institutional, and other high intensity uses, parking areas shall be surfaced with a minimum two inches of asphaltic concrete over a four-inch aggregate base, in accordance with public works standards for local roadways, unless a higher index is determined to be necessary by the city engineer. 
B.  In the cases of uses subject to discretionary approval, the required parking areas shall be surfaced with materials specified in accordance with the conditions of approval. 
C.  Parking aisles shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
Arrangements 	Minimum Aisle Width 
30 degree, single row 	11 feet 
45 degree, single or multiple row 	18 feet 
60 degree, single or multiple row 	20 feet 
90 degree, single or multiple row 	24 feet, except where parking is perpendicular to and abuts an alley 
 
  
  
  
D.  All spaces shall be clearly marked. 
E.  Off-street parking facilities shall be designed so that each space can function independently of any other space. Tandem space shall not be permitted. 
F.  All parking areas shall provide suitable maneuvering room so that all vehicles may enter an abutting street in a forward direction. Parking spaces which require backing onto a street or road right-of-way are prohibited except in the case of driveways for single-family and duplex residential dwellings. 
G.  No parking space shall be located so that a vehicle will maneuver within twenty feet of a vehicular entrance measured from the face of the curb. 
H.  Off-Street Residential Parking Design Criteria. Off-street residential parking areas shall be designed and developed in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Single-Family. 
a.  Each residential unit requires two covered spaces, which must be accessed from a paved surface approved and designed to city of McFarland standards; 
b.  Each single-family dwelling unit that has street access shall have a drive approach a minimum of twelve feet in width with a minimum vertical clearance of fifteen feet; 
c.  Accessory dwelling units shall be required to provide one covered space per bedroom. 
2.  Multifamily. 
a.  All multifamily developments shall be required to provide parking as required by Table 17.144(A); 
b.  Multifamily developments with four or fewer units shall have a drive approach a minimum of twelve feet in width with a minimum vertical clearance of fifteen feet. Multifamily developments with five or more units shall have a drive approach a minimum of twenty feet in width with a minimum vertical clearance of fifteen feet; 
c.  Off-street parking spaces shall be located within one hundred fifty feet from the dwelling unit (front or rear door) for which the parking space is provided; 
d.  Driveway approaches within multifamily developments of twelve or more units shall be delineated with interlocking pavers, rough textured concrete, or stamped concrete and landscaped medians; 
e.  Projects with parking drives longer than two hundred fifty feet are not permitted; 
f.  There shall be no more than ten contiguous single-loaded parking stalls; 
g.  Each section of contiguous parking stalls shall be separated from each other by either a dwelling unit or a landscaped bulb not less than eighty square feet in area. Architectural elements such as trellises, porches or stairwells may extend into these landscaped bulbs; 
h.  A parking lot plan shall be submitted in accordance with Section 17.144.110 for review and approval by the community development director. 
I.  All commercial and industrial developments shall have a drive approach a minimum of twenty feet in width with a minimum vertical clearance of fifteen feet. 
J.  Only one drive approach is allowed per frontage for single-family dwellings unless approved by the planning department. Any drive approach shall require an encroachment permit issued by the city of McFarland public works department. 
K.  Where a parking facility containing five or more spaces abuts property zoned for residential, the parking facility shall be separated from the abutting property by a solid masonry wall six feet in height, except that from the property line to the depth of the front yard setback shall be four foot in height. 
L.  For all parking lots containing six or more spaces, at least five percent of the total parking area shall be landscaped. This landscaping shall be in addition to any other landscaping required pursuant to Chapter 17.146. Trees shall be planted and maintained throughout the parking area at a minimum ratio of one tree per six parking spaces to achieve a fifty percent shade coverage of the parking area within ten years of installation. A landscaped planter of at least eighty square feet shall be provided at least every ten parking spaces. Trees shall have a minimum trunk diameter of two inches at four feet above finished grade. Landscaping materials and trees shall be selected from a list of approved trees as may be established by the planning director. 
M.  Where a parking facility containing five or more spaces includes diagonal and/or perpendicular parking spaces that abut public street or road, an ornamental fence, wall, vegetation and/or earth berm of not more than four feet in height shall be erected between the parking facility and the street so as to eliminate headlight glare. 
N.  Lights used to illuminate parking areas shall be directed away from any adjacent properties and/or streets. 
O.  Where parking areas adjoin a public right-of-way, a ten-foot landscaped planting strip shall be established and continuously maintained between the public right-of-way and parking area. Any planting, sign, or other structure within safety sight-distance of a driveway shall not be higher than thirty inches in height or lower than sixty inches (in the case of tree canopies) similar to defined site triangles. 
P.  All areas in parking lot not used for driveways, maneuvering areas, parking spaces or walks shall be permanently landscaped with suitable materials and permanently maintained. 
Q.  A permanent automatic irrigation system shall be installed and permanently maintained in all landscaped areas. The system shall employ state of the art water conservation technology, and recognize differing irrigation needs of various plant materials. 
R.  The landscaping plan shall be provided consistent with Chapter 17.146 and shall include a variety of plant materials, with an emphasis on drought-tolerant species, for the appropriate climate zone. This plan shall be subject to approval by the planning director. 
S.  To increase parking lot landscaped area, a maximum of three feet of the parking stall depth may be landscaped in lieu of asphalt while maintaining the required parking dimensions. Shrubs and trees shall be arranged in such a way as to avoid damage from the front of parked cars extending into the planter areas. 
T.  All parking structures shall be subject to approval by the planning director, and shall have a continuous ten-foot perimeter landscaping with trees every thirty lineal feet; points of ingress/egress shall include a minimum six-foot-wide landscaped island with accent paving in driveway; landscaping shall be permanently irrigated and maintained; and lighting for the aboveground deck shall not exceed four feet in height. 
U.  Security. All parking facilities shall be designed, constructed and maintained with security as a priority to protect the safety of the users. 
(Ord. No. 038-2014, § 1, 7-24-14)  
17.144.090 - Vehicle storage area design and development standards for nonresidential zones. 
Off-street vehicle storage areas shall be designed and developed in accordance with the following standards: 
A.  All vehicle storage areas shall be in connection with the operation of a lawfully constructed vehicular-oriented business. 
B.  All vehicle storage areas shall be surfaced with a minimum of two inches asphaltic concrete over a four-inch aggregate base, in accordance with the public works standards for local roadways. An alternative surface material may be approved for vehicle storage areas in the C-2 (commercial zone), M-1 (limited manufacturing), M-2 (light manufacturing), and M-3 (general manufacturing) zone districts by the community development director. 
C.  Parking aisles shall be provided and comply with the minimum standards found in Section 17.144.080(C). 
D.  All vehicle storage areas shall be accessed from a drive approach that is a minimum twenty feet in width with a minimum vertical clearance of fifteen feet. Said drive approach shall be constructed to city standards. 
E.  Any lighting of the vehicle storage area shall be directed away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way and shall be approved by the community development director. 
F.  All vehicle storage areas shall be completely screened from view by a permanent six-foot-high solid opaque fence or wall. 
(Ord. No. 038-2014, § 1, 7-24-14)  
17.144.100 - Bicycle parking requirements. 
Bicycle parking shall be required for certain land and structural uses in order to eliminate bicycles from becoming obstacles in designated pedestrian areas. Bicycle parking spaces in the form of bicycle racks shall be provided in the following manner: 
Use 	Required Number of Bicycle Parking Spaces 
Residential Uses: 
For residential amenities such as swimming pools, clubhouses, playgrounds and other recreational uses 	As required by the planning director 
Fraternities/sororities 	As required by the appropriate review authority 
SRO, boarding house, residential hotel, dormitory 	As required by the appropriate review authority 
Amusement/Recreational Facilities: 
Auditoriums, convention halls and theaters, clubs, lodges and meeting halls 	1 space per 50 seats 
Billiard hall 	1 space per 5 tables 
Bowling alley 	1 space per lane 
Golf—miniature golf course 	1 space per hole 
Movie theater 	1 space per 50 seats 
Tennis/racquetball courts 	1 space per court 
Video arcade/go-carts 	1 bike rack per 25 video machines 
Bookstores 	1 space per 2,000 sf. of gfa. 
Convenience stores 	1 space per 2,000 sf. of gfa. 
Mini-malls 	1 space per 2,000 sf. of gfa. or as required by the appropriate review authority 
Dance schools/karate or artist studio 	1 space per 15 students at maximum capacity 
Health athletic clubs 	1 space per 5,000 sf. of gfa. 
Government offices 	1 space per 5,000 sf. of gfa. 
Hospitals 	1 space per 5,000 sf. of gfa. 
Libraries, museums, art galleries 	1 space per 5,000 sf. of gfa. 
Post office 	1 space per 5,000 sf. of gfa. 
Religious facilities 	1 space per 5,000 sf. of gfa. 
Schools: 
Elementary/junior high 	5 spaces per classroom 
High school 	2 spaces per classroom 
Community/college/university 	To be determined at project review 
Trade/technical schools 	1 space per classroom 
All other uses not listed above 	To be determined by planning director 
 
A.  Bicycle Parking Requirements. 
1.  Bicycle parking area shall be clearly marked. 
2.  Bicycle parking areas shall be located away from vehicular maneuvering areas and away from blind curves and driveway entrances. 
3.  Bicycle parking may not be located in public rights-of-way unless approved by the appropriate review authority. Under no circumstance shall bicycle parking be located in pedestrian or vehicular travel paths. 
4.  All bicycle parking spaces shall be located on the same parcel as the structure or use, unless approved otherwise by the review authority. 
5.  Bicycle parking spaces shall be located within one hundred feet from the primary entrance for which the parking space is provided. 
6.  Bicycle parking shall be provided by approved, industrial quality bicycle parking racks, shall not be obtrusive, and shall be compatible in architectural character (color, materials, etc.) with the primary structures on the parcel. 
7.  All bicycle parking facilities shall be designed, constructed and maintained with security as a priority to protect safety of users. 
8.  Bicycle parking areas shall be clearly visible and permanently maintained. 
9.  Bicycle parking shall be located so that it reduces the potential for traffic interference and hazards. 
10.  Bicycle parking areas shall have lighting capable of providing adequate illumination for security and safety. Lighting standards shall be energy efficient and in scale with the height and use of the structure. Any illumination, including security lighting, shall be directed away from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way. 
11.  All required parking facilities shall be permanently maintained, free of litter, debris and graffiti. 
B.  Shared Bicycle Parking. Bicycle parking facilities may be shared if multiple uses cooperatively establish and operate the facilities and if these uses generate parking demands primarily during hours when the remaining uses are not in operation. (For example, if one use operates during evenings or weekdays only.) The applicant shall have the burden of proof for a reduction in the total number of required bicycle parking spaces, and documentation shall be submitted substantiating their reasons for the requested parking reduction. 
1.  A sufficient number of spaces are provided to meet the greater parking demand of the participating uses. 
2.  Satisfactory evidence, as deemed so by the planning director, has been submitted by the parties operating the shared parking facility, describing the nature of the uses and the times when the uses operate as to demonstrate the lack of potential conflict between them. 
(Ord. No. 038-2014, § 1, 7-24-14)  
17.144.110 - Off-street parking plot plan review and approval. 
No use shall be established or changed, no development shall occur or be expanded, and no building or grading permit or business license for any use or development shall be issued until an application for off-street parking plot plan review has been submitted to and approved by the planning director. 
A.  Application Contents. 
1.  Name and address of applicant. 
2.  Name and address of property owner. 
3.  Assessor's parcel number(s). 
4.  Legal description of the property. 
5.  A plot plan drawn (at the scale specified by the planning director) including the following: 
a.  Topography and proposed grading specifications; 
b.  Location of existing buildings and structures which are to remain; 
c.  Location of proposed buildings and structures; 
d.  Proposed uses of all buildings and structures; 
e.  Dimensions of the existing and proposed structures and other information (e.g., seating capacity) which will allow planning director to determine the parking needs in accordance with Table 14.144(A); 
f.  Layout proposed parking lot, including location of parking spaces, internal circulation pattern, and ingress and egress points; 
g.  Dimensions of parking stalls and aisles; 
h.  Location of landscaping and irrigation system, including identification of plant materials to be used; 
i.  Location of lighting; 
j.  North arrow. 
B.  Review and Approval. 
1.  Where a discretionary or ministerial approval is required for the use or uses for which the parking is being provided, the off-street parking plot plan application shall be reviewed and approved in conjunction with that discretionary or ministerial approval process. 
2.  Off-street parking plot plan application shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 17.134 of this title. 
3.  No use shall be established or changed, no development shall occur or be expanded, and no building or grading permit or business license for any use or development shall be issued until an application for off-street parking plot plan review has been submitted to and approved by the appropriate review authority. 
4.  No structures shall be permitted or constructed unless off-street parking spaces are provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
5.  The word "use" shall mean both type and intensity of use, and a change in use shall be subject to all the requirements of this chapter. 
6.  When a structure is enlarged or increased in parking intensity, additional parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Adequate spaces shall be provided for the expanded area, and the intensification of use. 
C.  Permit Revocation and Modification. Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked or modified pursuant to Section 17.148 of this title. 
TABLE 17.144(A) 
	Existing 	Proposed 
Residential Uses 
Single-family dwelling 	2 paved spaces 	2 covered spaces per unit 
Secondary residential unit 		1 covered parking space per bedroom 
Duplex, triplex, quadruplex 	2 paved spaces for duplexes, 1.5 spaces for other multifamily projects 	2 space per unit 
Apartment complexes 	1.5 spaces for each dwelling unit 	1 covered space per unit 
Guest parking 		.25 spaces per unit over 10 units 
Auditoriums, Places of Public Assembly 	1 seat per 4 spaces, a seat shall mean 18 lineal inches of bench, where no seating 7 square feet equal 1 seat 	1 space per 4 seats, 18" of bench is 1 seat, where no seating 7 square feet is 1 seat 
Automotive Services 
Automobile repair and services 	1 space per 500 square feet of floor area 	1 space per 500 square feet of floor area, plus 1.5 spaces per service bay 
Automobile sales 	1 space per 500 square feet of floor area 	1 space per 2,000 square feet of lot and building area used for display/storage, plus 1 space 300 square feet of office 
Automobile Washing 
Full service 		1 parking space per employee 
Self-service 		1 parking space per bay, 2 queuing spaces per bay 
Bank, Savings and Loan, Financial Institutions 	1 space per 500 square feet of floor area 	1 space per 260 square feet of floor area, plus 1 space per walk-up ATM, plus a drive through ATM lane a minimum of 24 feet in length 
Barber Shop/Beauty Parlor 	1 space per 500 square feet of floor area 	2 spaces per barber chair or beautician station with a minimum of 4 spaces 
Daycare 
Daycare center/pre-school 		1 space per 6 students plus 1 space per employee 
Family daycare 		1 space per employee of largest shift in addition to residential requirement 
Eating/Drinking Establishments 
Eating and drinking with or without takeout 	1 space per 500 square feet of floor area 	1 space per 100 square feet of dining area. Restaurants with drive through shall have a queuing capacity of 4 cars 
Fast food restaurant 	1 space per 500 square feet of floor area 	1 space per 75 square feet of floor area plus 1 space per employee of largest shift. Restaurants with drive through shall have a queuing capacity of 4 cars 
Bar/tavern/cocktail 	1 space per 500 square feet of floor area 	1 space per 100 square feet of floor area 
Nightclubs 	1 space per 10 square feet of floor area 	1 space per 30 square feet of floor area 
Education 
Colleges 		10 spaces plus 30 spaces per classroom 
Business and trade schools 		1 space per employee plus 1 space per 2 students at full enrollment 
Schools—Elementary and junior high 		2 spaces per classroom 
Schools—High school 		1 space per employee plus 1 space per student at full enrollment 
Health Care Facilities 		
Hospitals 	1 per 250 square feet of floor area 	1 space per 2 beds 
Convalescence and nursing homes 	1 per 250 square feet of floor area 	1 space per 3 beds 
Hotels/Motels 	1 space for each living or sleeping unit 	1 space per room, plus 1 space per 2 employee per shift, plus 1 space per 200 square feet of each banquet hall or meeting room, plus 50% of the spaces otherwise required for accessory uses 
Laundromats 
Self-service laundromat 		1 space per 3 washing machines 
Full service laundromat/dry cleaning 		1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 space per employee per shift. Drive through shall have a minimum of 2 queuing spaces 
Libraries, Museums, Galleries 		1 space per 400 square feet of floor area 
Manufacturing 	1 space per 500 square feet of floor area 	1 space per 500 square feet of floor area devoted to manufacturing plus 1 space per 250 square feet of office area 
Mortuaries 		1 space per 4 seats in chapel, 18" of bench is 1 seat, where no seating 7 square feet is 1 seat 
Office 
Business professional services 	1 space per 500 square feet of floor area 	1 space per 250 square feet of floor area 
Medical and dental offices/laboratories 	1 space per 500 square feet of floor area 	1 space per 200 square feet of floor area 
Veterinarian hospitals 	1 space per 500 square feet of floor area 	1 space per 300 square feet of floor area 
Places of Worship 	1 seat per 4 spaces, a seat shall mean 18 lineal inches of bench, where no seating 7 square feet equal 1 seat 	1 space per 4 seats in chapel, 18" of bench is 1 seat, where no seating 7 square feet is 1 seat 
Recreation 
Arcades 	1 space per 2 machines 	1 space per 100 square feet of floor area, plus 1 bicycle rack containing a minimum of 10 spaces 
Bowling alleys, billiards 	7 spaces for each alley but none for any other accessory use 	4 spaces per lane, plus 1 space per 100 square feet of floor area used for an eating or drinking establishment. 2 spaces per billiard or pool table 
Commercial stables 		1 space per 3 stalls 
Golf driving range 		1 space per tee 
Gold course 		4 spaces per hole plus required parking for other on-site uses 
Health clubs/centers 		1 space per 100 square feet of floor area 
Swimming facilities 		1 space per 100 square feet of pool and deck area plus 1 bicycle parking rack containing 10 spaces 
Skating rinks 		1 space per 100 square feet 
Mini golf 		2 spaces per hole plus 1 space per employee during largest shift 
Tennis, handball, racquetball facilities 		3 spaces per court plus required parking for other on-site uses 
Theatres, movie 	1 seat per 4 spaces, a seat shall mean 18 lineal inches of bench, where no seating 7 square feet equal 1 seat 	1 space per 5 seats in chapel, 18" of bench is 1 seat, where no seating 7 square feet is 1 seat 
Residential Care Homes 		½ space per bedroom in addition to residential requirement 
Retail 
Neighborhood and regional shopping centers 	1 space per 500 square feet of floor area 	1 space per 200 square feet of floor area 
Retail, General (Dept. stores, markets) Single tenant only 	1 space per 500 square feet of floor area 	1 space per 250 square feet of floor area 
Retail, Furniture/Major Appliances 	1 space per 500 square feet of floor area 	1 space per 500 square feet of floor area 
Nursery sales 	1 space per 500 square feet of floor area 	1 space per 250 square feet of indoor display area plus 1 space per 2,000 square feet of outdoor sales area 
Convenience market, with/without fueling 	1 space per 500 square feet of floor area 	1 space per 100 square feet of floor area 
Self Storage Facility 		2 space for the manager's living quarters, plus 1 spaces per 25 cubicles at the office 
Stadium, Sports Arena, Exhibition Hall 	1 seat per 4 spaces, a seat shall mean 18 lineal inches of bench, where no seating 7 square feet equal 1 seat 	1 space per 4 seats in chapel, 18" of bench is 1 seat, where no seating 7 square feet is 1 seat 
Warehouse and Distribution 		1 space per 1,000 square feet of floor area plus 1 space per 250 square feet of office area 
 
(Ord. No. 038-2014, § 1, 7-24-14)  
Chapter 17.146 - LANDSCAPING AND IRRIGATION 
 
17.146.010 - Purpose and application. 
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that development is aesthetically pleasing and compatible with surrounding development by requiring the provision of adequate landscaping in connection with new development and the expansion of existing development and changes in use. 
(Ord. No. 032-2013, § 1, 8-8-13)  
17.146.020 - Landscaping required. 
A.  All projects for which site plan approval is required, shall install and maintain landscaping in accordance with the requirements of this chapter; provided however, these landscape requirements shall not apply to projects where a current use is expanded but the valuation of the building permit is less than twenty-five percent of the appraised value. 
B.  All landscaping and irrigation required under these standards shall be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 032-2013, § 1, 8-8-13)  
17.146.030 - Landscaping standards—Generally. 
If landscaping is required, landscape and irrigation plans shall be submitted as a part of the building plans. The following design standards shall apply: 
A.  All areas within a required setback shall contain living ground cover or a combination of living and nonliving ground coverings (nonliving to be a maximum of twenty percent). Parking shall not be allowed within the front or street side setback in any zone, and shall be fully landscaped as set forth herein. All plants within required setbacks to be of species suited to Sunset Western Garden Book Climate Zones 8 and 9. The use of low water varieties, grouped by similar water usage is required. 
1.  Definition. "Living groundcover" means low-growing plants or shrubs that after being planted will grow together to form a solid cover in one year or less. To achieve desired coverage, low-growing groundcover plants taken from flats shall be planted a maximum of twelve inches on center. Low-growing, shrub type groundcovers in one-gallon cans shall be planted a maximum of two feet on center. Spacing may be increased to three feet on center for fast growing plants as approved by the planning division. 
2.  Definition. "Nonliving groundcover" means forest humus or walk-on bark, rock and other similar materials. Use shall require permission of the planning director. 
3.  All soil surfaces are to be covered by plant materials or nonliving groundcovers as defined in subsection (C)(5)(b) of this section. At least two inches of nonliving materials shall be applied to all planting areas except turf. 
B.  Islands of a minimum area of eighty square feet shall be established at a maximum separation of ten continuous parking stalls. The islands shall be landscaped with groundcovers and with a minimum of one fifteen-gallon tree planted in each island. Actual numbers of trees will be based on the size of the project as determined by the planning director. 
C.  All landscaping as required in this chapter shall be reviewed by the planning director as to the type, density of planting and size of plants intended for use. All landscaped areas shall be permanently maintained by the property owner. Such maintenance shall include, where appropriate, pruning, mowing, weeding, cleaning, fertilizing and regular watering. Whenever necessary, planting shall be replaced with other plant materials to insure continued compliance. 
D.  All landscaped areas in commercial, industrial, and multifamily projects shall be surrounded with six-inch high concrete curbing, unless waived by the planning director or planning commission. 
E.  Buffer planting shall occur along freeways and major arterials in order to visually screen uses and provide noise reduction. The landscaping shall be in addition to screening requirements set forth in this chapter. 
F.  Trees: 
1.  Spacing of trees to be variable depending on type and eventual size, but that there be a general minimum standard of one tree with a minimum trunk diameter of two inches at four feet above finished grade at time of planting, for each thirty lineal feet of frontage of a required landscaped setback, exclusive of vehicular site lines and shall not be planted within five feet of any curb, gutter or sidewalk unless a root directing device is used. 
2.  Trees to be used in parking lots shall be of a type that will form a full head on a single trunk, i.e., Chinese Elm, Chinese Pistache, Golden Rain, Valley Oak or other approved species. All trees planted within public right-of-way shall be consistent with the City Street Tree Master Plan. 
3.  Where trees are planted in paved areas which are unprotected by curbs they shall have a protective tree grate or equivalent device. Tree grates shall be cast iron with a natural finish. A deep root-directing device shall also be used. 
4.  Tree planters located in parking areas shall be sufficiently large and protected so that a parked car does not extend into the minimum four-foot by four-foot tree planting area which shall be landscaped with groundcover, shrubs and/or climbing plants. 
G.  Shrubs. 
1.  At least seventy-five percent of shrubs planted shall be of five-gallon minimum size. One-gallon plants may be used if planted with approved low water-using varieties. 
2.  Shrubs within a required setback shall be spaced in such a way so that at maturity the plants will provide eighty percent ground coverage. 
H.  Mounding. 
1.  Mounding or low-growing shrub areas along street frontages may be used to screen parking areas and shall not exceed a 1:7 slope and shrubs shall be low-growing varieties with a mature height of four feet or less. Steeper slopes may be allowed if irrigated by drip systems. 
2.  Mounding shall not be required for landscape areas which are ten feet, or less, in width. 
3.  Mounds shall be compacted prior to planting to prevent excessive settlement. 
4.  Black plastic shall not be used under wood chips on mounds, or slopes in general. 
5.  Turf on mounds requires slope rates of 1:10 or less. Mounds with groundcovers require slope rates of 1:5 or less. 
6.  Mounds may not be used within site triangles, or in areas that will create hazards to pedestrians or motorists. 
I.  Parking Lots. 
1.  Trees shall be planted in all parking lots at a 1:6 ratio of trees to parking stalls. 
2.  Such tree planters shall contain approved trees on twenty-foot centers or in such a manner as to have fifty percent shade coverage of the parking lot in ten years. 
3.  Shrubs and trees to be arranged in such a way as to avoid damage from the front of parked cars extending into the planter areas. 
4.  All landscaped areas shall be irrigated. 
J.  Turf. 
1.  Turf shall be limited to forty percent of the total landscape area and use low water-using varieties. Public parks, golf courses, cemeteries, schools, properties within a historic district, and residential office conversions are to be reviewed for exemptions on a project by project basis. 
2.  No turf will be allowed: 
a.  In traffic medians on arterials or freeways; 
b.  Parkways or planting areas narrower than five feet; 
c.  Storm drainage ponds with slopes in excess of 1:6; 
d.  On mounds or slopes exceeding 1:10; 
e.  Exceptions to turf in parkways may be granted by the planning division in cases where pedestrian access is necessary across parkways. 
(Ord. No. 032-2013, § 1, 8-8-13)  
17.146.040 - Landscaping standards—Single-family residential. 
The following defines the landscape requirements for all new residential developments: 
A.  A maximum of forty percent of the required front yard setback area may be paved for access to off-street parking or driveway access to off-street parking. An additional maximum of ten percent may be paved for walkways or uncovered patio use; 
B.  Landscape and automatic irrigation shall be provided in the front yard setback area; 
C.  The front yard setback shall be landscaped with a minimum of sod and two trees. Said trees shall be planted a minimum of ten feet from any common property line. If a landscaped area exists between the street and sidewalk then one of the required tress shall be planted in the landscape area. This would reduce the number of required trees in the front yard from two to one; 
D.  All landscaping shall be watered by an automatic irrigation system; 
E.  All sod shall be uniformly cut and fully mature prior to installation; 
F.  All trees shall have a minimum trunk diameter of two inches at four feet above finished grade at time of planting, and be free of insect infestation, plant disease, sun scalds or any other objectionable disfigurements; 
G.  All new trees shall be required to have heavy weight tree stakes to provide support; 
H.  Any trees installed in a landscaped strip shall be required to have root barrier devices. 
(Ord. No. 032-2013, § 1, 8-8-13)  
17.146.050 - Landscaping standards—Multifamily residential. 
The following defines the landscape requirements for all new residential developments: 
A.  Ten percent of the developed lot or all open space area, whichever is greater shall be landscaped with either living ground cover or a combination of turf, living and non-living ground coverings (turf shall be a maximum of forty percent and non-living ground cover a maximum of twenty percent). 
1.  "Living ground-cover" means low growing plants or shrubs that after being planted will grow together to form a solid cover in one year or less. To achieve desired coverage, low-growing groundcover plants taken from flats shall be planted a maximum of twelve inches on center. Low-growing, shrub type groundcovers in one gallon cans shall be planted a maximum of two feet on center. 
2.  "Nonliving-groundcover" means forest humus, bark rock or other similar materials. Uses shall require approval of the planning department. 
3.  All soil surfaces are to be covered by plant. 
B.  Front yard and street side yard setback areas, excluding approved driveway entrances, maneuvering areas and public sidewalks shall be landscaped. Within this area, trees shall be planted no farther thirty feet apart and no closer than five feet from the back of sidewalks. 
C.  Within each planter or landscaped area, an irrigation system and live landscaping shall be provided and maintained. 
(Ord. No. 032-2013, § 1, 8-8-13)  
17.146.060 - Landscape and irrigation plan requirements. 
A.  A landscape plan shall be submitted for approval by the planning department and shall contain the following: 
1.  Name and address of the applicant. 
2.  Name and address of property owner. 
3.  Location of existing and proposed buildings, structures and parking areas where such structures are to remain. 
4.  Proposed uses of buildings and structures. 
5.  Proposed landscaping including: 
a.  Symbolic representation of each tree, shrub, and ground cover with name or initial shown on the plan for each plant. 
b.  List of proposed plants with common and botanical name of each plant, the total number of each plant and the size and container of each plant. 
6.  The dimensions and square footage of each parking area. 
7.  Landscaped plans shall be prepared and stamped by a licensed landscaped architect or licensed landscape contractor. 
B.  An irrigation plan shall be submitted for approval by the planning department and shall contain the following: 
1.  Irrigation plans must show an irrigation conformance calculation with a ten percent safety margin. If the landscape is required as the result of a request for building permit, the landscape and irrigation plans shall be submitted as a part of the building plans. 
2.  Water-efficient systems (drip, mini-spray, bubbler type, etc., shall be used whenever feasible. 
3.  All irrigation systems shall be equipped with an automatic controller capable of dual or multiple programming. Controllers must have multiple cycle capabilities and a flexible calendar program. 
4.  Separate valves shall be installed based on water use of planting and exposures on irrigation systems with seven or more valves. Turf areas should be on separate valve from non-turf areas on all irrigation systems regardless of size. 
5.  Sprinkler heads spacing shall be designed for head-to-head coverage and placed at a maximum of fifty percent of the diameter of throw. 
6.  Sprinkler head spacing shall be designed for head-to-head coverage and placed at a maximum of fifty percent of the diameter of throw. 
7.  Overhead sprays shall not throw water onto hardscaped or other non-planted, or bare ground areas, including sidewalks between landscaped areas. 
8.  All sprinklers must be designed and installed to clear all plant material at maturity and obstacles in its throw zone. 
9.  Serviceable check valves or separate valves according to water zones are required where elevation differential may cause low-head drainage. 
10.  Drip or bubbler irrigation systems are required on all trees and shrubs regardless if planted alone, in groundcover or turf areas. 
11.  Automatic rain shut-off devices shall be required on all irrigation systems with seven or more valves. 
(Ord. No. 032-2013, § 1, 8-8-13)  
17.146.070 - Landscape and irrigation plan approval. 
A.  Where a discretionary or ministerial approval is required by this title for the use or uses for which the landscaping and irrigation is being provided, a conceptual landscape plan showing the general location and type of proposed landscaping materials and hard surface areas shall be submitted in conjunction with the application for the discretionary or ministerial permit. Following approval of the discretionary or ministerial permit but prior to the issuance of any building or grading permit for the principle use or uses, the applicant shall submit a landscaping plan application containing the information specified in Section 17.146.060 to the Planning Department for review and approval. 
(Ord. No. 032-2013, § 1, 8-8-13)  
17.146.080 - Enforcement. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the code enforcement officer to serve or cause to be served a notice upon the property owner and/or occupant of any site in violation of this chapter. 
B.  If the property owner and/or occupant does not comply with the provisions of this chapter than they will be subject to the abatement procedures found in Section 8.20 of the McFarland Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 032-2013, § 1, 8-8-13)  
Chapter 17.148 - VARIANCES, MODIFICATIONS AND ZONE CHANGES 
Sections: 
 
17.148.010 - Generally. 
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply to the granting of variances, modifications and zone changes. 
(Ord. 109 § 34.00, 1969)  
17.148.020 - Variances. 
A.  The planning commission upon its own motion may, or upon the verified application of any interested persons shall in specific cases, initiate proceedings for the granting or denial, as the case may be, of a variance from the provisions of this title. The planning commission may grant the variance only when the following circumstances are found to apply: 
1.  That the variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and the zone in which the subject property is situated. 
2.  That special circumstances exist which are applicable to the subject property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, wherein the strict application of the zoning provision in question is found to deprive the subject property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under identical zone classification. 
B.  All acts of the planning commission and city council under the provisions of this section shall be construed as administrative acts performed for the purpose of assuring that the intent and purpose of this title shall apply in special cases, as provided in this section, and shall not be construed as amendments to the provisions of this title or map. 
(Ord. 109 § 34.01, 1969)  
17.148.030 - Information required. 
Applications for variances shall be accompanied by: 
A.  A plot plan and description of the property involved, showing the location of all existing and proposed buildings. Additional plans and descriptions of the proposed use of the property with ground plans and elevations for all proposed buildings may be required at the discretion of the planning commission. 
B.  A reference to the provisions of this title from which is sought the exception of the property. 
(Ord. 109 § 34.02, 1969)  
17.148.040 - Amendments and changes of zone boundaries. 
A.  Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practices justify such action, the planning commission, upon its own motion, or upon the verified application of any interested person, may initiate proceedings to amend, supplement or change the zones, regulations or districts established by this title. 
B.  With the exception of amendments changing property from one zone to another, or changing the boundaries of any zone, amendments may be made or new zoning maps adopted in the same manner as the ordinance codified in this title was adopted. 
(Ord. 109 § 34.03, 1969)  
17.148.050 - Filing of applications. 
A.  Applications for variances, modifications and changes of zone shall be made in writing to the planning commission in such form as is approved by the planning commission. The planning commission may provide such forms for such purposes and may prescribe the type of information to be provided thereon. No petition shall be received unless it complies with such requirements. 
B.  Applications filed pursuant to this title shall be numbered consecutively in the order of their filing and shall become a part of the permanent official records of the planning commission, and there shall be attached thereto copies of all notices and actions pertaining thereto. 
(Ord. 109 § 34.04, 1969)  
17.148.060 - Filing fees. 
Before accepting any application for filing, the city shall charge and collect the following fees for the purpose of defraying the expenditures incidental to the proceedings prescribed in this chapter: 
A.  Change of zone: One hundred fifty dollars for the first lot or portion thereof, plus two dollars for each additional lot or portion thereof. 
B.  Variance: Seventy-five dollars for the first lot or portion thereof, plus two dollars for each additional lot or portion thereof. 
C.  Conditional use permit: Seventy-five dollars for the first lot or portion thereof, plus two dollars for each additional lot or portion thereof. 
D.  Modification: Where no public hearing is required, thirty dollars for the first lot or portion thereof, plus two dollars for each additional lot or portion thereof. Where a public hearing is required, the fees shall be the same as for a variance. 
E.  Appeal: Thirty dollars for the first lot or portion thereof, plus two dollars for each additional lot or portion thereof. 
F.  The foregoing fees and all other fees deemed necessary or appropriate by the city council with regard to the subject matter in this Title 17 may be modified or established by the city council by a duly adopted resolution. 
(Ord. 176 § 1, 1979; Ord. 109 § 34.05, 1969) 
(Ord. No. 287-2003, § 1, 5-13-04)  
17.148.070 - Investigation. 
The planning commission shall cause to be made by its own members, or members of its staff, such investigation of facts bearing upon such application as will serve to provide all necessary information to assure that the action on each such application is consistent with the intent and purpose of this title and with previous amendments or variances. 
(Ord. 109 § 34.06, 1969)  
17.148.080 - Notices. 
A.  Following the receipt on proper forms of any application filed under the provisions of this chapter, with the exception of an application filed pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.148.040, the secretary of the planning commission shall fix a time and place of public hearing thereon. Upon receipt in proper form of any application filed pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.148.040, the secretary of the planning commission, when directed to do so by the planning commission, shall fix a time and place of public hearing thereon. 
B.  Not less than ten days before the date of any public hearing fixed by the secretary of the planning commission as provided in this section, the date of the public hearing, notice of the date, time, place of hearing and location of the property and the nature of the request shall be given by any two of the following methods, the publishing and mailing methods to be used unless otherwise directed by the planning commission: 
1.  By publishing once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city; 
2.  By mailing a notice, postage prepaid, to the applicant, to each member of the planning commission, and to the owners of all property within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property involved, using for this purpose the last known name and address of such owners as shown on the last assessment roll of the county; 
3.  By posting notice not more than three hundred feet apart along each and every street upon which the property involved abuts, for a distance of not less than three hundred feet in each direction from the exterior limits of the property. 
(Ord. 109 § 34.07, 1969)  
17.148.090 - Public hearing. 
Public hearings as provided for in this chapter and by state law shall be held before the planning commission at the time and place for which public notice has been given as required in this chapter. The planning commission may establish its own rules for the conduct of such hearings. A summary of all pertinent testimony offered at a public hearing, together with the names and addresses of all persons testifying, shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent files of the case. Any such hearing may be continued, provided that, prior to the adjournment or recess thereof, the presiding officer at such hearing shall announce the time and place to which such hearing will be continued. 
(Ord. 109 § 34.08, 1969)  
17.148.100 - Findings. 
A.  Within thirty-five days after the conclusion of a public hearing, the planning commission shall render its decision on the matter so heard. The failure of the planning commission to render such decision within thirty-five days after the conclusion of the hearing may be deemed to constitute a denial, but in no case shall be deemed to constitute an approval. 
B.  The planning commission shall announce and record its actions by formal resolution, and such resolution shall recite the findings of the planning commission upon which it based its decision. 
1.  Variance, Modifications and Conditional Use Permits. 
a.  Within five days after final decision by the planning commission on an application for a variance, modification or conditional use permit, notices of the decision in the matter shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown upon the application, the city clerk, the members of the city council, the owners of the adjoining property and persons requesting the notice. 
b.  The granting, either with or without conditions, or the denial of the application by the planning commission, shall be final unless within fifteen days after the decision by the planning commission, or ten days after the mailing of the required notices, whichever date is later, the applicant, or any other person aggrieved, appeals therefrom in writing to the city council by presenting such appeal to the city clerk. At its next regular meeting after the filing of such appeal with the city clerk, the city council shall set a date for a hearing thereon. The manner of setting the hearing, giving of notice and conducting the hearing shall be the same as hereinbefore prescribed for hearing before the planning commission. The decision appealed from shall be affirmed unless reversed by a vote of not less than a majority of all members of the city council. 
c.  No permit or license shall be issued for any use involved in an application for a variance, modification or conditional use permit, until the same has become final by reason of the failure of any person to appeal or by reason of the action of the city council. 
d.  If the use authorized by any variance, modification or conditional use permit is, or has been, unused, abandoned, discontinued or has ceased for a period of six months, or the conditions have not been complied with, the variance, modification or conditional use permit shall become null and void and of no effect unless an extension therefor has been granted by the planning commission, upon written petition of the applicant for such extension of time before the expiration of the above period. 
2.  Amendments and Changes of Zone Boundaries. 
a.  Within ten days after final action by the planning commission on an application for amendments or changes of zone boundaries, its recommendations, together with the complete records of the case, shall be delivered to the city council. 
b.  The city council, after receipt of the report and recommendation from the planning commission, shall hold a final hearing thereon. The manner of setting the hearing, giving of notice and conducting the hearing shall be the same as hereinbefore prescribed for hearings by the planning commission. The recommendation of the planning commission shall be approved unless reversed by a vote of not less than a majority of all members of the city council. 
c.  No permit or license shall be issued for any use involved in an application for an amendment or change of zone until the same has become final by the adoption of an ordinance. 
3.  Notwithstanding any provision of subdivisions 1 and 2 of this subsection to the contrary, at the request of the applicant, or any other interested persons, the vote of the city council on any application for a variance, modification, conditional use permit or an amendment or change of zone boundary, shall be deferred by the city council until such time as all members of the city council are present and have had the opportunity to vote thereon. 
(Ord. 109 § 34.09, 1969)  
17.148.110 - Modification committee. 
The planning commission shall act as the modification committee. 
(Ord. 109 § 34.10, 1969)  
17.148.120 - Modification committee—Authority. 
The planning commission shall have the authority to grant, subject to appeal to the city council, under the provisions of this title, the following: 
A.  Permit the modification of the setback yard and lot area regulations that may be necessary to secure an appropriate improvement on a lot, to prevent unreasonable hardship, or to promote uniformity of improvement; provided, however, such modification shall not grant a reduction in excess of twenty-five percent of the applicable setback, yard or lot area requirements. 
B.  Permit the modification of fence, wall and hedge regulations that may be necessary to secure an appropriate improvement on a lot. 
(Ord. 109 § 34.11, 1969)  
17.148.130 - Procedure for modifications. 
The procedure for acting upon applications for modifications by the planning commission shall be the same as the procedure for acting upon applications for variances except that no notice of public hearing will be required if the application for such modification is accompanied by the written consent of the owners of all property abutting and of all property directly across a street from the subject property. Appeals from decisions of the planning commission shall be made to the city council in the same manner as an appeal for a variance. 
(Ord. 109 § 34.12, 1969)  
Chapter 17.150 - INCLUSIONARY ZONING 
Sections: 
 
17.150.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be called the "Inclusionary Zoning Ordinance of the city of McFarland." 
(Ord. No. 298-2005, § 1, 6-9-05)  
17.150.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to enhance the public welfare and assure that further housing development attains the city's affordable housing goals by increasing the production of residential units affordable to households of very low, low, and moderate income, and by providing funds for the development of very low, low, and moderate income ownership and/or rental housing. In order to assure that the limited remaining developable land is utilized in a manner consistent with the city's housing policies and needs, fifteen percent of the total number of units of all new multiple family residential projects containing fifteen or more units, constructed within the city as it now exists and as may be altered by annexation, shall be affordable to very low and low income households. For all new single family residential projects of fifteen units or more, at least twenty percent of the project's dwelling units shall be affordable to very low, low, and/or moderate income households. These requirements shall apply to both ownership and rental projects. 
(Ord. No. 298-2005, § 1, 6-9-05)  
17.150.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be interpreted as asset forth in this section unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended. 
"Affordable housing proposal" means proposal submitted by the project owner as a part of the city development application (e.g., design review, planned unit development, etc.) stating the method by which the requirements of this chapter are proposed to be met. 
"Affordable rent" means a monthly rent (including utilities as determined by a schedule prepared by the city) which does not exceed one-twelfth of thirty-five percent of the maximum annual income for a household of the applicable income level. 
"Affordable sales price" mean a sales price which results in a monthly mortgage payment (including principal and interest) which does not exceed one-twelfth of thirty-five percent of the maximum annual income for a household of the applicable income level. 
"Amenities" means interior features which are not essential to the health and safety of the resident, but provide visual or aesthetic appeal, or are provided as conveniences rather than as necessities. Interior amenities may include, but are not limited to, fireplaces, garbage disposals, dishwashers, cabinet and storage space and bathrooms in excess of one. Amenities shall in no way include items required by city building and its residents. 
"Applicant" means any person, firm, partnership, association joint venture, corporation, or any entity or combination of entities which seeks city permits and approvals for a project. 
"Commercial, office, and industrial project" means, for the purposes of this chapter, any new non-residential (commercial, office, or industrial) development or redevelopment greater than ten gross acres or two hundred fifty thousand square feet of gross building area, whichever is less. 
"City" means the city of McFarland or its designee or any entity with which the City contracts to administer this chapter. 
"Dwelling unit" means a dwelling designed for occupancy by one household. 
"Household" means one person living alone; or two or more persons sharing residency whose income is considered for housing payments. 
Household, Low Income. "Low income household" means a household whose annual income is more than fifty percent but does not exceed eighty percent of the annual median income for Kern County, based upon the annual income figures provided by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), as adjusted for household size. 
Household, Moderate Income. "Moderate income household" means a household whose annual income is more than eighty percent but does not exceed one hundred twenty percent of the annual median income for Kern County, based upon the annual income figures provided by HUD, as adjusted for household size. 
Household, Very Low Income. "Very low income household" means a household whose annual income does not exceed fifty percent of the annual median income for Kern County, based upon the annual income figures provided by HUD, as adjusted for household size. 
"HUD" means the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development or its successor. 
"Inclusionary unit" means a dwelling unit as required by this chapter which is rented or sold at affordable rents and/or affordable sales prices (as defined by this chapter) to very low, low, or moderate income households. 
"Inclusionary unit credits" means credits approved by the city council in the event a project exceeds the total number of inclusionary units required in this chapter. Inclusionary unit credits may be used by the project owner to meet the affordable housing requirements of another project subject to approval by the city council. 
"Income" means the gross annual household income as defined by HUD. 
"Life of inclusionary unit" means the term during which the affordability provisions for inclusionary units shall remain applicable. The affordability provisions for inclusionary units shall apply in perpetuity from the date of occupancy, which shall be the date on which the City of McFarland performs final inspection for the building permit. 
"Lower income housing fee" means a fee paid to the city by an applicant for a project in the city, in lieu of providing the inclusionary units required by this chapter. 
"Median income for Kern County" means the median gross annual income in Kern County as determined by HUD, adjusted for household size. 
"Off-site inclusionary units" means inclusionary units constructed within the city of McFarland on a site other than the site where the applicant intends to construct market rate units. 
"Ownership units" means inclusionary units developed as a part of a residential development which the applicant intends will be sold, or which are customarily offered for individual sale. 
"Project owner" means any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation, or any entity or combination of entities which holds fee title to the land on which the project is located. 
"Project" means a residential housing development at one location or site including all dwelling units for which permits have been applied for or approved. 
"Property owner" means the owner of an inclusionary unit, excepting a "project owner." 
"Rental units" means inclusionary units which the applicant intends will be rented or leased, or which are customarily offered for lease or rent. 
"Recapture mechanisms" means legal programs and restrictions by which subsidies provided to inclusionary units will be controlled and repaid to the city and/or other entity upon resale, to insure the ongoing preservation of affordability of inclusionary units or to insure funds for inclusionary units remain within the city's affordable housing program. 
"Resale restrictions" means legal restrictions which restrict the price of inclusionary units to insure that they remain affordable to very low, low, and moderate income households on resale. 
Residential Project, Multiple-Family. "Multiple-family residential project" means a residential project consisting of condominiums, apartments, and similar dwellings attached in groups of four or more units per structure and including multiple units located on a single parcel of land under common ownership. 
Residential Project, Single-Family. "Single-family residential project" means a residential project consisting of detached and attached single family homes, including paired single family, duets, duplexes, townshomes, and similar unit types where each unit is located on a separate parcel of land. 
"Unit type" means various dwelling units within a project which are distinguished by number of bedrooms and/or the type of construction (e.g., detached single family, duets, townhomes, condominiums). 
(Ord. No. 298-2005, § 1, 6-9-05)  
17.150.040 - General requirements/applicability. 
A.  Residential Development. 
1.  For all new multiple family residential projects of fifteen units or more, at least fifteen percent of the project's dwelling units shall be affordable to very low, and/or low income households. For all new single family residential projects of fifteen units or more, at least twenty percent of the project's dwelling units shall be affordable to very low, low, and/or moderate income houses. These dwelling units shall be referred to as "inclusionary units." Special consideration will be given to projects in which a significant percentage of the inclusionary units are for very low and low income households. The specific mix of units within the three affordability categories shall be subject to approval by the city. 
2.  The inclusionary units shall be reserved for rent or purchase by eligible very low, low, and moderate income households, as applicable. Projects subject to these requirements include, but are not limited to, single-family detached dwellings, townhomes, apartments, condominiums, or cooperatives provided through new construction projects, and/or through conversion of rentals to ownership units. 
3.  The percentage of inclusionary units required for a particular project shall be determined only once on a given project, at the time of tentative map approval, or, for projects not processing a map, prior to issuance of building permit. If the subdivision design changes, which results in a change in the number of unit types required, the number of inclusionary units required shall be recalculated to coincide with the final approved project. In applying and calculating the fifteen percent requirement, any decimal fraction less than or equal to 0.50 may be disregarded, and any decimal fraction greater than 0.50 shall be construed as one unit. 
B.  Commercial, Office, and Industrial (COI) Development. New COI developments shall submit an affordable housing proposal as set forth in Section 17.150.100 of this chapter. Upon submittal of the affordable housing proposal, city staff will meet with the developer to discuss the potential for providing incentives to encourage on-site construction of affordable housing units and alternatives to constructing affordable units as set forth in this chapter. In the event a developer requests incentives or alternatives as a means of providing affordable housing in connection with a COI development, the Affordable Housing Proposal will be reviewed as set forth in Section 17.150.100 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 298-2005, § 1, 6-9-05)  
17.150.050 - Inclusionary unit provisions and specifications. 
A.  Inclusionary units shall be dispersed throughout the project unless otherwise approved by the city. 
B.  Inclusionary units shall be constructed with identical exterior materials and an exterior architectural design that is consistent with the market rate units in the project. 
C.  Inclusionary units may be of smaller size than the market units in the project. In addition, inclusionary units may have fewer interior amenities than the market rate units in the project. However, the city may require that the inclusionary units meet certain minimum standards. These standards shall be set forth in the affordable housing agreement for the project. 
D.  Inclusionary units shall remain affordable in perpetuity through recordation of an affordable housing agreement as described in Section 17.150.060 of this chapter. 
E.  All inclusionary units in a project shall be constructed concurrently within or prior to the construction of the project's market rate units. 
F.  For purposes of calculating the affordable rent or affordable sales price of an inclusionary unit, the following household size assumptions shall be used for each applicable dwelling unit type: 
Unit Size 	HUD Income Category By Household Size 
Studio Unit 	One Person 
One Bedroom Unit 	Two Persons 
Two Bedroom Unit 	Three Persons 
Three Bedroom Unit 	Four Persons 
Four or more Bedroom Unit 	Five or more Persons 
 
G.  The city's adopted preference and priority system shall be used for determining eligibility among prospective beneficiaries for affordable housing units created through the inclusionary zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 298-2005, § 1, 6-9-05)  
17.150.060 - Affordable housing agreement. 
An affordable housing agreement shall be entered into by the city and the project owner. The agreement shall record the method and terms by which a project owner shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. The approval and/or recordation of this agreement shall take place prior to final map approval or, where a map is not being processed, prior to the issuance of building permits for such lots or units. 
A.  The affordable housing agreement shall state the methodology for determining a unit's initial and ongoing rent or sales and resale price(s), any resale restrictions, occupancy requirements, eligibility requirements, city incentives including second mortgages, recapture mechanisms, the administrative process for monitoring unit management to assure ongoing affordability and other matters related to the development and retention of the inclusionary units. 
B.  In addition to the above, the affordable housing agreement shall set forth any waiver of the lower income housing fee. For projects which meet the affordability threshold with very low and/or low income units, all units in the project shall be eligible for a waiver of the lower income house fee. For single family residential projects which meet the affordability threshold with moderate income units, or multiple family residential projects which do not meet the affordability threshold, only the inclusionary units shall be eligible for a waiver of the lower income housing fee except as otherwise approved by the city council. 
C.  To assure affordability over the life of the unit, the affordable housing agreement shall be recorded with the property deed or other method approved by the city attorney. In the event an inclusionary units is affordable by design the affordable housing agreement shall stipulate the method for assuring that the units retain their affordability as the housing market changes. 
D.  The planning director may waive the requirement for an affordable housing agreement for projects approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and/or for projects that have their affordable housing requirements included in a development agreement or other city document. 
(Ord. No. 298-2005, § 1, 6-9-05)  
17.150.070 - Incentives to encourage on-site construction of inclusionary units. 
The city shall consider making available to the applicant incentives to increase the feasibly of residential projects to provide inclusionary units. Incentives or financial assistance will be offered only to the extent resources for this purpose are available and approved for such use by the city council or city manager, as defined below, and to the extent that the project, with the use of incentives or financial assistance, assists in achieving the city's housing goals. However, nothing in this chapter establishes, directly or through implication, a right of an applicant to receive any assistance or incentives from the city. Any incentives provided by the city shall set out in the affordable housing agreement pursuant to Section 17.150.060 of this chapter. The granting of the additional incentives shall require demonstration of exceptional circumstances that necessitate assistance from the city, as well as documentation of how such incentives increase the feasibility of providing affordable housing. 
The following incentives may be approved for applicants who construct inclusionary units on-site: 
A.  Fee Waiver or Deferral. The city council, by resolution, may waive or defer payment of city development impact fees and/or building permit fees applicable to the inclusionary units or the project of which they are a part. Fee waivers shall meet the criteria included in the city's adopted policy for evaluating waivers of city fees for affordable housing projects. The affordable housing agreement shall include the terms of the fee waiver. 
B.  Design Modifications. The granting of design modifications relative to the inclusionary requirement shall require the approval of the city council and shall meet all applicable zoning requirements of the city. Modifications to typical design standards may include the following: 
1.  Reduced setbacks; 
2.  Reduction in infrastructure requirements; 
3.  Reduced open space requirements; 
4.  Reduced landscaping requirements; 
5.  Reduced interior or exterior amenities; 
6.  Reduction in parking requirements; 
7.  Height restriction waivers. 
C.  Second Mortgages. The city may utilize available lower income housing funds for the purpose of providing second mortgages to prospective unit owners or to subsidize the cost of a unit to establish an affordable rent or an affordable sales price. Terms of the second mortgage or subsidy shall be stated in the affordable housing agreement. The utilization of these incentives shall not be the sole source of providing the inclusionary units and they are intended to augment the developer's proposal. 
D.  Priority Processing. After receiving its discretionary approvals, a project that provides inclusionary units may be entitled to priority processing of building and engineering approvals subject to the approval of the city manager. A Project eligible for priority processing shall be assigned to City engineering and/or building staff and processed in advance of all non-priority items. 
(Ord. No. 298-2005, § 1, 6-9-05; Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
17.150.080 - Alternatives to constructing inclusionary units on-site. 
The primary emphasis of the inclusionary zoning ordinance is to achieve the inclusion of affordable housing units to be constructed in conjunction with market rate units within the same project in all new residential projects. However, the city acknowledges that it may not always be practical to require that every project satisfy its affordable housing requirement through the construction of affordable units within the project itself. Therefore, the requirements of this chapter may be satisfied by various methods other than the construction of inclusionary units on the project site. Some examples of alternate methods of compliance appear below. As housing market conditions change, the city may need to allow alternatives to provide options to applicants to further the intent of providing affordable housing with new development projects. 
A.  Off-Site Projects. Inclusionary units required pursuant to this chapter may be permitted to be constructed at a location within the city other than the project site. Any off-site inclusionary units must meet the following criteria: 
1.  The off-site inclusionary units must be determined to be consistent with the city's goal of creating, preserving, maintaining, and protecting housing for very low, low, and moderate income households. 
2.  The off-site inclusionary units must not result in a significant concentration of inclusionary units in any one particular neighborhood. 
3.  The off-site inclusionary units shall conform to the requirements of all applicable city ordinances and the provisions of this chapter. 
4.  The occupancy and rents of the off-site inclusionary units shall be governed by the terms of a deed restriction, and if applicable, a declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions similar to that used for the on-site inclusionary units. 
The affordable housing agreement shall stipulate the terms of the off-site inclusionary units. If the construction does not take place at the same time as project development, the agreement shall require the units to be produced within a specified time frame, but in no event longer than five years. A cash deposit or bond may be required by the city, refundable upon construction, as assurance that the units will be built. 
B.  Land Dedication. An applicant may dedicate land to the city or a local non-profit housing developer in place of actual construction of inclusionary units upon approval of the city council. 
The intent of allowing a land dedication option is to provide the city or a local non-profit housing developer the land needed to make an inclusionary unit development feasible, thus furthering the intent of this chapter. The dedicated land must be appropriately zoned, buildable, free of toxic substances and contaminated soils, and large enough to accommodate the number of inclusionary units required for the project. The city's acceptance of land dedication shall require that the lots be fully improved, with infrastructure, adjacent utilities, grading, and fees paid. 
C.  Credit Transfers. In the event a project exceeds the total number of inclusionary units required in this chapter, the project owner may request inclusionary unit credits which may be used to meet the affordable housing requirements of another project. Inclusionary unit credits are issued to and become the possession of the project owner and may not be transferred to another project owner without approval by the city council. The number of inclusionary unit credits awarded for any project is subject to approval by the city council. 
D.  Alternate Methods of Compliance. Applicants may propose creative concepts for meeting the requirements of this chapter, in order to bring down the cost of providing inclusionary units, whether on- or off-site. The city council may approve alternate methods of compliance with this chapter if the applicant demonstrates that such alternate method meets the purpose of this Chapter (as set forth in Section 17.150.020). 
(Ord. No. 298-2005, § 1, 6-9-05)  
17.150.090 - Administration. 
An applicant of a project subject to this chapter shall submit an affordable housing proposal stating the method by which it will meet the requirements of this chapter. The Affordable Housing Proposal shall be submitted as a part of the applicant's city development application (e.g., design review, planned unit development, etc.) to the planning department in a form approved by the city manager. The Planning Director may waive the requirement for submittal of an Affordable Housing Proposal for projects approved prior to the effective date of this ordinance and/or for projects that have undergone considerable public review during which affordable housing issues were addressed. The affordable housing proposal shall be reviewed by the city's housing commission at a properly noticed meeting open to the public. The housing commission shall make recommendations to the city council either accepting, rejecting or modifying the developer's proposal and the utilization of any incentives as outlined in this chapter. The housing commission may also make recommendations to the planning commission regarding the project as necessary to assure conformance with this chapter. Acceptance of the applicant's affordable housing proposal is subject to approval by the city council, which may direct the city manager to execute an affordable housing agreement in a form approved by the city attorney. The city manager or his/her designee shall be responsible for monitoring the sale, occupancy and resale of inclusionary units. 
(Ord. No. 298-2005, § 1, 6-9-05; Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
17.150.100 - Conflict of interest. 
The following individuals are ineligible to purchase or rent an inclusionary unit: (a) city employees and officials (and their immediate family members) who have policy making authority or influence regarding city housing programs; (b) the project applicant and its officers and employees (and their immediate family members); and (c) the project owner and its officers and employees (and their immediate family members). 
(Ord. No. 298-2005, § 1, 6-9-05)  
17.150.110 - Enforcement. 
The city manager is designated as the enforcing authority. The city manager may suspend or revoke any building permit or approval upon finding a violation of any provision of this chapter. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all agents, successors and assigns of an applicant. No building permit or final inspection shall be issued, nor any development approval be granted which does not meet the requirements of this chapter. In the event that it is determined that rents in excess of those allowed by operation of this chapter have been charged to a tenant residing in an inclusionary unit, the city may take appropriate legal action to recover, and the project owner shall be obligated to pay the tenant or to the city in the event the tenant cannot be located, any excess rents charged. 
(Ord. No. 298-2005, § 1, 6-9-05; Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
17.150.120 - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by an action or determination of the city manager under this chapter, may appeal such action or determination to the city council by providing the city clerk with written notice of appeal within fifteen days after the action or determination. 
(Ord. No. 298-2005, § 1, 6-9-05; Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
Chapter 17.152 - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS 
Sections: 
 
17.152.010 - Regulations generally. 
A.  The regulations in this chapter shall apply to the granting of conditional use permits. 
B.  Certain uses may be permitted by the planning commission and the city council in zones in which they are not permitted by this title where such uses are deemed essential or desirable to the public convenience or welfare, and are in harmony with the various elements or objectives of the comprehensive general plan. The procedure for filing of applications, filing fees, investigations, notices, public hearings, findings and appeal shall be the same as provided in this title to variances, except that the planning commission may waive public hearings on an application for conditional use permits for public utility or public service uses or public buildings, when found to be necessary for the public health, safety, convenience or welfare. 
(Ord. 109 § 35.00, 1969)  
17.152.020 - Uses permitted in any zone. 
The following uses may be permitted in any zone upon the granting of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Airports or aircraft landing fields. 
B.  Cemeteries, columbariums, crematories, mausoleums, mortuaries and funeral parlors. 
C.  Churches and other places used exclusively for religious worship. 
D.  City, county, state and federal enterprises, including buildings, facilities and uses of departments or institutions thereof which are necessary or advantageous to the general welfare of the community. 
E.  Day nurseries and nursery schools. 
F.  Educational institutions including schools, elementary or high. 
G.  Establishments or enterprises involving large assemblages of people or automobiles, including: amusement parks, circuses, carnivals, expositions, fairgrounds, open air theatres, race tracks, recreational sport centers. 
H.  Hospitals, sanitariums and rest homes. 
I.  Institutions of a philanthropic or eleemosynary nature. 
J.  Large-scale neighborhood housing projects having a minimum gross area of twenty acres. 
K.  Libraries, museums and private clubs. 
L.  Natural resources development, together with the necessary apparatus or appurtenances incident thereto, except drilling for or removal of oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances. 
M.  Parks, playgrounds and other community buildings. 
N.  Public utility or public service buildings, structures and uses. 
O.  Radio and television transmitters. 
P.  Real estate tract offices and signs. 
Q.  Golf courses and country clubs. 
(Ord. 109 § 35.01, 1969)  
17.152.030 - Uses permitted in specific zones. 
The following uses may be permitted in the zones indicated in this section upon the granting of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Advertising sign boards or structures in the C-2 zone. 
B.  Agricultural industries and the processing of agricultural products in the A-2 zone. 
C.  Animal hospitals, kennels and veterinaries in the C-2 zone. 
D.  Automobile trailer courts or camps, house or coach trailers, and public camp grounds in the C-2, M-1, B and A-1 zones. 
E.  Automobile wash, being a building or a portion thereof, containing facilities for washing more than two automobiles, using production-line methods with a chain conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device or other mechanical devices in the C-2, M-1, M-2 and M-3 zones. 
F.  Coin-operated self-service car wash in the C-1 and C-2 zones. 
G.  Commercial stockyards and animal slaughter in the A-2 and M-3 zones. 
H.  Dairies and livestock feed yards in the M-2, M-3 and A-1 zones. 
I.  Dumps and refuse disposal areas in the A-2 and M-3 zones. 
J.  Dwellings in the M-1, M-2 and M-3 zones. 
K.  Equestrian establishments, including stables, riding academies, schools or amusements in the C-2 zone. 
L.  Fruit, vegetable and meat packing plants in the A-1 and A-2 zones. 
M.  Hog ranches in the A-2 zone. 
N.  Hotels, inns, motels, house or coach trailers and automobile trailer courts in the H-F zone. 
O.  Junk, salvage or auto wrecking yards in the M-2, M-3 and A-2 zones. 
P.  Sewer farms or sewage disposal plants in the A-2 and M-3 zones. 
Q.  Beverage container recycling facilities in C-O, C-1, C-2, M-1, M-2 and M-3 zones. 
R.  Mobilehomes (manufactured homes) on property owned and/or leased by a public agency/entity of the state in the A-1 zone. 
S.  Secondary residential units in the R-1, E and A-1 zones. 
T.  Placing, storing or maintaining chemical toilets of the type normally transported by semitrailers in the R and C zones. 
(Ord. 274 § 2, 1995; Ord. 268 § 3, 1993; Ord. 212 § 1, 1988; Ord. 211 § 1, 1988; Ord. 109 § 35.02, 1969)  
CHAPTER 17.154 - DENSITY BONUS AND INCENTIVES[4] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 330-2008, § 1, adopted May 8, 2008, set out provisions intended for use as Chapter 17.150. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Chapter 17.154. 
 
17.154.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations that implement the State's Density Bonus Law, California Government Code Sections 65915—65918. 
(Ord. No. 330-2008, § 1, 5-8-08)  
17.154.020 - Application. 
An application for a density bonus shall be made to city on a form prescribed by city. The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 330-2008, § 1, 5-8-08)  
17.154.030 - Hearings and notice. 
Upon receipt of a density bonus application and city's determination that it is complete, city shall prepare a report in which it determines whether the development will qualify for a density bonus and, if so, the basis for its qualification, and the amount of density bonus and incentives required under the density bonus law or as otherwise recommended by the city. The city shall thereafter refer the matter to the planning commission and set a hearing in the manner described in Section 17.148.010(B). 
(Ord. No. 330-2008, § 1, 5-8-08)  
17.154.040 - Action of planning commission. 
The planning commission may recommend that the city council approve, approve with conditions, or deny the density bonus. The commission may recommend denial of a density bonus if it finds that the housing development will have an adverse impact as defined in Government Code Section 65589.5(d)(2) upon public health and safety or the physical environment or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impacts without rendering the development unaffordable to low and moderate income households; or that it is not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5 or for rents for the targeted units to be set as specified in Government Code Section 65915(c). If the planning commission recommends that the city council approves or conditionally approves the density bonus the commission may recommend incentives which may be selected from the following: a reduction in site development standards or modification of zoning code requirements or architectural design requirements; or approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing project if commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and if the commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses are compatible with the housing project and the existing or planned development in the area. 
(Ord. No. 330-2008, § 1, 5-8-08)  
17.154.050 - Action of city council. 
The city council shall consider the planning commission's recommendation. The council may approve, approve with modifications, or deny the application. If the council denies the application, it shall do so only after making the findings described in Section 17.154.040. If the council approves or conditionally approves the density bonus it shall also consider the recommendation of the planning commission regarding incentives and approve, conditionally approve, or deny them. After action by the council which includes approval or conditional approval of the density bonus, the council shall direct staff to negotiate an agreement with the developer regarding same. 
(Ord. No. 330-2008, § 1, 5-8-08)  
17.154.060 - Agreements. 
Upon approval by the city council of a density bonus and any incentives also included, the city and developer shall enter into an agreement wherein the developer shall be required to insure compliance with the requirements of the density bonus law, including the applicable provisions of Section 65915(c). 
(Ord. No. 330-2008, § 1, 5-8-08)  
17.154.070 - Density bonus calculations. 
The density bonus calculations and any incentives shall be determined with reference to Section 65915 as it applies to the development described in the application. 
(Ord. No. 330-2008, § 1, 5-8-08)  
Chapter 17.156 - CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY 
Sections: 
 
17.156.010 - Purpose. 
To ensure that each new or expanded use of a structure or site and each new structure or alteration of an existing structure complies with all applicable provisions of this title, and in order that the city may have a record of each new or expanded use of a structure or site, a certificate of occupancy is required before any structure or site may be occupied or used. 
(Ord. 109 § 36.00, 1969)  
17.156.020 - Certificate required. 
No structure erected, moved, altered or enlarged after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall be occupied or used, and no site shall be initially occupied or used after said effective date until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building inspector. 
(Ord. 109 § 36.01, 1969)  
17.156.030 - Application. 
Application for a certificate of occupancy shall be filed with the building inspector on a form prescribed by the city planning commission prior to the erection, moving, alteration or enlargement of any structure and prior to the commencement of a new use or a change in use of any structure or site. 
(Ord. 109 § 36.02, 1969)  
17.156.040 - Issuance. 
The building inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy upon receipt of written notice that the structure or site is ready for occupancy or use and after he has inspected the structure or site, provided that the structure or site and the intended use thereof conform with the regulations for the district in which it is located and all other applicable provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 109 § 36.03, 1969)  
Chapter 17.158 - REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS 
 
17.158.010 - Applicability. 
It is the city's policies to provide individuals with disabilities reasonable in regulations and procedures to ensure equal access to housing and to facilitate the development of housing for individuals with disabilities. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a procedure under which a disabled person may request a reasonable accommodation in the application of zoning requirements. 
(Ord. No. 047-2015, § 1(A), 10-22-15)  
17.158.020 - Definitions. 
The words and phrases contained in this section shall, for the purpose of this chapter, be defined as follows, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
A.  "Disabled person" means a person who has a medical, physical or mental condition that limits one or more major life activities; anyone who is regarded as having such a condition; an authorized representative of a person with a disability; or anyone who has a medical record of having such a condition. A disabled person does not include individuals currently using controlled substances as defined by federal law. 
B.  "Fair Housing Law" means existing law affecting reasonable accommodation in housing including, without limitation, the reasonable accommodation required by 42 U.S.C. 3604(f)(3)(B) and reasonable accommodation required by Government Code Sections 12927(c)(1) and 12955(l). 
C.  "Reasonable accommodation" means any request by, or on behalf of, a disabled person for a reasonable deviation from the city's strict application of its land use or building regulations as set forth in this code, in order for such disabled person to use and enjoy a dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 047-2015, § 1(A), 10-22-15)  
17.158.030 - Requesting reasonable accommodations. 
A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any person with a disability, the person's representative, or an entity, when the application of a zoning law or other land use regulation, policy or practice is perceived to act as a barrier for fair housing opportunities. 
A request for reasonable accommodations may include a modification or exception to the rules, standards and practices for siting, development and use of housing of housing related facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a person with a disability equal opportunity to housing of his or her choice. 
(Ord. No. 047-2015, § 1(A), 10-22-15)  
17.158.040 - Application requirements. 
Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be submitted on an application form provided by the planning division or in the form of a letter to the planning division and shall contain the following information: 
A.  Application Material. 
1.  The applicant's name, address and telephone number. 
2.  Address of the property for which the request is being made. 
3.  The current use of the property. 
4.  The basis for the claim that the individual is considered disabled under the Acts. 
5.  The code provision, regulation or policy from which reasonable accommodation is being requested. 
6.  What accommodation is requested and why the accommodation is necessary to make the specific property accessible to the individual. 
If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is being made also requires some other discretionary approval (including but not limited to: conditional use permit, design review, general plan amendment, zone change, annexation, etc.), then the applicant shall file the information required above for reasonable accommodation together for concurrent review with the application for discretionary approval. 
(Ord. No. 047-2015, § 1(A), 10-22-15)  
17.158.050 - Review and approval. 
A.  Planning Director. If no approval is sought other than the request for reasonable accommodation, the request shall be reviewed by the planning director, or designee. 
B.  Other Reviewing Authority. If a request for reasonable accommodation is submitted for concurrent review with another discretionary land use application, it shall be determined by the authority making the final discretionary land use decision. 
(Ord. No. 047-2015, § 1(A), 10-22-15)  
17.158.060 - Review procedures and findings. 
A.  Planning Director. The planning director shall make a written determination on the request within thirty days and either grant, grant with modifications or deny a request for reasonable accommodation. 
B.  Other Reviewing Authority. The determination on whether to grant, grant with modifications or deny a request for accommodation made by the authority responsible for reviewing the discretionary land use application shall be made at the time of the discretionary land use decision. The determination shall then be provided in writing to the applicant. 
C.  Findings. The written decision to grant, grant with conditions or deny a request for reasonable accommodation shall be based on consideration of the following factors: 
1.  Whether the housing, which is the subject of the request, will be used by a disabled individual. 
2.  Whether the accommodation requested is necessary to make specific housing available to a disabled individual. 
3.  Whether the requested accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city, in which instance it would not be deemed to be reasonable. 
4.  Whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of a city program or law, including but not limited to land use and zoning, in which instance it would not be deemed to be reasonable. 
5.  Potential impact on surrounding uses. 
6.  Physical attributes of the property and structures. 
7.  Alternative accommodations which may provide an equivalent level of benefits. 
D.  Conditions of Approval. In granting a request for reasonable accommodation the reviewing authority may impose any conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the accommodation complies with the findings. 
(Ord. No. 047-2015, § 1(A), 10-22-15)  
17.158.070 - Appeal. 
Pursuant to Section 17.148.100(B)(1)(b) any decision of the planning director or planning commission can be appealed. 
(Ord. No. 047-2015, § 1(A), 10-22-15)  
Chapter 17.160 - PERMIT PROCEDURES 
 
17.160.010 - Purpose and application. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish review and approval procedures for ministerial and discretionary permits provided for by this chapter. Application contents and development standards and conditions for the approval of permits are contained in the appropriate chapter of this title. 
(Ord. No. 066-2017, § 1, 5-25-17)  
17.160.020 - Ministerial permits issued by the community development director. 
The ministerial permits specified in this chapter for review pursuant to this section shall be issued by the community development director upon submission of an application containing the information specified in applicable sections of this title and a determination by the community development director that the proposed use or development meets the development standards and conditions specified in the applicable section or sections of this title. These permits include all uses identified as permitted uses in all zoning classifications that do not require formal site plan review as stated in Section 17.134.070. The decision of the community development director shall be final unless appealed to the planning commission. The community development director may, at his/her discretion, forward a ministerial permit to the planning commission for their consideration and action. 
A.  Application and approval shall include the following: 
1.  An applicant for a ministerial permit pursuant to this section shall submit an application to the community development director in the format described in Section 17.134.060, unless the community development director waives any of the information requirements. The application shall be accompanied with the fee established by the city council by resolution. 
2.  The community development director shall inform the applicant in writing within thirty calendar days of receipt that the application is complete or that additional information is needed to complete the application. 
3.  Within fourteen calendar days of determining the application is complete, and that the project or approach meets the development standards and conditions specified in the applicable section or sections of this chapter, or other applicable ordinances, the community development director shall issue the permit; issue the permit with conditions, or deny the permit if he or she determines that the proposed use or development does not meet the standards and conditions specified in the applicable section or sections of this title. 
B.  Appeal. The community development director's action or lack of action on a permit pursuant to this section may be appealed by the applicant or interested person(s) to the planning commission. 
1.  The applicant may file with the community development director a notice of appeal to the action of the community development director indicating the basis of appeal within ten calendar days of such action. The appeal shall be accompanied with the fee established by the city council by resolution. The city council, at the written request of two council members, may appeal the community development director's decision, without payment of fee, to the planning commission. 
2.  The planning commission shall consider the appeal within thirty days of the filing of such appeal. No public hearing or notice shall be required. 
3.  The planning commission may reverse or affirm or affirm with conditions the action of the community development director. The action of the commission shall constitute a ministerial action and shall be based solely on whether or not the proposed use or development meets the development standards and conditions specified in or established pursuant to the applicable section or sections of this title. 
4.  The decision of the planning commission pursuant to subsection (B)(3) of this section may be appealed to the city council pursuant to Section 17.160.030. 
(Ord. No. 066-2017, § 1, 5-25-17)  
17.160.030 - Discretionary permit decisions by the planning commission. 
A.  The permits specified in this section may be issued by the planning commission following submission of an application containing the information specified in the applicable section of this title and a properly noticed public hearing. The decision of the planning commission shall be final unless appealed to the city council: 
1.  Site plan reviews (Chapter 17.134); 
2.  Variances (Chapter 17.148); 
3.  Zone modifications when filed in conjunction with an application for a permit to be heard by the planning commission (Chapter 17.148); 
4.  Extensions of time; 
5.  Appeals of ministerial decisions by the community development director; 
6.  Conditional use permit (Chapter 17.152); 
7.  Precise development plan (Chapter 17.132); 
8.  Tentative maps (Chapter 16.20). 
B.  Public Hearing. 
1.  When an application has been submitted in accordance with this chapter, the community development director shall set the application for a public hearing. 
2.  At least ten days before the date of any public hearing, the date, time, place of the hearing, identity of the hearing body, and the nature and location of the application shall be given by the following methods: 
a.  Publishing such notice once in a newspaper of general circulation. If there is no newspaper of general circulation than the notice shall be posted in three public places in the city. 
b.  Mailing or delivering notice, postage prepaid, to the property owner, the applicant, to the owners of all property within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property which is the subject of the application, and to any person who has filed a written request for such notice. For the purposes of this notice, the name and address of the property owner on the last assessment roll of the county may be used. If the number of owners to whom notice would be mailed or delivered pursuant to this paragraph is greater than one thousand, a display advertisement of at least one-eighth page in at least one newspaper of general circulation may be published at least ten days prior to the hearing in lieu of mailed or delivered notice. 
3.  Public Hearing. A public hearing shall be held before the planning commission at a time and place in accordance with the public notice. The planning commission may establish its own rules for the conduct of such hearings. Any hearing may be continued; provided, that prior to adjournment or recess the presiding officer shall announce the time and place to which the hearing will be continued. 
C.  Decision. 
1.  The planning commission may approve, conditionally approve, or deny any application following the close of the public hearing on the matter or within thirty-five days thereafter by resolution, or later as may be practicable. Such resolution shall include findings in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The decision shall be final, subject to appeal in accordance with this chapter. 
2.  Written notice of such decision shall be given by mail within ten calendar days after the date of the decision to the applicant and any person filing a written request for notice of the decision. 
3.  The decision of the planning commission shall be final on expiration of ten calendar days from, but not including, the date of the decision, unless a notice of appeal is filed with the community development director within such time. 
4.  All conditions of approval shall be final, and a request to delete or to modify a condition to make it less restrictive shall only be considered at a properly noticed public hearing, unless said conditions are appealed pursuant to subsection D of this section. 
D.  Appeal. 
1.  Any decision of the planning commission pursuant to this section shall be subject to appeal to the city council. 
2.  The applicant or any other person aggrieved may appeal such decision by filing a written notice of appeal with the community development director within ten calendar days from, but not including, the date of the decision. The community development director shall furnish forms of notice of appeal. The appeal shall be accompanied with the fee established by the city council by resolution. The city council, at the written request of two council members, may appeal the planning commission's decision, without payment of fee, to the city council. 
3.  Notice of the hearing on appeal shall be given in the manner and time provided in Section 17.160.030(B)(2). Notice of the hearing on appeal shall also be given not less than ten days before such hearing to each person entitled to notice of the preceding decision. 
4.  The city council may reserve, affirm wholly or partly, modify, or attach other or additional conditions to the decision appealed from. 
5.  A decision of the city council on any such appeal shall be final on adoption of an order or resolution containing its determination, and no notice thereof need be given. 
E.  Permit Issued. No permit shall be issued prior to the expiration of any appeal period. 
(Ord. No. 066-2017, § 1, 5-25-17)  
17.160.040 - Discretionary permit decisions by the city council. 
The discretionary permits specified in this chapter for review pursuant to this section may be issued by the city council following submission of an application containing the information specified in the applicable section of this chapter, review and recommendation by the planning commission and a properly noticed public hearing. These permits include: 
A.  Amendments to this ordinance (Chapter 17.162); 
B.  Application for change of zone classification (Chapter 17.162); 
C.  Precise development zones (Chapter 17.132); 
D.  Final tract and parcel maps; 
E.  Conditional use permits, variances, and zone modifications when filed in conjunction with an application for a change in zone classification or for a tentative subdivision map (Chapters 17.148, and 17.152); 
F.  Appeal of planning commission decisions (Section 17.160.030(D)(1)). 
(Ord. No. 066-2017, § 1, 5-25-17)  
17.160.050 - Permit revocation and modification. 
Any permit, conditional use permit, zone variance, or zone modification issued pursuant to this chapter may be modified or revoked by the official or decision making body that originally approved the permit by the same procedure under which the permit was issued for any of the following causes: 
A.  That any term or condition of the permit, conditional use permit, variance, or zone modification has not been complied with. 
B.  That the property or portion thereof subject to the permit, conditional use permit, variance, or zone modification is used or maintained in violation of any statute, ordinance, law, or regulation. 
C.  That the use for which the permit, conditional use permit, variance, or zone modification was granted has been so exercised as to be detrimental to the public health or safety or as to constitute a nuisance. 
D.  That changes in technology or in the type or amount of development in the vicinity of the use or other good cause warrants modification of the conditions of operation or imposition of additional conditions of operation to assure that the use remains compatible with existing and potential uses of other property within the general area in which the use is located. 
(Ord. No. 066-2017, § 1, 5-25-17)  
17.160.060 - Time limitations on challenges. 
Any legal action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void, or annul any decision made pursuant to this chapter, or concerning any of the proceedings, acts, or determinations taken, done, or made prior to such decision, or to determine the reasonableness, legality, or validity of any condition attached thereto, shall not be maintained by any person unless the action or proceeding is commenced within thirty days after the date of the decision and the legislative body is served within sixty days after the date of the decision. Thereafter, all persons are barred from any such legal action or proceeding or any defense of invalidity or unreasonableness of that decision or of these proceedings, acts, or determinations. 
(Ord. No. 066-2017, § 1, 5-25-17)  
Chapter 17.162 - AMENDMENTS TO THIS ORDINANCE 
 
17.162.010 - Purpose and application. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for the amendment of this zoning ordinance and zoning maps. Amendments to this ordinance may be initiated by the City Council on its own motion or by the application of any interested person. 
(Ord. No. 066-2017, § 1, 5-25-17)  
17.162.020 - Initiation of amendments by the city. 
The city council, may at any time and in any form deemed appropriate by the city council initiate an amendment to any portion of this chapter. An amendment may be any of the following types: 
A.  An amendment to the text of this chapter not changing regulations or standards affecting the use of any property. 
B.  An amendment to the text of this chapter changing regulations or standards affecting the use of property. 
C.  Amendment to the official zoning maps reclassifying property from one district to another, including applying a combining district to, or removing a combining (overlay) district from, property. 
(Ord. No. 066-2017, § 1, 5-25-17)  
17.162.030 - Initiation of amendments by an interested person. 
A property owner, his or her or its authorized representative, or any other interested person may initiate an amendment to the official zoning map to reclassify property from one district to another by submitting an application to the community development director. 
A.  An application for a reclassification of property shall include: 
1.  The name and address of the applicant; 
2.  The name(s) and address(es) of the property owner(s); 
3.  Assessor's parcel number(s); 
4.  Legal description of the property; 
5.  A map of the property; 
6.  Identification of the zoning district reclassification being sought; 
7.  Signatures or letter of consent from all property owners of record. 
   The application shall be accompanied with the fee established by the city council by resolution. 
B.  The community development director shall inform the applicant in writing within thirty calendar days of receipt that the application is complete or that additional information is needed to complete the application. 
(Ord. No. 066-2017, § 1, 5-25-17)  
17.162.040 - Notice of public hearing. 
A.  At least ten days before the date of any public hearing on a proposed amendment to the text of this chapter changing regulations or standards affecting the use of any property or on an amendment to the official zoning maps reclassifying property from one district to another, notice of hearing, identity of the hearing body, and the nature of the amendment, and identification of affected properties, shall be given by the following methods: 
1.  Publishing such notice once in at least one newspaper of general circulation. If there is no newspaper of general circulation than the notice shall be posted in three public places in the city. 
2.  Mailing or delivering notice, postage prepaid, to the property owner, the applicant, to each member of the city council, to each member of the planning commission, to the owners of all property within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property which is the subject of the application and to any person who has filed a written request for such notice. For the purposes of this notice, the name and address of the property owners on the last assessment roll of the county may be used. If the number of owners to whom notice would be mailed or delivered pursuant to this subsection is greater than one thousand, a display advertisement of at least one-eighth page in at least one newspaper of general circulation may be published at least ten days prior to the hearing in lieu of mailed or delivered notice. 
3.  In lieu of the requirements set forth in subsection (A)(1) of this section, notice may also be given by posting notices not more than three hundred feet apart along each street upon which the subject property abuts for a distance of not less than three hundred feet in each direction from the exterior limits of the subject property. 
B.  At least ten days before the date of any public hearing on a proposed amendment to the text of this chapter not changing regulations or standards affecting the use of any property, notice of the hearing, including the date, time, place of the hearing, identity of the hearing body, and the nature of the amendment, shall be given by publishing such notice once in at least one newspaper of general circulation. If there is no newspaper of general circulation than the notice shall be posted in three public places in the city. 
(Ord. No. 066-2017, § 1, 5-25-17)  
17.162.050 - Public hearing. 
A public hearing shall be held before the appropriate hearing body at a time and place in accordance with the public notice. The city council may establish rules for the conduct of such hearings. The name and address of each witness shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent files. Any hearing may be continued provided that prior to adjournment or recess, the city council shall announce the time and place to which the hearing will be continued. 
(Ord. No. 066-2017, § 1, 5-25-17)  
17.162.060 - Decision. 
A.  The city council may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the proposed amendment following the close of the public hearing within thirty-five days thereafter by ordinance. The decision shall be final. 
B.  Where the amendment was initiated by an interested person pursuant to Section 17.162.030, written notice of the decision shall be given by mail within seven days after the date of the decision to the applicant and any person filing a written request for notice of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 066-2017, § 1, 5-25-17)  
17.162.070 - Time limitations challenges. 
Any legal action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void, or annul any decisions made pursuant to this chapter, or concerning any of the proceedings, acts, or determinations taken, done, or made prior to such decision, or to determine the reasonableness, legality, or validity or any condition attached thereto, shall not be maintained by any person unless the legal action or proceeding is commenced within thirty days after the date of decision, and the legislative body is served within sixty days after the date of the decision. Thereafter, all persons are barred from any such action or proceeding or any defense of invalidity or unreasonableness of that decision or of these proceedings, acts, or determinations. 
(Ord. No. 066-2017, § 1, 5-25-17)  
Chapter 17.164 - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 066-2017, § 1, adopted May 27, 2017, renumbered Chapter 17.160 as Chapter 17.164. 
 
17.164.010 - Enforcement. 
A.  All departments, officials and public employees of the city vested with the duty or authority to issue permits, certificates or licenses shall comply with the provisions of this title and shall issue no permit, certificate or licenses for uses, buildings or purposes in conflict with the provisions of this title; and any such permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this title shall be null and void. 
B.  Any building or structure erected, moved, altered, enlarged or maintained, or any use of property, contrary to the provisions of this title, shall be, and the same is, declared to be a public nuisance, and the city attorney shall immediately commence actions and proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law; and shall take such other steps, and shall apply to any court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such building, structure or use and restrain and enjoin any person, firm or corporation from erecting or maintaining such building or structure, or using any property contrary to the provisions of this title. 
C.  This title may also be enforced by injunction issued out of the Superior Court upon the suit of the city or the owner or occupant of any real property affected by such violation or prospective violation. This method of enforcement shall be cumulative and in no way affect the penal provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 109 § 37.00, 1969) 
(Ord. No. 066-2017, § 1, 5-25-17)  
17.164.020 - Duties of building inspector. 
The building inspector shall be the official responsible for the enforcement of this title. In the event the building inspector is unable for any reason to act in this capacity, the city council shall appoint someone to act in his stead. In the discharge of this duty the building inspector shall have the right to enter on any site or any structure for the purpose of investigation and inspection, provided that the right of entry shall be exercised only at reasonable hours and that in no case shall any structure be entered in the absence of the owner or tenant without the written order of a court of competent jurisdiction. The building inspector may serve notice requiring the removal of any structure in violation of this title on the owner or his authorized agent, on a tenant, or on an architect, builder, contractor or other person who commits or participates in any violation. The building inspector may call upon the city attorney to institute necessary legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this title, and the city attorney is authorized to institute appropriate actions to that end. The building inspector may call upon the chief of police and his authorized agents to assist in the enforcement of this title. 
(Ord. 109 § 37.01, 1969) 
(Ord. No. 066-2017, § 1, 5-25-17)  
17.164.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating any provision of this title shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both fine and imprisonment. Each day that violation of this title continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. 109 § 37.02, 1969) 
(Ord. No. 066-2017, § 1, 5-25-17)  
Title 18 - CODE ENFORCEMENT FEES AND FINES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 18.04 - CODE ENFORCEMENT FEES AND FINES 
Section: 
 
18.04.010 - City shall create a table of code enforcement fees and fines. 
The following fees and fines are hereby created and shall be updated every year reflecting the Consumer Price Index. 
Item No. 	Subject 	Proposed Fee/Fine 
1 	First Administrative Citation 	100 
2 	Second Administrative Citation 	200 (same case) 
3 	Third Administrative Citation 	500 (same case) 
4 	Extension of Time Fee for abatement 	75 
5 	Inspection Fee (each visit) 	100 
6 	Stop work fee, including site visit 	3 × the permit fee 
7 	Inspection of work without permits 	75 
8 	Public Hearing Notice 	200 
9 	Request for Public Hearing 	200 
9 	Appeals to City Manager 	100 
10 	Appeals to Boards, Commissions, or Council (must be within 30 days, or else the complaint will be considered waived) 	200 
11 	Continued Hearings of the same case — per day 	100 
12 	Notice of Decision 	100 for each additional hearing date 
13 	Removal of Vehicles 	200 
14 	Notice to DMV after removal of vehicles 	75 
15 	Recordation of Public Nuisance 	75 
16 	Withdrawal of recordation 	75 
17 	Title Search Fee 	300 
18 	Dangerous Building Posting Fee 	100 (posted per building) 
19 	Dangerous Building Recordation Fee 	200 
20 	Abatement of nuisance by City 	200 
21 	Lien Recordation Charges 	Actual cost + 15% 
22 	Attorney Fees 	Actual cost + 15% 
23 	Court Fines and other fees per the following Municipal Code Sections:* 
  
10.16.070; 8.20.060; 8.22.070; 10.16.130; 10.16.180; 17.160.030 	As existing 
24 	Services not identified above 	At actual cost based on salary of staff + 30% to cover overheads. 
 
* For Misdemeanor and felony fines, refer respective sections of the code. 
(Ord. No. 004-2009, § 1, 7-9-09)  
CHAPTER 18.08 - WAIVER PROVISION 
Section: 
 
18.08.010 - Waiver provision. 
A waiver may be allowed in cases where a property owner has documentation for the following: 
A.  Little or no income or another hardship; 
B.  Is in the process of an extensive renovation; 
C.  Is the new owner of the property; 
D.  The violations are limited to exterior paint and/or roof work; 
E.  The attached informational sheet provides more information about the types of waivers. 
(Ord. No. 004-2009, § 1, 7-9-09)  
CHAPTER 18.12 - INFORMATION ABOUT CODE ENFORCEMENT FEE WAIVER 
Section: 
 
18.12.010 - Information about a code enforcement fee waiver. 
A waiver provides for temporary suspension of code enforcement fees assessed against a property. Waivers are available in qualifying cases based on the provisions contained in this chapter and as determined by the city manager. 
A.  Income-Based Waiver. Upon approval of this waiver, monthly code enforcement fees may be suspended for twelve months. The following requirements must all be met before the waiver may be granted: 
1.  All cited fire, life, and safety violations must be corrected, inspected, and approved by the housing inspector; or the property is vacant with no significant exterior fire, life, and safety violations; 
2.  The property is clear of any other code violation administered by neighborhood inspections; 
3.  The housing case is currently open; 
4.  The dwelling is a one- or two-family residence; 
5.  The property owner(s) must meet the income requirements by providing required documentation; 
6.  The property is owner-occupied or vacant. 
B.  Residential Renovation Waiver. Upon approval of this waiver, monthly code enforcement fees may be suspended for six months with a possible six month extension. The following requirements must all be met before the waiver may be granted: 
1.  All cited fire, life, and safety violations must be corrected, inspected, and approved by the housing inspector; or the property is vacant with no significant exterior fire, life, and safety violations; 
2.  The property is clear of any other code violations administered by neighborhood inspections; 
3.  The housing case is currently open; 
4.  The building is attached to a permanent foundation or has an issued and active permit for foundation work; 
5.  Paid and issued building permit fees of at least five hundred dollars or a project value of fifteen thousand dollars; or 
6.  A submitted work plan that demonstrates a fifteen thousand dollars valuation of non-permit work to be done (or a combination of permit and non-permit work that values fifteen thousand dollars) to rehabilitate the property. 
(If permits are required, they must be paid for and issued before the waiver will be granted). 
(Ord. No. 004-2009, § 1, 7-9-09; Ord. No. 002-2010, § 1, 2-11-10)  
CHAPTER 18.16 - CODE ENFORCEMENT FEE WAIVER APPLICATION 
Section: 
 
18.16.010 - Code enforcement fee waiver application. 
A property owner, or their authorized agent, must submit a completed waiver application in order to determine waiver eligibility. They must also provide an explanation, additional information, or supporting documentation that may be relevant. The property owner or agent will be notified in writing about the application results. 
NOTE TO APPLICANT: Complete and return this form to: the Building Inspector; or you may FAX it to: _______________ (Please print legibly). 
Property Address: 
_____
Case # _____________________ Tax # __________________ 
Lien # ______________________________ 
Property Owner's Name: 
_____
Mailing Address: 
_____
City: __________________________________________ 
State: _______________ Zip Code: _______________ 
Day Phone: _____________________________________ 
Alternate Phone: _______________ 
Signature: 
_____
Date: _______________ 
Income-based waiver: Total annual household (All persons 18 years of age or older) income is: _______________ 
Type of property is: ? Commercial ? Residential ? Combined Use 
If residential, the property is: ? Occupied ? Vacant 
If occupied: ? Owner, how many people live in the household ___ 
If tenant: ? Tenants, how many people live in the household _____ 
? Other _____ 
The Income-based waiver may be applied to the period of time the housing violation case is open. Documentation may include a copy of the property owner's federal tax return for each year the case is open; a statement of benefits from a social service agency; or other documentation showing income for the relevant time period. If your waiver request is based on a renovation of the property, additional information is required. 
Contact: City Clerk for the paperwork. Telephone: (661) _______________ 
Additional Comments: 
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
(Ord. No. 004-2009, § 1, 7-9-09) 
