Article I. General Provisions
Ord. No. 427-AC
Sec. 91.00. Title
This part shall be known and may be cited as the Needles zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 91.01. Authority
This part is enacted pursuant to the California Planning and Zoning Law: Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 4 (Sections 65800-65912) of the California Government Code. (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 91.02. Purpose
The purpose of this part is to implement the general plan of the city and to ensure that growth and development of the city is attractive, compatible with existing conditions, humane; and that the health, safety, prosperity, enjoyment and general welfare of those who reside, work, or visit in the city is served to the optimum degree. (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 91.03. Jurisdiction
(a) This part shall be effective throughout the city's planning jurisdiction which comprises the area within the corporate boundaries of the city.
(b) A copy of a map showing the boundaries of the city's planning jurisdiction shall be available for public inspection in the planning department. (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 91.04. Effective date
The provisions in this part were originally adopted and became effective on April 4, 1996.
(Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 91.05. Relationship to general plan
It is the intention of the city council that this part implement the planning policies adopted by the city council as reflected in the general plan. While the city council reaffirms its commitment that this part and any amendment to it be in conformity with the adopted general plan.
The city council expresses its intent that neither this part nor any amendment to it be challenged on the basis of any alleged nonconformity with any planning document. (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 91.06. Fees
(a) Reasonable fees sufficient to cover the cost of administration, inspection, publication of notice and similar matters may be charged to applicants for zoning permits, sign permits, conditional use permits, special use permits, zoning amendment, variances and other administrative relief. The amount of fees charged shall be as set forth by resolution of the city council on file in the office of the city clerk.
(b) Fees established in accordance with subsection (a) of this section shall be paid upon submission of a signed application or notice of appeal. (Ord. 427-AC)
Article II. Definitions
Ord. No. 427-AC, 429-AC, 535-AC, 547-AC
Sec. 92.00. Definitions
As used in this part, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
Antenna. An “antenna” is equipment designed to transmit or receive electronic signals.
Base flood. A “base flood” is a flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. It is also known as the one hundred (100) year flood.
Boarding house. A “boarding house” is a residential use consisting of at least one (1) dwelling unit together with more than two (2) rooms that are rented or are designed or intended to be rented but which rooms, individually or collectively, do not constitute separate dwelling units. A rooming house or boarding house is distinguished from a bed and breakfast or a tourist home in that the former is designed to be occupied by longer-term residents (at least month-to-month tenants) as opposed to overnight or weekly guests.
Building. A “building” is a structure designed to be used as a place of occupancy, storage or shelter.
Building, accessory. An “accessory building” is a minor building that is located on the same lot as a principal building and that is used incidentally to a principal building and that houses an accessory use.
Building, principal. A “principal building” is the primary building on a lot or a building that houses a principal use.
Certify. Whenever this part requires that some agency certify the existence of some fact or circumstance to the city, the city may require that such certification be made in any manner that provides reasonable assurance of the accuracy of the certification. By way of illustration, and without limiting the foregoing, the city may accept certification by telephone from some agency when the circumstance warrants it, or the city may require that the certification be in the form of a letter or other document. Verbal certification is to be followed by a written document.
Childcare home. A “childcare home” is a home for not more than nine (9) orphaned, abandoned, dependent, abused, or neglected children, together with not more than two (2) adults who supervise such children, all of whom live together as a single housekeeping unit.
Childcare institution. A “childcare institution” is an institutional facility housing more than nine (9) orphaned, dependent, abused, or neglected children.
Circulation area. The “circulation area” is that portion of the vehicle accommodation area used for access to parking or loading areas or other facilities on the lot. Essentially, driveways and other maneuvering areas (other than parking aisles) comprise the circulation area.
City. The “city” is the City of Needles.
Combination use. A “combination use” is a use consisting of a combination on one (1) lot of two (2) or more principal uses separately. (Under some circumstances, a second principal use may be regarded as not accessory to the first, and thus a combination use is not established. In addition, when two (2) or more separately owned or separately operated enterprises occupy the same lot, and all such enterprises fall within the same principal use classification, this shall not constitute a combination use.)
Conditional use permit. A “conditional use permit” is a permit issued by the city council that authorizes the recipient to make use of property in accordance with the requirements of this part as well as any additional requirements imposed by the council.
Convenience store. A “convenience store” is a one (1) story, retail store containing less than two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area that is designed and stocked to sell primarily food, beverages, and other household supplies to customers who purchase only a relatively few items (in contrast to a “supermarket”). It is designed to attract and depends upon a large volume of stop-and-go traffic. Illustrative examples of convenience stores are those operated by the “Circle K,” “7-11,” and “AM/PM” chains.
Council. The “council” is the city council of the City of Needles.
Day care center. A “day care center” is any childcare arrangement that provides day care on a regular basis for more than four (4) hours per day for more than five (5) children of preschool age.
Developer. A “developer” is a person who is responsible for any undertaking that requires a zoning permit., special use permit, conditional use permit, or sign permit.
Development. “Development” is that which is to be done pursuant to a zoning permit, special use permit, conditional use permit, or sign permit.
Dimensional nonconformity. A “dimensional nonconformity” is a nonconforming situation that occurs when the height, size, or minimum floor space of a structure or the relationship between an existing building or buildings and other buildings or lot lines does not conform to the regulations applicable to the district in which the property is located.
Driveway. A “driveway” is that portion of the vehicle accommodation area that consists of a travel lane bounded on either side by an area that is not part of the vehicle accommodation area.
Duplex. See Residence, duplex.
Dwelling Unit. A single dwelling unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. (Ord. 535-AC)
Expenditure. An “expenditure” is a sum of money paid out in return for some benefit or to fulfill some obligation. The term also includes binding contractual commitments to make future expenditures, as well as any other substantial changes in position.
Factory-built home. A dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label that it is constructed in compliance with the California Administrative Code applicable to industrialized housing (see California Administrative Code, Title 25, Chapter 3, Subchapter 1, for legal definition).
Family. A “family” is one (1) or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit.
Floodplain. A “floodplain” is any land area susceptible to be inundated by water from the base flood. As used in this part, the term refers to that area designed as subject to flooding from the base flood (one hundred (100) year flood) on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map prepared by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, a copy of which is on file in the planning department.
Floodway. The “floodway” is the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. The term refers to that area designated as a floodway on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map prepared by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, a copy of which is on file in the planning department.
Gross floor area. The “gross floor area” is the total area of a building measured by taking the outside dimensions of the building at each floor level intended for occupancy or storage.
Habitable floor. A “habitable floor” is any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking, or recreation, or any combination thereof. A floor used only for storage is not a habitable floor.
Halfway house. A “halfway house” is a home for not more than nine (9) persons who have demonstrated a tendency toward alcoholism, drug abuse, mental illness, or antisocial or criminal conduct, together with not more than two (2) persons providing supervision and other services to such persons, eleven (11) of whom live together as a single housekeeping unit.
Handicapped or infirm home. “Handicapped or infirm home” is a residence within a single dwelling unit for at least six (6) but not more than nine (9) persons who are physically or mentally handicapped or infirm, together with not more than two (2) persons providing care or assistance to such persons, all living together as a single housekeeping unit. Persons residing in such homes, including the aged and disabled, principally need residential care rather than medical treatment.
Handicapped or infirm institution. “Handicapped or infirm institution” is an institutional facility housing and providing care or assistance for more than nine (9) persons who are physically or mentally handicapped or infirm. Persons residing in such homes, including the aged or disabled, principally need residential care rather than medical treatment.
High-volume traffic generation. All uses other than low-volume traffic generation uses.
Home occupation. A “home occupation” is a commercial activity that: (1) is conducted by a person on the same lot (in a residential district) where such person resides; and (2) is not substantial or incidental or is not so commonly associated with the residential use as to be regarded as an accessory use but that can be conducted without any significantly adverse impact on the surrounding neighborhood.
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, a use may not be regarded as having an insignificantly adverse impact on the surrounding neighborhood if: (1) goods, stock in trade, or other commodities are displayed; (2) any on-premises retail sales occur; (3) more than one (1) person not a resident on the premises is employed in connection with the purported home occupation; (4) it creates objectionable noise, fumes, odor, dust or electrical interference; or (5) more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total gross floor area of residential buildings plus other buildings housing the purported home occupation, or more than fifty (50) square feet of gross floor area (whichever is less), is used for home occupation purposes.
The following is a non-exhaustive list of examples of enterprises that may be home occupations if they meet the foregoing definition criteria: (1) the office or studio of a physician, dentist, artist, musician, lawyer, architect, engineer, teacher, or similar professional; (2) workshops, greenhouses, or kilns; (3) dressmaking or hairdressing studios.
Hotel, Motel or Motor Hotel. Hotel, Motel or Motor Hotel (“Premises”) shall mean a facility offering transient lodging accommodations on a daily basis of less than 30 days to the general traveling public, on a short-term basis except where a conditional use permit has been obtained to convert the Hotel, Motel or Motor Hotel use to Multi-Family Apt.-Conversion consisting of individual Dwelling Units (studio or larger). Upon completion of the conversion of the Premises to individual Dwelling Units (studio or larger), the premises shall be known as a Multi-Family Apt-Conversion. (Ord. 535-AC)
Intermediate care home. An “intermediate care home” is a facility maintained for the purpose of providing accommodations for not more than seven (7) occupants needing medical care and supervision at a lower level than that provided in a nursing care institution but at a higher level than that provided in institutions for the handicapped or infirm.
Intermediate care institution. An “intermediate care institution” is an institutional facility maintained for the purpose of providing accommodations for more than seven (7) persons needing medical care and supervision at a lower level than that provided in a nursing care institution but at a higher level than that provided in institutions for the handicapped or infirm.
Kennel. A “kennel” is a commercial operation that:
(1) provides food and shelter and care of animals for purposes not primarily related to medical care (a kennel may or may not be run by or associated with a veterinarian); or (2) engages in the breeding of animals for sale.
Loading and unloading area. The “loading and unloading area” is that portion of the vehicle accommodation area used to satisfy the requirements of section 111.05.
Lot. A “lot” is a parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by some legal instrument such as a recorded deed or a recorded map and which is recognized as a separate legal entity for purposes of transfer of title.
If a public body or any authority with the power of eminent domain condemns, purchases, or otherwise obtains fee simple title to or a lesser interest in a strip of land cutting across a parcel of land otherwise characterized as a lot by this definition, or a private road is created across a parcel of land otherwise characterized as a lot by this definition, and the interest thus obtained or the road so created is such as effectively to prevent the use of this parcel as one lot, then the land on either side of this strip shall constitute a separate lot.
Lot area. The “lot area” is the total area circumscribed by the boundaries of a lot, except that: (1) when the legal instrument creating a lot shows the boundary of the lot extending into a public street right-of-way, then the lot boundary for purposes of computing the lot area shall be the street right-of-way line, or if the right-of-way line cannot be determined, a line running parallel to and thirty (30) feet from the center of the traveled portion of the street; and (2) in a residential district, when a private road that serves more than three (3) dwelling units is located along any lot boundary, then the lot boundary for purposes of computing the lot area shall be the inside boundary of the traveled portion of that road.
Low-volume traffic generation. “Low volume traffic generation” are uses such as furniture stores, carpet stores, major appliance stores, etc., that sell items that are large and bulky, that need a relatively large amount of storage or display area for each unit offered for sale, and that therefore generate less customer traffic per square foot of floor space than stores selling smaller items.
Manufactured home. A dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying it is constructed in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards (see 24 CFR 3280 for legal definition).
Mobile home. A “mobile home” is a transportable, factory-built home, designed to be used as year-round residential dwelling. The city does not allow mobile homes built prior to enactment of the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, which became effective June 15, 1976, to be set up within the city limits.
Mobile home park. A “mobile home park” is a residential use in which more than one (1) mobile home is located on a single lot.
Nonconforming lot. A “nonconforming lot” is a lot existing at the effective date of this part (and not created for the purposes of evading the restrictions of this part) that does not meet the minimum area requirement of the district in which the lot is located.
Nonconforming project. A “nonconforming project” is any structure, development, or undertaking that is incomplete at the effective date of this part and would be inconsistent with any regulation applicable to the district in which it is located if completed as proposed or planned.
Nonconforming situation. A “nonconforming situation” is any situation that occurs when, on the effective date of this part, any existing lot or structure or use of an existing lot or structure does not conform to one (1) or more of the regulations applicable to the district in which the lot or structure is located.
Among other possibilities, a nonconforming situation may arise because a lot does not meet minimum acreage requirements because structures exceed maximum height limitations, because the relationship between existing buildings and the land (in such matters as density and setback requirements) is not in conformity with this part, or because land or buildings are used for purposes made unlawful by this part.
Nonconforming use. A “nonconforming use” is any nonconforming situation that occurs when property is used for a purpose or in a manner made unlawful by the use regulations applicable to the district in which the property is located. (For example, a commercial office building in a residential district may be a nonconforming use.) The term also refers to the activity that constitutes the use made of the property. (For example, all the activity associated with operating a retail clothing store in a residentially zoned area constitutes a nonconforming use.)
Nursing care home. A “nursing care home” is an institutional facility maintained for the purpose of providing skilled nursing care and medical supervision at a lower level than that available in a hospital to less than nine (9) persons.
Nursing care institution. A “nursing care institution” is an institutional facility maintained for the purpose of providing skilled nursing care and medical supervision at a lower level than that available in a hospital to more than nine (9) persons.
Parking area aisles. “Parking area aisles” are portions of the vehicle accommodation area consisting of lanes providing access to parking spaces.
Parking space. A “parking space” is a portion of the vehicle accommodation area set aside for the parking of one (1) vehicle.
Person. A “person” is an individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary, corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, or other entity acting as a unit.
Planned residential development. A “planned residential development” is a development constructed on a tract under single ownership, planned and developed as an integral unit, and consisting of single-family detached residences combined with either two-family residences or multi-family residences, or both.
Planned unit development (PUD). A “planned unit development” is development constructed on a tract under single ownership, planned and developed as an integral unit, and consisting of a combination of residential and nonresidential uses on land within a PUD district in accordance with the City of Needles zoning regulations.
Planning jurisdiction. The “planning jurisdiction” is the area within the city limits as well as the area beyond the city limits within which the city is authorized to plan for and regulate development, as set forth.
Public water supply system. The “public water supply system” is any water supply system furnishing potable water to ten (10) or more dwelling units or businesses or any combination thereof.
Receive-only earth station. A “receive-only earth station” is an antenna and attendant processing equipment for reception of electronic signals from satellites.
Residence, duplex. A “duplex residence” is a two-family residential use in which the dwelling units share a common wall (including without limitation the wall of an attached garage or porch) and in which each dwelling unit has living space on the ground floor and a separate, ground floor entrance.
Residence, multifamily. A “multifamily residence” is a residential use consisting of a building containing three (3) or more dwelling units. For purposes of this definition, a building includes all dwelling units that are enclosed within that building or attached to it by a common floor or wall (even the wall of an attached garage or porch).
Residence, multifamily apartments. A “multifamily apartment residence” is a multifamily residential use other than a multifamily conversion or multifamily townhouse.
Residence, multifamily conversion. A “multifamily conversion residence” is a multifamily residence containing not more that four (4) dwelling units and results from the conversion of a single building containing at least two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area that was in existence on the effective date of this provision and that was originally designed, constructed and occupied as a single-family residence.
Residence, multifamily townhouses. A “multifamily townhouse residence” is a multifamily residential use in which each dwelling unit share a common wall (including without limitation the wall of an attached garage or porch) with at least one (1) other dwelling unit and in which each dwelling unit has living space on the ground floor and a separate, ground floor entrance.
Residence, primary with accessory apartment. A “primary residence with accessory apartment” is a residential use having the external appearance of a single-family residence but in which there is located a second dwelling unit that comprises not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of the building nor more than a total of seven hundred fifty (750) square feet.
Residence, single-family detached, more than one dwelling per lot. A “single-family detached residence, more than one dwelling per lot” is a residential use consisting of two (2) single-family detached dwelling units on a single lot.
Residence, single-family detached, one dwelling unit per lot. A “single-family detached, one dwelling unit per lot” is a residential use consisting of a single detached building containing one (1) dwelling unit and located on a lot containing no other dwelling units.
Residence, two-family. A “two-family residence” consists of a building containing two (2) dwelling units. If two (2) dwelling units share a common wall, even the wall of an attached garage or porch, the dwelling units shall be considered to be located in one (1) building.
Residence, two-family apartment. A “two-family residence apartment” is a two-family residential use other than a duplex, two-family conversion, or primary residence with accessory apartment.
Residence, two-family conversion. A “two-family residence conversion” is a two-family residence resulting from the conversion of a single building containing at least two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area that was in existence on the effective date of this provision and that was originally designed, constructed and occupied as a single -family residence.
Road. A “road” is all private ways used to provide motor vehicle access to: (1) two (2) or more lots; or (2) two (2) or more distinct areas or buildings in unsubdivided developments.
Rooming house. (See Boarding house)
Second dwelling unit. A “second dwelling unit” is defined as a permanent dwelling unit that is accessory to a primary dwelling on the same site. A second dwelling unit provides complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, sanitation, and parking. A second dwelling unit may be attached to or detached from the primary dwelling. (Ord. 547-AC)
Signage. (See Signage definitions Article X)
Special events. “Special events” are circuses, fairs, carnivals, festivals, or other types of special events that: (1) run for longer than one (1) day but not longer than two (2) weeks; (2) are intended to or likely to attract substantial crowds; and (3) are unlike the customary or usual activities generally associated with the property where the special event is to be located.
Special use permit. A “special use permit” is a permit issued by the planning commission that authorizes the recipient to make use of property in accordance with the requirements of this part.
Street. A “street” is a public street with respect to which an offer of dedication has been made.
Street, arterial. An “arterial street” is a major street in the city’s street system that serves as an avenue for the circulation of traffic onto, out, or around the city and carries high volumes of traffic.
Street, collector. A “collector street” is a street whose principal function is to carry traffic between minor, local, and sub-collector streets and arterial streets but that may also provide direct access to abutting properties. It serves or is designed to serve, directly or indirectly, more than one hundred (100) dwelling units and is designed to be used or is used to carry more than eight hundred (800) trips per day.
Street, cul-de-sac. A “cul-de-sac street” is a street that terminates in a vehicular turnaround.
Street, local. A “local street” is a street whose sole function is to provide access to abutting properties. It serves or is designed to serve at least ten (10) but not more than twenty-five (25) dwelling units and is expected to or does handle between seventy-five (75) and two hundred (200) trips per day.
Street, marginal access. A “marginal access street” is a street that is parallel to an adjacent arterial street and that is designed to provide access to abutting properties so that these properties are somewhat sheltered from the effects of the through traffic on the
arterial street and so that the flow of traffic on the arterial street is not impeded by direct driveway access from a large number of abutting properties.
Street, minor. A “minor street” is a street whose sole function is to provide access to abutting properties. It serves or is designed to serve not more than nine (9) dwelling units and is expected to or does handle up to eighty-one (81) trips per day.
Street, sub-collector. A “sub-collector street” is a street whose principal function is to provide access to abutting properties but is also designed to be used or is used to connect minor and local streets with collector or arterial streets. Including residences indirectly served through connecting streets, it serves or is designed to serve at least twenty-six (26) but not more than one-hundred (100) dwelling units and is expected to or does handle between two hundred (200) and eight hundred (800) trips per day.
Structure. A “structure” is anything constructed or erected.
Subdivision. A “subdivision” is the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future except for leases of agricultural land for agricultural purposes. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easement or railroad rights-of-way. “Subdivision” includes a condominium project, as defined in subdivision (f) of Section 1351 of the Civil Code, a community apartment project, as defined in subdivision (d) of Section 1351 of the Civil Code, or the conversion of five (5) or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 1351 of the Civil Code. As used in this section, “agricultural purposes” means the cultivation of food or fiber or the grazing or pasturing of livestock.
Subdivision, major. A “major subdivision” is any subdivision other than a minor subdivision.
Subdivision, minor. A “minor subdivision” is a subdivision that does not involve any of the following: (1) the creation of more than a total of four (4) lots; (2) the creation of any new public streets serving other lots; (3) the extension of a public water or sewer system serving other lots; or (4) the installation of drainage improvements through one (1) or more lots to serve one (1) or more other lots.
Temporary emergency, construction, or repair residence. A “ temporary emergency, construction, or repair residence” is a residence (which may be a mobile home) that is: (1) located on the same lot as a residence that is under construction or undergoing substantial repairs or reconstruction and occupied by the persons intending to live in such permanent residence when the work is completed; or (2) located on a nonresidential construction site and occupied by persons having construction or security responsibilities over such construction site.
Tower. A “tower” is any structure whose principal function is to support an antenna.
Tract. A “tract” is a lot (see definition “Lot”). The term tract is used interchangeably with the term lot, particularly in the context of subdivisions, where one (1) tract is subdivided into several lots.
Travel trailer. A “travel trailer” is a structure that: (1) is intended to be transported over the streets and highways (either as a motor vehicle or attached to or hauled by a motor vehicle); and (2) is designed for temporary use as sleeping quarters but that does not satisfy one (1) or more of the definitional criteria of a mobile home.
Use. The “use” is the activity or function that actually takes place or is intended to take place on a lot.
Use, principal. The “principal use” is a use listed in the table of permissible uses.
Utility facilities. “Utility facilities” are any aboveground structures or facilities (other than building, unless such buildings are used as storage incidental to the operation of such structure or facilities) owned by a governmental entity, a nonprofit organization, a corporation, or any entity defined as a public utility for any purpose by (the appropriate provision of state law) and used in connection with the production, generation, transmission, delivery, collection, or storage of water, sewage, electricity, gas, oil, or electronic signals.
Utility facilities, community or regional. “Utility facilities, community or regional” are all utility facilities other than neighborhood facilities.
Utility facilities, neighborhood. “Neighborhood utility facilities” are utility facilities that are designed to serve the immediately surrounding neighborhood and that must, for reasons associated with the purpose of the utility in question, be located in or near the neighborhood where such facilities are proposed to be located.
Variance. A “variance” is a grant of permission by the city council that authorizes the recipient to do that which, according to the strict letter of this part, he could not otherwise legally do.
Vehicle accommodation area. A “vehicle accommodation area” is a portion of a lot that is used by vehicles for access, circulation, parking, and loading and unloading. It comprises the total of circulation areas, loading and unloading areas, and parking areas.
Wholesale sales. “Wholesale sales” are sales of goods primarily to customers engaged in the business of reselling the goods.
Zoning permit. A “zoning permit” is a permit issued by the city planner that authorizes the recipient to make use of property in accordance with the requirements of this part. (Ord. 427-AC, Ord. 429-AC)
Article III. Zones.
Ord. No. 427-AC
Sections
93.00 Establishment of zones
93.01 Zoning map
93.02 Boundaries of zones
93.03 Residential zones
93.04 Commercial zones
93.05 Manufacturing zones
93.06 Public facilities zone
93.07 Open space zone
Sec. 93.00 Establishment of zones. In order to classify, regulate, restrict and segregate the uses of land and buildings; to regulate and restrict the height and bulk of buildings; and to regulate the area of yards and other open spaces about buildings; and to regulate the density of population, the following classes of land zones are established, with their general purpose as indicated:
R-1 Single Family Zone
R-2 Two-Family Zone
R-3 Multifamily Zone
P Public Facilities Zone
PD Planned Unit Development Overlay Zone
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial Zone
C-2 General Commercial Zone
C-3 Highway Commercial Zone
CRR Commercial, Residential, Resort Zone
M-1 Light Manufacturing Zone
M-2 General Manufacturing Zone
OS Open Space Zone. (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 93.01. Zoning map. The zones aforesaid and the boundaries of such zones are shown upon the maps attached and made a part of the ordinance codified in this part, being designated as the zoning map and said map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be as much as a part of the ordinance codified in this part as if the matter and information set forth by said map were all fully described herein. (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 93.02. Boundaries of zones. Were uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zone shown on such map, the following rules shall apply:
(a) Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following streets and alley lines or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries;
(b) In subdivided property or where a zone boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map;
(c) In case any uncertainty exists, the planning commission shall determine the location of boundaries;
(d) Where any public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to abutting property shall apply to such vacated or abandoned street or alley;
(e) Where any private right-of-way or easement of any railroad, railway, canal, transportation or public utility company is vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to abutting property shall apply to such vacated or abandoned property;
(f) All property in the city not otherwise classified, and all property hereafter annexed and not zoned upon annexation, is classified as OS zone. (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 93.03. Residential zones. (a) The following residential zones are established: R-1, R-2 and R-3. Each of those zones is designed and intended to secure for the persons who reside there a comfortable, healthy, safe and pleasant environment in which to live, sheltered from incompatible and disruptive activities that properly belong in nonresidential zones. Other objectives of some of these zones are explained in the remainder of this section.
(b) R-1 Single-Family Zone. This zone is intended to provide for the development of low density, single-family residential areas (one (1) to seven (7) units per net acre).
(c) R-2 Two-Family Zone. This zone is intended to provide for the development of medium density, two-family residential areas (eight (8) to seventeen (17) units per net acre).
(d) R-3 Multifamily Zone. This zone is intended to provide for the development of high density multiple family units (eighteen (18) to thirty (30) units per net acre), such as apartments, condominiums, townhouses or other group dwellings compatible for the neighborhood environment.
(e) CRR This zone is intended to allow for sufficient diversity of land use types in the area along the Colorado River catering to the resort atmosphere. Depending upon the nature of the development, this zone can support the full range of residential and commercial densities as appropriate. (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 93.04. Commercial zones. (a) The following commercial zones are established: C-1, C-2, and C-3. These zones are created to accomplish the purposes and serve the objectives set forth in the remainder of this section.
(b) C-1 Neighborhood Commercial Zone. This zone is intended to serve the daily or frequent food and convenience needs of families within their respective service areas -- usually one-half (1/2) to one (1) mile. The uses normally include a supermarket and small shops such as drug store, barber and beauty shops, laundry and cleaning service. The overall site area should be sufficient to provide for the supportable commercial facilities as well as sufficient parking.
(c) C-2 General Commercial Zone. This zone is generally intended for uses in central business district (particularly those that are pedestrian oriented) accommodating a wide range of commercial and associated residential uses.
(d) C-3 Highway Commercial Zone. This zone is intended for uses that do not fit into any of the other commercial development in that businesses would include those not associated with the CBD or neighborhood center such as shopping centers, automobile
sales and services, commercial recreation, gasoline service stations, restaurants and motels and miscellaneous commercial uses. Naturally, many of the highway commercial uses would be located adjacent to the freeway interchanges.
(e) CRR Commercial, Residential, Resort Zone. This zone is intended for types of uses that would occur essentially along the river and contain apartments, hotels, motels, restaurants, boat clubs, marinas, specialty and gift shops and convenience services, goods and supplies for boat owners, water skiers, scuba divers and the visiting public, using marina and aquatic recreational facilities. This zone is intended to allow for sufficient diversity of land use types in the resort tourist areas for interest, convenience and resort atmosphere while avoiding the dangers of overcrowding and haphazard mixing of land uses. (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 93.05. Manufacturing zones. The following are established primarily to accommodate enterprises engaged in the manufacturing, processing, creating, repairing, renovating, painting, cleaning, or assembling of goods, merchandise, or equipment: M-1 and M-2. The performance standards set forth in later sections place limitations in the characteristics of uses located in these zones. The limitations in the M-1 zone are less restrictive than those in the M-2 zone. (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 93.06. Public facilities zone. This zone is intended for public facilities such as schools, parks, civic centers, etc. (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 93.07. Open space zone. This zone category is for land in the city not designated for residential commercial, industrial, parks and recreation or institutional uses. Development may be allowed in open space areas under the PUD process. (Ord.427-AC)
Article V. Appeal, Variances, Interpretations
Ord. 427-AC, 460-AC
Sec. 95.00. Appeals. (a) An appeal from any final order or decision of the city planner may be taken to the planning commission by any person aggrieved. An appeal is taken by filing with the city planner and the planning commission written notice of appeal specifying the grounds therefor. A notice of appeal shall be considered filed with the city planner or council when delivered to the planning department, and the date and time of filing shall be entered on the notice by the planning staff.
(b) An appeal from any final order or decision of the planning commission may be taken to the city council by any person aggrieved. Filing of appeal shall be the same procedure as described in subsection (a) of this section.
(c) An appeal must be taken within ten days after the date of the decision or order appealed from.
(d) Whenever an appeal is filed, the city planner shall forthwith transmit to the planning commission or city council all the papers constituting the record relating to the action appealed from.
(e) The planning commission or council may reverse or affirm (wholly or partly) or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and shall make any order, requirement, decision or determination that in its opinion ought to be made in the case before it. To this end, the commission shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 95.01. Variances. (a) An application for a variance shall be submitted to the planning commission by filing a copy of the application with the city planner in the planning department. Applications shall be handled in the same manner as applications for special use permits.
(b) A variance may be granted by the planning commission if it concludes that strict enforcement of the ordinance codified in this part would result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships for the applicant and that, by granting the variance, the spirit of the ordinance codified in this part will be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. It may reach these conclusions if it finds that:
(1) If the applicant complies strictly with the provisions of the ordinance codified in this part, he can make no reasonable use of his property;
(2) The hardship of which the applicant complains is one suffered by the applicant rather than neighbors or the general public;
(3) The hardship relates to the applicant’s land, rather that personal circumstances;
(4) The hardship is unique, or nearly so, rather than one shared by many surrounding properties;
(5) The hardship is not the result of the applicant’s own actions; and
(6) The variance will neither result in the extension or initiation of a nonconforming situation.
(c) In granting variances, the planning commission may impose such reasonable conditions as will ensure that the use of the property to which the variance applies will be as compatible as practicable with the surrounding properties.
(d) A variance may be issued for an indefinite duration or for a specified duration only.
(e) The nature of the variance and any conditions attached to it shall be entered on the face of the zoning permit, or the zoning permit may simply note the issuance of the variance and refer to the written record of the variance for further information. All such conditions are enforceable in the same manner as any other applicable requirement of this part. (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 95.01.1. Limitations on granting waivers and variances. Neither the city council nor the planning commission is authorized to grant waivers or variances to any of the provisions of this Part III, except:
(a) Only if necessary and only to the extent necessary to prevent the taking of property in violation of the federal or state constitutions by the strict applications of the requirements of this Part III; or
(b) As provided in Section 95.01. (Ord. 460-AC)
Sec. 95.02. Interpretations. (a) The planning commission is authorized to interpret the zoning map and to pass upon disputed questions of lot lines or district boundary lines and similar questions, if such questions arise in the context of an appeal from a decision of the city planner.
(b) An application for a map interpretation shall be submitted to the planning commission by filing a copy of the application with the city planner in the planning department. The application shall contain sufficient information to enable the commission to make the necessary interpretation.
(c) Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zones as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
(1) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of alleys, streets, highways, streams or railroads should be construed to follow such centerlines;
(2) Boundaries indicated as approximately following lot lines, city limits or extraterritorial boundary lines, shall be construed as following such lines, limits or boundaries;
(3) Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as following such shorelines;
(4) Where a district boundary divides a lot or where distances are not specifically indicated on the official zoning map, the boundary shall be determined by measurement, using the scale of the official zoning map;
(5) Where any street or alley is hereafter officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to each parcel of abutting property shall apply to that portion of such street or alley added thereto by virtue of such vacation or abandonment.
(d) Interpretations of the location of floodway and floodplain boundary lines may be made by the city planner. (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 95.03. Requests to be heard expeditiously. The planning commission and city council shall hear and decide all appeals, variance requests, and requests for interpretations as expeditiously as possible, consistent with the need to follow regularly established agenda procedures, provide notice, and obtain the necessary information to make sound decisions. (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 95.04. Burden of proof in appeals and variances. (a) When an appeal is taken to the planning commission in accordance with Section 95.00, the city planner shall have the initial burden of presenting to the body sufficient evidence and argument to justify the order or decision appealed from. The burden of presenting evidence and argument for the appeal then shifts to the appellant, who shall also have the burden of persuasion.
(b) The burden of presenting evidence sufficient to allow the planning commission or city council to reach the conclusions set forth in section 95.01 (b), as well as the burden of persuasion on those issues, remains with the applicant seeking the variance. (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 95.05. Action on appeals and variances. (a) With respect to appeals, a motion to reverse, affirm, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from shall include, insofar as practicable, a statement of specific reasons or findings of facts that support the motion, if a motion to reverse or modify is not made or fails to receive the majority vote necessary for adoption.
(b) Before granting a variance, the body must take a separate vote and vote affirmatively on each of the six (6) required findings stated in section 95.01(b). Insofar as practicable, a motion to make an affirmative finding on each of the requirements set forth in section 95.01(b) shall include a statement of the specific reasons or findings of fact supporting such motion.
(c) A motion to deny a variance may be made on the basis that any one (1) or more of the six (6) criteria set forth in section 95.01(b) are not satisfied or that the application
is incomplete. Insofar as practicable, such a motion shall include a statement of the specific reasons or findings of fact that support it. (Ord. 427-AC)
Article XIII. Recreational Vehicle (RV) Parks.
Ord No. 427-AC
Sec. 113.00. Recreational vehicle parks. (a) General.
(1) Recreational vehicle parks shall be permitted in the CRR (commercial residential resort) zone with a special use permit.
(2) Recreational vehicle parks may be permitted in some residential zones and the C-3 (highway commercial) zone with an approved conditional use permit.
(b) Application Process--Procedures.
(1) The plan proposal submitted to the planning department shall include facilities or any other provision required by and acceptable for approval by the state and local health departments and any other jurisdictional agency to whom it will be submitted for review.
(2) Ten (10) copies of the plans and all necessary fees shall be deposited with the planning department for distribution to the city engineer and other jurisdictional agencies for their evaluation prior to approval or hearing by the planning commission.
(3) RV park plans shall be prepared, stamped and signed by a California registered engineer in accordance with California state statutes and rules.
(4) If a zone change or conditional use permit is required, the necessary applications, fees and other material may be submitted for processing simultaneously with the RV park plans. If desired or appropriate, the developer/applicant may elect to have any zoning action processed and heard by the planning commission and city council prior to submittal of the RV park plans. In addition to any zoning action, park plans must be approved by the city council after receiving a recommendation from the planning commission.
Within fifteen (15) days from deposit of the park plan, the city planner or his designee shall review the park plan, preferably with the subdivider, as it relates to the following:
(A) City general plan;
(B) Suitability of the site for development proposed;
(C) The improvements, design and dedications required by these regulations and those of other jurisdictions;
(D) Zoning requirements;
(E) All information, documents, maps and fees including evaluations by the various agencies/departments shall be submitted to the city planner at least ten (10) working days prior to the next planning commission meeting date;
(F) Fee: two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) plus one dollar ($1.00) for each RV space;
(G) Any substantial changes in design, after approval by the planning commission, shall invalidate that approval, and the plan shall be reprocessed as a new proposal;
(H) Approval by the planning commission and the city council shall be conditioned on approval by the other jurisdictional reviewing agencies.
(c) Plan Design and Format. All applications for recreational vehicle parks shall contain the following: complete park plans and specifications of the RV park depicting but not limited to:
(1) Names and addresses of the applicant(s), owner(s), and project engineer;
(2) Title and vicinity map showing the location and legal description of the park including the location of existing roads, existing or proposed access to the park and the nature and status of the access road;
(3) North arrow, date of preparation, scale, source and date of topography information as established by field or aerial survey methods;
(4) The complete boundary of the park, area and dimensions of the tract of land and the density of the park;
(5) Existing (and proposed) zoning and location of any existing development or structures within the park boundary;
(6) Proposed method and source of water supply, sewage disposal, fire protection, electricity, phone, etc. (general statement);
(7) Number, location, dimensions, and sizes of all spaces. Each space shall be numbered;
(8) Location and width dimensions of all roadways, walkways, and the entrance/exit way including the access road;
(9) Location and amount of parking and/or storage area;
(10) Location, size and description of the recreation area(s) or other amenities;
(11) Drainage arrows depicting direction of drainage flows;
(12) Location of water and sewer lines, riser pipes, fire hydrants (if applicable) and the electrical layout and proposed lighting;
(13) Dimension, location and nature of all buildings or facilities to be constructed in the park;
(14) Plans and specifications of the water supply, refuse and sewage disposal and sanitary facilities;
(15) Engineer’s stamp and date of preparation.
(d) Additional Accompanying Materials. The following material shall accompany the submittal of all RV park plans. If this data is not on the park plan, ten (10) copies are required.
(1) A statement regarding the nature of the proposed improvements within the park, including but not limited to roadways, parking areas, access road, method of sewage disposal, water supply and distribution, screening, landscaping and extent and nature of recreational facilities;
(2) A description of how streets and spaces will be numbered or identified for emergency vehicle response;
(3) A descriptive statement of the design concept and traffic circulation system of the park;
(4) Rezone or conditional use permit application and fees, if applicable;
(5) Drainage report.
(e) Park Design and Improvement Standards.
(1) Environmental Requirements.
(A) General. Condition of soil, groundwater level, drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed, in the opinion of the planning commission, to objectionable smoke, noise, odors or other adverse influences, and not portion subject to flooding, subsidence or erosion shall be used for any purpose which would expose persons or property to hazards.
(B) Site drainage. The ground surface in all parts of every recreational vehicle park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner.
(2) Recreational parks shall be a minimum of three (3) gross acres.
(3) RV Space Dimensions. The following dimensions and standards shall apply to RV spaces:
Minimum
Width
Minimum Depth
Minimum Area
(A)
Back-in
Drive-through
25
20
45
50
1,400 square feet
1,400 square feet
(B)
Overnight back-in
Overnight
drive-through
25
20
35
40
1,000 square feet
1,000 square feet
(C)
Compact
25
35
1,000 square feet.
Overnight and compact spaces may comprise no more than twenty (20) percent (one-fifth (1/5)) of the total number of recreational vehicle spaces within the park. Overnight spaces shall be located to facilitate entry to and exit from the park without being in conflict with the primary park users and area.
Compact spaces shall be limited to trailer-tents, vans, compact trailers and rigs of similar size requiring lesser area.
(D) Lot measurements: measured width and depth on perpendicular distance between the side lot lines and the front and rear lot lines, respectively.
(E) Each lot shall be accessible from an approved private street or accessway.
(F) Each recreational park shall have access on a major collector or larger street.
(4) Recreational Vehicular Separation and Set-backs.
Separations. Recreational vehicles and any portion thereof shall be separated from each other and from other buildings and structures by at least ten (10) feet on all sides. Parking pads for recreational vehicles shall be so arranged as to comply with the requirements for a ten (10) foot separation between recreational vehicles as well as the required RV space setback.
Setbacks.
(A) No lot or space shall be located within fifty (50) feet of the right-of-way line at any major street or within twenty-five (25) feet of the right-of-way line of any major street unless such space is adequately screened from the street.
(B) The minimum space setback for recreational vehicles shall be observed as follows:
Front: five (5) feet.
Side: three (3) feet. If the side fronts on an interior street, the side back shall be five (5) feet.
Rear: three (3) feet. If the space is designed as a drive-through space, then five (5) feet shall be the minimum setback for the area.
(5) Lot Improvements. Each space shall be provided water from a controlled water system, each space shall be provided sewage disposal from a central community sewage disposal system, and each space shall be provided electricity.
Each space shall have paved parking pad to be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width by a minimum of forty (40) feet in length (ten (10) feet by forty (40) feet and shall extend to the street. Where drive-through spaces are provided, said paved pads shall extend across the space from street to street. “Compact” and “overnight” spaces shall be paved or graveled parking pad with a minimum width of ten (10) feet and a minimum length of thirty (30) feet.
If provided, barbecue pits or fire rings and related setbacks thereof shall be subject to approval by the governing fire district.
(6) RV Park Density. The overall maximum allowed density permitted for recreational vehicle parks shall be twenty (20) recreational vehicle spaces per acre (less area proposed for manager’s residence, dedicated rights-of-way.)
(7) Recreational Area Requirements. Recreational and/or usable common, open areas shall be provided and conveniently accessible to all park guests and shall be no less than seven (7) percent of the total park area. Floor space in enclosed or open recreation halls and/or recreational amenities may be included in the requirement. The recreation open area requirements shall not include parking, streets, or incidental landscaped or open parcels not suitable or intended for recreational use.
(8) Screening
(A) A solid masonry wall having a minimum thickness of six (6) inches and height of six (6) feet shall be installed and maintained along the setback line where a property line abuts an arterial street or residential property.
(B) A six (6) foot high opaque screen shall be provided along all setback lines where the property abuts any collector or lessor streets and along the property lines where the property abuts an alley and/or common interior lot line. The opaque screen may consist of a wall or a fence having an approved hedge or plant screen.
(C) The height of a wall shall be measured from the highest grade level.
(D) In cases where “overnight” and/or tent spaces are provided, acceptable screening shall be provided to the extent necessary to screen and separate these types of spaces from the primary portion of the RV park.
(9) Landscaping.
(A) The setback between a required wall and property line shall be landscaped.
(B) All common outdoor recreational living spaces shall be landscaped except for pools, shuffleboards and similar open recreational facilities.
(C) All required landscaping shall be maintained with a permanent watering system.
(D) A landscaping plan depicting the screening and landscaping scheme for all required landscaped areas shall be submitted. Where trees and shrubbery are required or used in recreational areas, said landscaping plan shall indicate the plant type, size, quantity and spacing.
(10) Parking.
(A) No on-street parking shall be allowed with any RV park.
(B) Adequate off-street parking shall be provided for automobiles, boats, etc. One (1) space for every two (2) lots shall be the minimum provided. Additional parking spaces or added storage area may be required by the planning commission when warranted by special conditions or circumstances such as but not necessarily limited to, the size, nature and location of the park.
(C) Each RV space shall have adequate room for at least one (1) parking space in addition to the RV pad.
(11) Streets and Access--Park Street System.
(A) Access to recreational vehicle park lots shall be internal private drive only. No lot shall have direct access to a public street or way.
(B) Entrances to recreational vehicle parks shall be designed to minimize congestion and traffic hazards through designated driveways and allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets.
(C) Park street width shall be at least twenty (20) feet if one (1) way and twenty-four (24) feet if two (2) way.
(D) All internal streets must be improved to minimum applicable city standards for paved streets (except width). Specific required standards as determined by the planning commission shall relate to and depend on (but not limited to) such factors as park size,
site character, density, drainage, site (soils) type, character and use of surrounding lands, amount of park traffic, proximity to urban or developed areas, input from the city engineer, etc.
(E) Dead-end streets shall be limited to serve no more than twelve (12) lots and shall be provided at the closed end with a turn-around having an outside roadway diameter of at least sixty (60) feet.
(12) For parks with roads serving more than twelve (12) sites, these roads shall be continuous and return to a public road or way.
(13) Service Buildings (where applicable).
(A) All service buildings shall be convenient to the units which they serve, and shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
(B) All service buildings shall be of permanent construction and in accordance with local requirements.
(C) Facilities in service buildings such as lavatories, toilets, showers, etc., shall be provided and constructed in accordance with state and local health department requirements.
(14) Sanitary Stations (where provided).
(A) Sufficient facilities shall be provided for sanitary stations for the sole purpose of removing and disposing of waste from all holding tanks in a clean, efficient and convenient manner.
(B) Sanitary stations shall be approved by the county health department. (Ord. 427-AC)
Article XIV. Mobile-home Parks.
Ord. No. 427-AC
Sec. 114.00 Mobile-home parks. (a) General.
(1) Mobile-home parks shall be permitted in the CRR (commercial residential resort) zone.
(2) Mobile-home parks may be permitted in any residential zone and the C-3 (highway commercial) zone with an approved conditional use permit.
(b) Application Process--Procedures.
(1) All proposals submitted to the planning department and city shall be in a form required by and acceptable to, pursuant to city requirements, the provisions of CEQA (California Environmental Quality Act), state and local health departments, and other jurisdictions to whom it will be submitted.
(2) City Permits. A city building permit, and if required, a conditional use permit, shall be required for a mobile-home park.
(3) Any substantial changes in design after approval by the planning commission shall invalidate that approval, and the plan shall be reprocessed as a new proposal.
(4) Open storage of materials or belongings is prohibited.
(c) All applications for mobile-home parks shall contain the following, on or with the map submitted:
(1) Names and addresses of applicant(s), property owner(s), designer and engineer, if applicable;
(2) Location and legal description of proposed park;
(3) Plans and specifications showing, but not necessarily limited to the following (ten (10) copies of plans to be submitted):
(A) Area and dimensions of the tract of land,
(B) Number, location and size of all lots. Each lot shall be numbered, and the dimensions of all measurements shown,
(C) Location and width of all roadways and walkways,
(D) Proposed method for collection and disposal of solid waste,
(E) Location of all water and sewer lines and riser pipes,
(F) Plans and specifications for the water supply, sanitary sewer lines, and sewage disposal facilities (as required by the State Health Department),
(G) Dimensions and locations of all buildings to be constructed within the park,
(H) General location of lighting and electrical systems,
(I) Topographic map and drainage plan shall be submitted,
(J) The plan shall be drawn at a scale of either one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet, one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet or one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet,
(K) Fee: three hundred dollars ($300.00) plus two dollars ($2.00) for each mobile-home lot;
(4) If a conditional use permit is required, complete information, including evaluations by the various departments responsible for reports, shall be received by the planning staff at least ten (10) working days prior to the next planning commission meeting date;
(5) Recreational vehicles in mobile-home parks; designated areas:
(A) In any new mobile-home park that is developed after January 1, 1982, mobile-home spaces shall not be rented for the accommodation of recreational vehicles unless the mobile-home park has a specifically designated area within the park for recreational vehicles, which is separate and apart from the area designated for mobile-homes. Recreational vehicles may be located only in the specifically designated area.
(B) Any new mobile-home park that is developed after January 1, 1982, is not subject to the provisions of subsection (c) (5) (A) of this section until seventy-five (75) percent of the spaces have been rented for the first time.
(d) Environmental Requirements.
(1) General. Condition of soil, groundwater level, drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health and safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed, in the opinion of the planning commission, to objectionable smoke, noise, odors, or other adverse influences, and no portion subject to flooding, subsidence, or erosion shall be used for any purpose which would expose persons or property to hazards.
(2) Site Drainage. The ground surface in all parts of every mobile-home park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner.
(e) Mobile-home Park Design Standards.
(1) Minimum Parcel Size and Allowable Density.
(A) Mobile-home parks shall be a minimum of five (5) gross acres. Variation may be allowed by a conditional use permit.
(B) The maximum permitted density shall be ten (10) units per gross acre.
(2) Access and Streets.
(A) Site Access.
(i) Each mobile-home park shall have access on a major collector or larger street.
(ii) Mobile-home parks shall have secondary access for emergency service vehicles unless specifically waived by the planning commission. Said secondary access may be barricaded in a manner approved by the fire chief.
(B) Park Street System
(i) Access to mobile-home lots shall be by internal drive only. No lot shall have direct access to a public street or way.
(ii) Entrances to mobile-home parks shall be designed to minimize congestion and traffic hazards through designated driveways and to allow free traffic movement on adjacent streets.
(iii) Minimum street width for all streets within a mobile-home park shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
(iv) The construction of base paving, curbs and gutters on all private streets shall be approved by the city engineer.
(v) The surface drainage along the street within the mobile home park shall be by means of concrete gutters.
(vi) A lighting system shall be installed along all streets, said lighting systems to be approved by city staff.
(3) Screening Requirements.
(A) A solid masonry wall having a minimal thickness of six (6) inches and height of six (6) feet shall be installed and maintained along the setback line where a property line abuts an arterial street or residential zone.
(B) A six (6) foot high opaque screen shall be provided along all setback lines where the property abuts any collector or lesser streets and along the property lines where the property abuts an alley and/or common interior lot line. The opaque screen may consist of a wall or a fence having an approved hedge or plant screen.
(C) The height of a wall or fence shall be measured from the highest grade level.
(4) Setback Requirements.
(A) Where exterior property lines abut a street there shall be a minimum building setback of ten (10) feet.
(B) Where exterior property lines do not abut a street there shall be a minimum building set back of five (5) feet.
(C) The minimum distance required for the separation of a mobile-home from a building shall be ten (10) feet.
(D) The minimum distance required for the separation of a mobile-home from any other mobile-home shall be: ten (10) feet from side to side, eight (8) feet from side to rear, and six (6) feet from rear to rear; provided, however that each mobile-home shall not be located closer than three (3) feet from the rear or side mobile-home lot line.
(E) Accessory structure including awnings and carports shall not be located closer than three (3) feet from a lot or property line.
(5) Parking.
(A) No on-street parking shall be allowed within any mobile-home park.
(B) Adequate off-street parking shall be provided for automobiles, boats, etc.
(C) If desired, parking may be provided in a central location, convenient to all homes, for use by visitors and residents. Such parking area must be paved and adequately illuminated at night. One (1) of the two (2) required parking spaces for each lot may be located in such a parking areas.
(6) Landscaping.
(A) The setback between a required wall and property line shall be landscaped.
(B) All common outdoor recreational living spaces shall be landscaped except for pools, shuffleboards and similar open recreational facilities.
(C) Each occupied space shall contain at least one (1) live fifteen (15) gallon tree.
(D) All required landscaping shall be maintained with a permanent watering system.
(E) A landscaping plan depicting the screening and landscaping scheme for all required landscaped areas shall be submitted. Where trees and shrubbery are required or used in recreational areas, said landscaping plan shall indicate the plant type, size, quantity and spacing.
(7) Recreational Areas.
(A) Common recreational areas shall be provided for the benefit of residents based on the minimum standard of two hundred (200) square feet of recreational area for each permitted mobile-home space.
(B) Recreation areas shall be so located as to be free of traffic hazards, and shall, where topography permits, be centrally located or adjacent to existing waterway.
(8) Park Accessory Building.
(A) All accessory buildings and uses such as laundromats, maintenance buildings, and refuse collection areas, shall be convenient to the units they service, and shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
(B) Trash storage areas shall be provided and distributed throughout the park. Said trash storage areas shall be screened from public view by a solid wall.
(C) All accessory buildings shall be of permanent construction.
(D) Such accessory buildings shall require a city building permit.
(9) Signs.
(A) All signs shall conform to the provisions of the city sign ordinance.
(10) All utilities shall be underground. (Ord.427-AC)
Article XV. Nonconforming Situations.
Ord. No. 427-AC
Sec. 115.00. Continuation of nonconforming situations. Unless otherwise specifically provided in this part and subject to the restrictions and qualifications set forth in sections 115.01 through 115.06, nonconforming situations that were otherwise lawful on the effective date of this part may be continued. (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 115.01. Nonconforming lots. (a) When a nonconforming lot can be used in conformity with all the regulations applicable to the intended use, except that the lot is smaller than the required minimums, then the lot may be used as proposed just as if it were conforming. However, no use (e.g., a two-family residence) that requires a greater lot size than the established minimum lot size for a particular zone is permissible on a nonconforming lot.
(b) When the use proposed for a nonconforming lot is one that is conforming in all other respects, but the applicable setback requirements cannot reasonably be complied with, then the entity authorized by this part to issue a permit for the proposed use (the city planner, planning commission, or council) may allow deviations from the applicable setback requirements if it finds that:
(1) The property cannot reasonably be developed for the use proposed without such deviations;
(2) These deviations are necessitated by the size or shape of the nonconforming lot; and
(3) The property can be developed as proposed without any significantly adverse impact on surrounding properties or the public health or safety.
(c) For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, compliance with applicable building setback requirements is not reasonably possible if a building that serves the minimal needs of the use proposed for the nonconforming lot cannot practicably be constructed and located on the lot in conformity with such setback requirements. However, mere financial hardship does not constitute grounds for finding that compliance is not reasonably possible.
(d) This section applies only to undeveloped nonconforming lots. A lot is undeveloped if it has no substantial structures upon it. A change in use of a developed nonconforming lot may be accomplished.
(e) Subject to the following sentence, if, on the date this section becomes effective, an undeveloped nonconforming lot adjoins and has continuous frontage with one or more other undeveloped lots under the same ownership, then neither the owner of the nonconforming lot nor his successors in interest may take advantage of the provisions of this section.
(f) This subsection shall not apply to a nonconforming lot if a majority of the developed lots located on either side of the street, where such lot is located and within five hundred (500) feet of such lot, are also nonconforming. The intent of this subsection is to require nonconforming lots under the circumstances specified herein, but not to require such combination when that would be out of character with the way the neighborhood has previously been developed. (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 115.02. Extension or enlargement of nonconforming situations. (a) Except as specifically provided in this section, no person may engage in any activity that causes an increase in the extent of nonconformity of a nonconforming situation. Physical alteration of structures or the placement of new structures on open land is unlawful if such activity results in:
(1) An increase in the total amount of space devoted to a nonconforming use; or
(2) Greater nonconformity with respect to dimensional restrictions such as setback requirement, height limitations or density requirements or other requirements such as parking requirements.
(b) Subject to subsection (d) of this section, a nonconforming use may be extended throughout any portion of a completed building that, when the use was made nonconforming by this part, was manifestly designed or arranged to accommodate such use. However, a nonconforming use may not be extended to additional buildings or to land outside the original building.
(c) Subject to Section 115.06 (authorizing the completion of nonconforming projects in certain circumstances), a nonconforming use of open land may not be extended to cover more land than was occupied by that use when it became nonconforming, except that a use that involves the removal of natural materials from the lot (e.g., a sand pit) may be expanded to the boundaries of the lot where the use was established at the time it became nonconforming if ten (10) percent or more of the earth products had already been removed on the effective date of this part.
(d) The volume, intensity, or frequency of use of property where a nonconforming situation exists may be increased and the equipment or processes used at a location where a nonconforming situation exists may be changed if these or similar changes amount only to changes in the degree of activity rather than changes in kind and no violations of other subsections of this section occur.
(e) Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, any structure used for single-family residential purposes and maintained as a nonconforming use may be enlarged or replaced with a similar structure of a larger size, so long as the enlargement or replacement does not create new nonconformities with respect to such matters as setback and parking requirements. This subsection is subject to the limitations stated in section 115.05 (abandonment and discontinuance of nonconforming situations).
(f) Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, whenever: (1) there exists a lot with one (1) or more structures on it; and (2) a change in lot use that does not involve any enlargement of a structure is proposed for such lot; and (3) the parking and loading requirements that would be applicable as a result of the proposed change cannot be satisfied on such lot because there is not sufficient area available on the lot that can practicably be used for parking and loading, then the proposed use shall not be regarded as resulting in an impermissible extension or enlargement of a nonconforming situation. However, the applicant shall be required to comply with all applicable parking and loading requirements that can be satisfied without acquiring additional land and shall also be required to obtain satellite parking if: (1) parking requirements cannot be satisfied on the lot with respect to which the permit is required; and (2) such satellite parking is reasonably available.
(g) If such satellite parking is not reasonably available at the time of zoning or special or conditional use permit is granted then the permit recipient shall be required to obtain it when it does become reasonably available. This requirement shall be a continuing condition of the permit. (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 115.03. Repair, maintenance and reconstruction. (a) Minor repairs to and routine maintenance of property where nonconforming situations exist are permitted and encouraged. Major renovation, i.e., work estimated to cost more than twenty-five (25) percent of the appraised valuation of the structure to be renovated may be done only in accordance with a zoning permit issued pursuant to this section.
(b) If a structure located on a lot where a nonconforming situation exists is damaged to an extent that the costs of repair or replacement would exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the appraised valuation of the damaged structure, then the damaged structure may be repaired or replaced only in accordance with a zoning permit issued pursuant to this section. This subsection does not apply to structures used for single-family residential purposes, which structures may be reconstructed pursuant to a zoning permit as they may be enlarged or replaced as provided in section 115.02.
(c) For purpose of subsections (a) and (b) of this section:
(1) The “cost” of renovation, repair or replacement shall mean the fair market value of the materials and services necessary to accomplish such renovation, repair, or replacement.
(2) The “cost” of renovation, repair or replacement shall mean the cost of all such intended work, and no person may seek to avoid the intent of subsections (a) or (b) of this section, by doing such work incrementally.
(3) The “appraised valuation” shall mean the appraised valuation for property tax purposes, updated as necessary by the increase in the consumer price index since the date of the last valuation determined by a professionally recognized property appraiser.
(d) The city planner shall issue a permit authorized by this section if he or she finds that, in completing the renovation, repair or replacement work:
(1) No violation of section 115.02 will occur; and
(2) The permittee will comply to the extent reasonably possible with all provisions of this part applicable to the existing use (except that the permittee shall not lose his right to continue nonconforming use).
(e) Compliance with a requirement of this part is not reasonably possible if compliance cannot be achieved without adding additional land to the lot where the nonconforming situation is maintained or moving a substantial structure that is on a permanent foundation. Mere financial hardship caused by the cost of meeting such requirements as paved parking does not constitute grounds for finding that compliance is not reasonably possible. (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 115.04. Change in use of property where a nonconforming situation exists. (a) A change in the use of property (where a nonconforming situation exists) that is sufficiently substantial to require a new zoning, special use, or conditional use permit may not be made except in accordance with subsections (b) through (d) of this section. However, this requirement shall not apply if only a sign permit is needed.
(b) If the intended change in use is to a principal use that is permissible in the district where the property is located, and all the other requirements of this part is applicable to that use can be complied with, permission to make the change must be obtained in the same manner as permission to make the initial use of a vacant lot. Once conformity with this part is achieved, the property may not revert to its nonconforming status.
(c) If the intended change in use is to a principal use that is permissible in the district where the property is located, but all the requirements of this par applicable to that use cannot reasonably be complied with, then the change is permissible if the entity authorized by this part to issue a permit authorizes the change. This permit may be issued if the permit-issuing authority finds, in addition to any other findings that may be required by this part, that:
(1) The intended change will not result in a violation of section 115.02; and
(2) All the applicable requirements of this part that can be reasonably complied with will be complied with. Compliance with a requirement of this part is not reasonably possible if compliance cannot be achieved without adding additional land to the lot where the nonconforming situation is maintained or moving a substantial structure that is on a permanent foundation. Mere financial hardship caused by the cost of meeting such requirements as paved parking does not constitute grounds for finding that compliance is not reasonably possible. And in no case may an applicant be given permission pursuant to this subsection to construct a building or add to an existing building if additional nonconformities would thereby be created.
(d) if the intended change in use is to another principal that is also nonconforming, then the change is permissible if the entity authorized by this part to issue a permit for that particular use (council) issues a permit authorizing the change. The permit-issuing authority may issue the permit if it finds, in addition to other findings that may be required by this part, that:
(1) The use requested is one (1) that is permissible in some zoning districts with either a zoning, special use, or conditional use permit; and
(2) All the conditions applicable to the permit authorized in subsection (c) of this section are satisfied; and
(3) The proposed development will have less of an adverse impact on those most affected by it and will be more compatible with the surrounding neighborhood than the use in operation at the time the permit is applied for. (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 115.05. Abandonment and discontinuance of nonconforming situation. (a) When a nonconforming use is: (1) discontinued for a consecutive period of one hundred eighty (180) days; or (2) discontinued for any period of time without a present intention to reinstate the nonconforming use, the property involved may therefore be used only for conforming purposes.
(b) If the principal activity on property where a nonconforming situation other than a nonconforming use exists is: (1) discontinued for a consecutive period of one hundred eighty (180) days; or (2) discontinued for any period of time without present intention resuming that activity, then the property may thereafter be used only in conformity with all of the regulations applicable in the preexisting use unless the entity with authority to issue a permit for the intended use issues a permit to allow the property to be used for this purpose without correcting the nonconforming situations. This permit may be issued if the permit-issuing authority finds that eliminating a particular nonconformity is not reasonably possible (i.e., cannot be accomplished without adding additional land to the lot where the nonconforming situation is maintained or moving a substantial structure that is on a permanent foundation). The permit shall specify which nonconformities need not be corrected.
(c) For purposes of determining whether a right to continue a nonconforming situation is lost pursuant to this section, all the buildings, activities, and operations maintained on a lot are generally to be considered. For example, the failure to rent one (1) apartment in a nonconforming apartment building for one hundred eighty (180) days shall not result in a loss of the right to rent that apartment or space thereafter so long as the apartment building is continuously maintained. But if a nonconforming use is maintained in conjunction with a conforming use, discontinuance of a nonconforming use for the required period shall terminate the right to maintain it thereafter.
(d) When a structure or operation made nonconforming by this part is vacant or discontinued at the effective date of this part, the one hundred eighty (180) day period for purposes of this section begins to run on the effective date of this part. (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 115.06. Completion of nonconforming projects. (a) All nonconforming projects on which construction was begun at least one hundred eighty (180) days before the effective date of this part, as well as all nonconforming projects that are at least ten (10) percent completed in terms of the total expected cost of the project on the effective date of this part may be completed in accordance with the terms of their permits, so long as these permits were validity issued and remain unrevoked and unexpired. If a development is designed to be completed in stages, this subsection shall apply only to the specific phase under construction.
(b) Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, all work on any nonconforming project shall cease on the effective date of this part, and all permits previously issued for work on nonconforming projects may begin or may be continued only pursuant to a zoning, special use, conditional use, or sign permit issued in accordance with this section by the individual or board authorized by this part to issue permits for the type of development proposed. The permit-issuing authority shall issue such a permit if it finds that the applicant has, in good faith, made substantial expenditures or incurred substantial binding obligations or otherwise changed his position in some substantial way in reasonable reliance on the land use law as it existed before the effective date of this part and thereby would be unreasonably prejudiced if not allowed to complete his project as proposed. In considering whether these finds may be made, the permit-issuing authority shall be guided by the following, as well as other relevant considerations:
(1) All expenditures made to obtain or pursuant to a validly issued and unrevoked building, zoning, sign or special or conditional use permit shall be considered as evidence of reasonable reliance on the land use law that existed before this part became effective.
(2) Except as provided in subsection (b) (1) of this section, no expenditures made more than one hundred eighty (180) days before the effective date of this part may be considered as evidence of reasonable reliance on the land use law that existed before this part became effective. An expenditure is made at the time a party incurs a binding obligation to make that expenditure.
(3) To the extent that expenditures are recoverable with a reasonable effort, a party shall not be considered prejudiced by having made those expenditures. For example, a party shall not be considered prejudiced by having made some expenditure to acquire a potential development site if the property obtained is approximately as valuable under the new classification as it was under the old, for the expenditure can be recovered by a resale of the property.
(4) To the extent that a nonconforming project can be made conforming and that expenditures made, or obligations incurred can be effectively utilized in the completion of
a conforming project, a party shall not be considered prejudiced by having made such expenditures.
(5) An expenditure shall be considered substantial if it is significant both in dollar amount and in terms of: (A) the total estimated cost of the proposed project; and (B) the ordinary business practices of the developer.
(6) A person shall be considered to have acted in good faith if actual knowledge of a proposed change in the land use law affecting the proposed development site could not be attributed to him.
(7) Even though a person had actual knowledge of a proposed change in the land use law affecting a development site, the permit-issuing authority may still find that he acted in good faith if he did not proceed with his plans in a deliberate attempt to circumvent the effects of the proposed ordinance. The permit-issuing authority may find that the developer did not proceed in an attempt to undermine the proposed ordinance if it determines that; (A) at the time the expenditures were made, either there was considerable doubt about whether any ordinance would ultimately be passed, or it was not clear that the proposed ordinance would prohibit the intended development; and (B) the developer had legitimate business reasons for making expenditures.
(c) When it appears from the developer’s plans or otherwise that a project was intended to be or reasonably could be completed in phases, stages, segments, or other discrete units, the developer shall be allowed to complete only those phases or segments with respect to which the developer can make the showing required under subsection (b) of this section. In addition to the matters and subject to the guidelines set forth in subsections (b)(1) through (6) of this section, the permit-issuing authority shall, in determining whether a developer would be unreasonably prejudiced if not allowed to complete phases or segments of a nonconforming project, consider the following in addition to other relevant factors:
(1) Whether any plans prepared or approved regarding uncompleted phases constitute conceptual plans only or construction drawings based upon detailed surveying, architectural, or engineering work;
(2) Whether any improvements, such as streets or utilities, have been installed in phases not yet completed,
(3) Whether utilities and other facilities installed in completed phases have been constructed in such a manner or location or such a scale, in anticipation of connection to or interrelationship with approved but uncompleted phases, that the investment in such utilities or other facilities cannot be recouped if such approved but uncompleted phases are constructed in conformity with existing regulations.
(d) The permit-issuing authority shall not consider any application for the permit authorized by subsection (b) of this section that is submitted more than sixty (60) days
after the effective date of this part. The permit-issuing authority may waive this requirement for good cause shown, but in no case may it extend the application deadline beyond one (1) year.
(e) The city planner shall send copies of this section to the persons listed as owners for tax purposes (and developers, if different from the owners) of all properties in regard to which permits have been issued for nonconforming projects or in regard to which a nonconforming project is otherwise known to be in some stage of development. This notice shall be sent by certified mail not less than fifteen (15) days before the effective date of this part.
(f) The permit-issuing authority shall establish expedited procedures for hearing applications for permits under this section. These applications shall be heard, whenever possible, before the effective date of this part, so that construction work is not needlessly interrupted. (Ord. 427-AC)
Article XVI. Change of Zone and Pre-zoning.
Ord. No. 427-AC
Sec. 116.00. Zone change. (a) Any ordinance which changes any property from one (1) zone to another shall be considered in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section.
(b) Initiation. A zone change may be initiated by order of the city council or the planning commission, or by application of the owner of affected property or an agent of said owner authorized in writing.
(c) Commission Hearing. On a proposed zone change, at least one (1) public hearing shall be held by the planning commission. Notice of such hearing shall be given by notice to property owners within three hundred (300) feet.
(d) Commission Recommendation. The planning commission shall make written findings and recommendations to the city council on each proposed zone change. Such report shall include:
(1) Explanation of the relationship to the general plan and any applicable specific plans;
(2) Consideration of the effect of the proposal on the housing needs of the region balanced against the public service needs of city residents and the fiscal and environmental resources available.
(e) Further Action or Appeal.
(1) If the planning commission recommends against a proposed zone change, no further action by the city council is required unless an appeal is filed.
(2) If the planning commission recommends approval of a zone change, the city council shall take action on such recommendation.
(f) Council Hearing.
(1) If the city council considers a proposed zone change, at least one (1) hearing shall be held. Notice of such hearing shall be given by notice to property owners within three hundred (300) feet.
(2) If the city council proposes any modification from the commission recommendation which was not previously considered by the commission, the proposal shall be referred back to the commission for report and recommendation, but further commission hearing is not required.
(g) Council Action. Action to adopt a zone change shall be by ordinance. When an ordinance for a zone change has been considered by the council but not adopted within one (1) year of introduction, the proceeding shall be considered null and void. New proceedings must be initiated in order to consider the matter further. (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 116.01. Pre-zoning. (a) The city may pre-zone areas outside the city for the purpose of determining the zoning that will apply to such property in the event of annexation to the city. Such zoning shall become effective when property is annexed.
(b) In any petition for the annexation of property to the city, the petitioner shall request in his petition how he desires the property to be zoned, provided the same is annexed by the city.
Copies of the petition shall be filed with the city planning commission, and the planning commission may immediately give notice of its intention to consider the petition for annexation and for zoning the property as requested at two (2) hearings before the planning commission. Said notice shall be by one (1) publication by a newspaper circulated in the city giving notice of its intention to recommend annexation and recommend the zoning of the property if annexation is completed. Notice shall be so given by publication at least ten (10) days prior to the first hearing, the planning commission shall make its recommendation to the city council by resolution. The recommendation of the planning commission shall be final, unless an appeal to the city council is made within thirty (30) days, or the city council may act upon the matter without such an appeal, if done so within forty-five (45) days from the date of the recommendation. After receiving such recommendation, the city council shall by resolution give notice of the filing of the petition, the proposal to annex and its proposal to zone the property in a specific way, provided such annexation is completed.
(c) Said notice of zoning shall be consolidated with a notice for annexation of property to the city and shall comply with the law for the requirements of both notices of annexation and for zoning.
(d) Upon the hearing of the proposal to annex and zone, in addition to the ordinance for annexation, the city council shall zone the property in the manner required by law, pursuant to the notice and upon the completion of said annexation, the zoning of the property shall automatically take effect. (Ord. 427-AC)
Article XVII. Occupancy.
Ord. No. 427-AC
Sec. 117.00. Certificate of occupancy. (a) No vacant land shall be occupied or used, and no building, hereinafter erected, structurally altered, or moved, shall be occupied or used until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the building department.
(b) Certificates of occupancy for a new building, or the enlargement, alteration or moving of an existing building, shall be applied for coincidentally with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the erection or alteration of such building shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of this part.
(c) Certificates of occupancy for use of vacant land, or the change in the use of land, or the change in the use of the land as herein provided, shall be applied for before any such land shall be occupied or used for any purpose except that tilling the soil and the growing therein of farm, garden or orchard products, and a certificate of occupancy shall be issued within ten (10) days after the application has been made, provided such use is in conformity with the provision of this part.
(d) Certificates of occupancy shall state that the building, or proposed use of a building or land, complies with all the building and health laws and ordinances and with the provisions of this part. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the building department and copies shall be furnished on request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected. No fee shall be charged for an original certificate; for all other certificates or for copies of any original certificate there shall be a charge of two dollars ($2.00) each.
(e) Certificates of occupancy for nonconforming uses existing at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this part or any amendment thereto shall be issued by the building department, and the certificate shall state that the use is a nonconforming use and does not conform with the provisions of this part.
(f) No permit for excavation for any building shall be issued before application has been made for a certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 427-AC)
Article XVIII. Enforcement and Review.
Ord. No. 427-AC
Sec. 118.00. Enforcement. (a) It shall be the duty of the planning department to enforce the ordinance codified in this part. All departments, officials and public employees of the city, vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses, shall conform to the provisions of this part and shall issue no permit or license for uses, buildings, or purposes in conflict with the provisions of this part; and any such permit or licenses issued in conflict with the provisions of this part shall be null and void.
(b) The provisions of this part shall be interpreted and administered by the planning commission whose inspectors or authorized representatives shall have the right to enter upon any premises affected by this part for purposes of inspection.
(c) Any building or structure erected or maintained, or any use of property, contrary to the provisions of this part shall be, and the same is declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance and the city attorney shall immediately commence actions and proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law; and shall take such other steps, and shall apply to any court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such building, structure or use and restrain and enjoin any person, firm or corporation from erecting or maintaining such building or structure, or using any property contrary to the provisions of this part. (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 118.01. Complaints regarding violations. Whenever the city planner receives a written, signed complaint alleging a violation of this part, he/she shall investigate the complaint, take whatever action is warranted, and inform the complaint in writing what actions have been or will be taken in accordance with section 118.00(c). (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 118.02 Persons liable. The owner, tenant, or occupant of any building or land or part thereof and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, or maintains any situation that is contrary to the requirements of this part may be held responsible for the violation and suffer the penalties and be subject to the remedies herein provided. (Ord.427-AC)
Sec. 118.03. Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employees or otherwise, violating any provision of this part shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by fines and/or imprisonment in accordance with the San Bernardino County bail schedule. Each day that violation of this part continues shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 118.04. Permit revocation. (a) A zoning, sign, special use, or conditional use permit may be revoked by the permit-issuing authority (in accordance with the
provisions of this section) if the permit recipient fails to develop or maintain the property in accordance with the plans submitted, the requirements of this part, or any additional requirements lawfully imposed by the permit-issuing board.
(b) Before a conditional use or special use permit may be revoked, all of the notice and hearing and other requirements of article V shall be complied with. The notice shall inform the permit recipient of the alleged grounds for the revocation.
(1) The burden of presenting evidence sufficient to authorize the permit-issuing authority to conclude that a permit should be revoked for any of the reasons set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall be upon the party advocating that position. The burden of persuasion shall also be upon that party.
(2) A motion to revoke a permit shall include, insofar as practicable, a statement of the specific reasons or findings of fact that support the motion.
(c) Before a zoning or sign permit may be revoked, the city planner shall give the permit recipient ten (10) days notice of intent to revoke the permit and shall inform the recipient of the alleged reasons for the revocation and of his right to obtain an informal hearing on the allegations. If the permit is revoked, the city planner shall provide to the permittee a written statement of the decision and the reasons thereof.
(d) No person may continue to make use of land or buildings in the manner authorized by any zoning, sign, special use or conditional use permit after such permit has been revoked in accordance with this section. (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 118.05. Judicial review. (a) Every decision of the city council granting or denying a conditional use permit and every final decision of the planning commission shall be subject to review by the Superior Court of San Bernardino County by proceedings in certiorari.
(b) The petition for writ of certiorari must be filed with the San Bernardino County clerk of court within thirty (30) days after the later of the following occurrences:
(1) A written copy of the commission or council’s decision has been filed in the office of the city clerk; and
(2) A written copy of the decision has been delivered by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant or appellant and every other aggrieved party who has filed a written request for such copy at the hearing of the case.
(c) A copy of the writ of certiorari shall be served upon the city. (Ord.427-AC)
Article XIX. Validity and Repeals.
Ord. No. 427-AC
Sec. 119.00. Validity. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this part is for any reason held to the invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this part, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that anyone (1) or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 427-AC)
Sec. 119.01. Repeals. (a) Part III of the Needles Municipal Code in its entirety is hereby repealed and all ordinances of the city inconsistent herewith to the extent of such inconsistency, and no further, are hereby repealed.
(b) The repeal of any of the above-included ordinances does not revive any other ordinance or portion thereof repealed by said ordinances.
(c) Such repeals shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for the violation of any ordinances repealed hereby for an offense committed prior to the repeal. (Ord. 427-AC)
Article XX. Enactment of Ordinance Codified in this Part.
Ord. No. 427-AC
Sec. 120.00. Enactment. The ordinance codified in this part shall take effect and be in force thirty (30) days after date of its passage and shall within fifteen (15) days from the date of its passage be published in the said City of Needles, State of California, together with the names of the members of the city council voting for and against same. (Ord. 427-AC)