NATIONAL CITY MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
the City of National City, California 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 24, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
 
PREFACE 
The National City, California Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1974, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 24, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of Donald McLean, Jr., city attorney. 
The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the Title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 24, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance No. 2019-2463, passed September 3, 2019. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
Beginning with Supplement No. 24 a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
As of Supplement No. 24, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Beginning with Supplement No. 24 this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 24, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Insertion Guide. 
Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Insertion Guide. This guide will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
When originally published, this code was numbered with consecutive page numbers. As it is amended, new material may require the insertion of new pages that are numbered with hyphens. (Example: 31, 32, 32-1.) Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) are left unnumbered but the number is "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION* 
Sections: 
 
1.01.010 - Adoption. 
There is adopted the "National City Municipal Code," as compiled, edited and published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. 
(Ord. 2170 § 1, 2000)  
1.01.020 - Title—Citation—Reference. 
This code shall be known as the "National City Municipal Code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to this code as the "National City Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the National City Municipal Code. References may be made to the titles, chapters, sections and subsection of the National City Municipal Code and such references shall apply to those titles, chapter, sections or subsections as they appear in the code. 
(Ord. 2170 § 2, 2000)  
1.01.030 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "National City Municipal Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of National City, codified herein, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 2170 § 3, 2000)  
1.01.040 - Title, chapter and section headings. 
Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. 
(Ord. 2170 § 4, 2000)  
1.01.050 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 2170 § 5, 2000)  
1.01.060 - Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code. 
The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance 2167, passed October 5, 1999. 
The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance 2167, but prior to adoption of this code, are adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinances 2168 and 2169. 
(Ord. 2170 § 6, 2000)  
1.01.070 - Effect of code on past actions and obligations. 
The adoption of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of this code, does not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this code, and does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed or deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. 
(Ord. 2170 § 7, 2000)  
1.01.080 - Constitutionality. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 
(Ord. 2170 § 8, 2000)  
1.01.090 - References to prior code. 
References in city forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and section of the former city code shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 2170 § 9, 2000)  
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.04.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases whenever used in this code shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases. 
A.  "City" means the city of National City, California, or the area within the territorial limits of the city of National City, and such territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
B.  "Computation of time" means the time within which an act is to be done. It is computed by excluding the first day and including the last day; and if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
C.  "Council" means the city council of National City, California. "All its members" or "all councilmen" means the total number of councilmen provided by the general laws of the state of California. 
D.  "County" means the county of San Diego, California. 
E.  "Law" denotes applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of the state of California, the ordinances of the city of National City, and when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
F.  "May" is permissive. 
G.  "Month" means a calendar month. 
H.  "Must" and "Shall." Each is mandatory. 
I.  "Oath" includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" are equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
J.  "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
K.  "Ordinance" means a law of the city, provided that a temporary or special law, administrative action, order or directive may be in the form of a resolution. 
L.  "Owner" applied to a building or land includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
M.  "Person" means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
N.  "Personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
O.  "Preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
P.  "Property" includes real and personal property. 
Q.  "Real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
R.  "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
S.  "State" means the state of California. 
T.  "Street" includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in this city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
U.  "Tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
V.  Title of Office. Use of the title of any officer, employee, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city. 
W.  "Written" includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed or multigraphed. 
X.  "Year" means a calendar year. 
Y.  All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
Z.  When an act is required by an ordinance the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed as to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. 
(Ord. 1360 § 1, 1973)  
1.04.020 - Grammatical interpretation. 
The following grammatical rules apply in this code: 
A.  Gender. Any gender includes the other genders. 
B.  Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
C.  Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
D.  Use of Words and Phrases. Words and phrases not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language. 
(Ord. 1360 § 2, 1973)  
1.04.030 - Prohibited acts include causing, permitting, etc. 
Whenever in this code any act or omission is made unlawful, it includes causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Ord. 1360 § 3, 1973)  
1.04.040 - Construction. 
The provisions of this code and all proceedings under it are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. 
(Ord. 1360 § 4, 1973)  
1.04.041 - Construction not to impose mandatory duty or civil liability. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, the words "must" and "shall," when used in this code, are not to be construed as creating a mandatory duty on the part of the city or any officer or employee of the city under Section 815.6 of the California Government Code, nor shall such words impose any civil liability upon the city or any officer or employee of the city. 
(Ord. 1854, 1985)  
1.04.050 - Repeal shall not revive any ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of such ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(Ord. 1360 § 5, 1973)  
1.04.060 - Publication of ordinances. 
The city clerk is directed to publish the full text of an adopted ordinance once, unless he or she determines that it is not cost effective and so notifies the city attorney. The city attorney shall, if feasible, prepare a summary of the ordinance to then be published twice by the city clerk in accordance with Government Code Section 36933(c)(1). However, if the city attorney determines that summarization is not feasible, the city clerk shall, upon notification by the city attorney, then publish a one-quarter page display advertisement twice in accordance with Government Code Section 36933(c)(2). 
(Ord. 2153, 1999)  
Chapter 1.08 - OFFICIAL CITY SEALS, LOGOS, INSIGNIAS, BADGES AND NAMES* 
Sections: 
 
1.08.010 - City seal. 
The following symbol with the inscription thereupon constitutes and is adopted as the official seal of the city. 
 
(Ord. 2312 § 1 (part), 2008)  
1.08.020 - City insignia. 
The following symbol with the inscription thereupon constitutes and is adopted as the official insignia of the city. 
 
(Ord. 2312 § 1 (part), 2008)  
1.08.030 - City logo. 
The following symbol with the inscription thereupon constitutes and is adopted as an official logo of the city. 
 
(Ord. 2312 § 1 (part), 2008)  
1.08.040 - City logo. 
The following symbol with the inscription thereupon constitutes and is adopted as an official logo of the city. 
 
(Ord. 2312 § 1 (part), 2008)  
1.08.050 - Official city name adopted. 
The official name for the city shall be the "City of National City," and constitutes and is adopted as the official name for the city. The name "National City" shall also constitute a secondary official name for the city. 
(Ord. 2312 § 1 (part), 2008)  
1.08.060 - Official community development commission of the city of National City name adopted. 
The official name for the community development commission of the community shall be "Community Development Commission of the City of National City," and constitutes and is adopted as the official name for the commission. The name "Community Development Commission" shall also constitute a secondary official name for the community development commission of the community. 
(Ord. 2312 § 1 (part), 2008)  
1.08.065 - Official Successor Agency to the Community Development Commission as the National City Redevelopment Agency name adopted. 
The official name for the Successor Agency to the Community Development Commission as the National City Redevelopment Agency shall be the "Successor Agency to the Community Development Commission as the National City Redevelopment Agency," and hereby constitutes and is adopted as the official name for the Successor Agency to the Community Development Commission as the National City Redevelopment Agency. The name "successor agency" shall also constitute a secondary official name for the Successor Agency to the Community Development Commission as the National City Redevelopment Agency. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2382, § 2, 8-20-2013)  
1.08.070 - Police department badges. 
The following symbols with the inscriptions thereupon constitute and are adopted as the official badges of the police department of the city. 
 
(Ord. 2312 § 1 (part), 2008) 
(Ord. No. 2013-2382, § 3, 8-20-2013)  
1.08.080 - Fire department badges. 
The following symbols with the inscriptions thereupon constitute and are adopted as the official badges of the fire department of the city. 
 
(Ord. 2312 § 1 (part), 2008) 
(Ord. No. 2013-2382, § 3, 8-20-2013)  
1.08.090 - Fire department logo. 
The following symbol with the inscription thereupon constitutes and is adopted as the official logo of the fire department of the city. 
 
(Ord. 2312 § 1 (part), 2008)  
1.08.100 - Violations. 
A.  The city seal, insignia, logo, official name, the community development commission official name and logo, the police department badge, and the fire department badge and logo are for the exclusive use by the city, the community development commission, and their officials and employees, in the course and scope of their official duties. No other persons may use, adopt, alter, or reproduce the city seal, insignia, logo, official name, the community development commission official name and logo, the police department badge, and the fire department badge and logo without the express written authorization of the city manager of the city of National City. 
B.  A violation of any provision of this chapter or a failure to comply with any mandatory requirements of this chapter is subject to prosecution in accordance with Title 1 of the National City Municipal Code and may be enforced through criminal, civil, administrative, injunctive or other relief available by law. Criminal penalties for violations of the provisions of this chapter may result in up to a misdemeanor citation for each day in violation, punishable by a maximum of one year in jail and a one thousand dollar fine. 
(Ord. 2312 § 1 (part), 2008)  
Chapter 1.12 - RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION OR SERVICE OF NOTICES, AND STOP ORDERS 
Sections: 
 
1.12.010 - Right of entry authorized. 
Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this code, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe there exists a public nuisance or code violation in any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the city, any authorized city official or enforcement officer may, upon presentation of proper credentials, enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon him by this code; provided, that except in emergency situations or when consent of the owner and/or occupant to the inspection has been otherwise obtained, the owner and/or occupant, if they can be located after reasonable effort, shall be given twenty-four hours' written notice of the authorized official's intention to inspect. The notice transmitted to the owner and/or occupant shall state that the property owner has the right to refuse entry but that in the event such entry is refused, inspection may thereafter be made upon issuance of a search or inspection warrant by a duly authorized magistrate. In the event the owner and/or occupant refuses entry after such request has been made, the official is empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1822.50 in obtaining an inspection warrant authorizing entry. 
(Ord. 2197 § 1 (part), 2002: Ord. 2140 § 1 (part), 1998: Ord. 1361 § 1, 1973)  
1.12.020 - Entry of public officer for purpose of service or posting of notice of violation or other legal process. 
A.  General. A city official or enforcement officer who is charged by statute, ordinance or regulation with duties to enforce state law or this code is a public officer for purposes of Penal Code Section 148. Penal Code Section 148 makes it unlawful and a misdemeanor to wilfully obstruct, resist or delay a public officer in the discharge of his or her official duties, which includes the service of process or posting of a required notice. 
B.  Any city official or enforcement officer may enter upon that portion of private property to which the public is generally invited for the purposes of service of an official notice of code violation or notice to abate a public nuisance. The city official or enforcement officer is authorized to serve the owner or occupant with the notice upon entry. If the posting of a notice upon real property or a structure is prescribed by law in conformity with procedures for the correction or abatement of a code violation or public nuisance, the city official or enforcement officer is authorized to enter and post the prescribed notice upon the premises. 
(Ord. 2140 § 1 (part), 1998)  
1.12.030 - Stop orders. 
A.  Scope. This section applies to any work, activity, construction, land development, land grading, use of land or conduct of a business for which a permit or license is required. 
B.  Definitions. 
1.  A stop order is a verbal directive, written notice or combination directed to one or more responsible parties to cease and desist immediately from conducting business or performing or allowing work or activity to continue, including without limitation construction, land development or land grading, without having first obtained a required permit or license or from conducting work or activity in a manner that violates the terms and conditions of an issued permit or license or while a required permit or license is suspended or revoked. 
2.  The terms "public nuisance" and "responsible party" are as defined in Section 1.36.010. 
C.  Issuance of Stop Order. A public officer who is charged with the enforcement of the municipal code or state law is hereby authorized to issue a verbal or written stop order. A stop order may be issued to any person who conducts business without a license, conducts business or performs or allows work or activity to occur in violation of law, the municipal code or the terms and conditions of an issued permit or license or who otherwise creates a public nuisance. A verbal stop order shall be followed up as soon as practicable by a written stop order. The written stop order may be in letter format or on cardboard backing suitable for posting on site or any combination of written product sufficient to place each responsible party on notice of a duty to cease and desist from further operations in violation of law. 
In addition to any responsible party, the stop order may be served upon any employee, agent or contractor on site who is performing the work or activity. All work or activity must immediately stop upon the service or posting of the stop order and shall not proceed again until authorized. 
D.  Posting of Stop Order. When practicable one copy of the stop order should be posted conspicuously at the entrance to the business or worksite and an additional copy posted on any structure that has been enjoined from construction. Additional copies should be posted every two hundred feet along the perimeter of a work site consisting of unimproved real property. The failure to post a stop order on site or the unauthorized removal of a posted stop order shall not impair the validity or effect of any stop order issued pursuant to this section. 
E.  Removal Prohibited. Once posted, no stop order shall be removed until a permit is issued or a determination is made by the building official, the city engineer, the finance director or the planning director, as applicable, that a permit or license is not required or the work is consistent with an issued permit. 
F.  Cessation of Work and Remediation. While a stop order is in effect, no responsible person shall authorize, perform or allow an act or omission to occur which directly or indirectly allows the prohibited activity to continue or proceed towards completion, except that debris, construction material and equipment may be removed from the site while the stop order is in effect. The property owner, any contractor on site and any other responsible party may be required and shall be allowed by the stop order to secure the area against danger to the public by erecting barricades or fencing, to fill in any excavation and remove debris or obstructions to pedestrian and vehicle safety or to remediate the site in order to remove a public nuisance. 
G.  Contents of Stop Order. Written stop orders posted on site may utilize an eight and one-half inch by eleven inch cardboard backing against a red background on which will appear the words "Stop Order" in one-inch block letters. In smaller size type, the following information may appear: a description or address of the site, the time and date issued, a notice that it is unlawful and a misdemeanor with a penalty of a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) fine or imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both, to remove the sign or to continue work or business without authority. The stop order shall be signed by or on behalf of the administering official and shall cite this section as authority. A stop order may also be issued in letter format, containing the information above together with any additional directives required for safety or site remediation. Stop orders shall be mailed or personally delivered to each responsible party and may be delivered to any on site contractor. 
H.  Violations and Penalties. 
1.  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person upon whom a stop order is served or who has actual notice of a stop order: 
a.  To continue to conduct business without a license or in violation of the terms and conditions under which the license was issued; 
b.  To perform, authorize or allow work or activity to continue or proceed towards completion without a required permit or in violation of the terms and conditions under which a permit was issued; or 
c.  To fail or refuse to install fencing or barricading, to remove debris and obstructions to pedestrian or vehicle safety or to fill in excavations as may be required by a lawfully issued stop order to remediate or return the site to a safe or non-public nuisance condition. 
2.  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to remove any lawfully posted stop order issued pursuant to this section unless authorized by an enforcement official or responsible public officer. 
3.  Violators are subject to arrest. It shall be the duty of a peace officer to accept the custody of a violator who is arrested pursuant to this section by any public officer who is not a peace officer. Additionally, any implements, animals, equipment or materials utilized in violation of this section may be impounded, and storage or maintenance fees and charges shall be charged against all responsible parties. 
4.  Each day that work, activity or business continues in violation of this section constitutes a separate violation for purposes of criminal prosecution and imposition of administrative penalties to a maximum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day pursuant to Chapter 1.48. Criminal, civil or administrative action under this section shall not bar any criminal, civil or administrative action pertaining to the underlying initial performances of work, business or activity in violation of law. 
(Ord. 2244 § 1, 2004: Ord. 2197 § 1 (part), 2002: Ord. 2151 § 1, 1998: Ord. 2140 § 1 (part), 1998)  
Chapter 1.16 - PRISONERS 
Sections: 
 
1.16.010 - County jail. 
Any prisoner convicted of the violation of any provision of this code in which the penalty may be a jail sentence, and who has been duly sentenced by a court to be imprisoned therefor, may be incarcerated in the county jail instead of in the city jail, if it is so ordered by the court pronouncing the sentence. 
(Ord. 524 § 1, 1923)  
Chapter 1.20 - GENERAL PENALTY 
Sections: 
 
1.20.010 - Designated—Applicability. 
A.  Any person violating any of the mandatory provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of the ordinances of the city is guilty of an infraction, unless by ordinance the violation or failure to comply is made a misdemeanor. The city attorney, in his or her discretion, may upgrade an infraction to a misdemeanor, or reduce a designated misdemeanor to an infraction. An infraction is punishable by (1) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; (3) a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year. A misdemeanor is punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both fine and imprisonment. 
B.  A person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the ordinances of the city is committed, continued or permitted by that person, and be punished accordingly. 
C.  Payment of a fine shall not excuse payment of any fee required by this code or other city ordinance. 
(Ord. 2140 § 2, 1998: Ord. 2100, 1995; Ord. 1883 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1853, 1985; Ord. 1665, 1979; Ord. 1621, 1978: Ord. 1358 § 1, 1973)  
1.20.020 - Violation a public nuisance. 
A.  In addition to the other penalties provided in this code, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by this city, summarily abated and/or enforced by civil action, and each day such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
B.  As part of a civil action filed to enforce provisions of this code, a court may assess, pursuant to Government Code Section 36901, a maximum civil penalty of two thousand five hundred dollars per violation of the municipal code for each day during which any person commits, continues, allows or maintains a violation of any provision of this code. 
C.  During the period of time that a public nuisance exists on real property and a stop order, civil injunction or nuisance abatement proceeding is in effect, no permits or licenses other than those necessary to correct the violation shall be issued or processed on behalf of an applicant who is the owner or occupant of the affected site. 
D.  Maintenance of a public nuisance, if not otherwise punishable by a specific provision of law, is punishable under the provisions of Section 1.36.160. (Ord 2151 § 2, 1998: Ord. 2080 § 1, 1994; Ord. 1868, 1985)  
1.20.030 - Judicial abatement—Special assessment—Lien. 
Pursuant to California Government Code Section 38773, the city has the authority to judicially abate public nuisances by filing criminal or civil actions. The city also has the authority to make the expense of abatement of the nuisance a special assessment, or a lien against the property on which it is maintained and a personal obligation against the property owner, in accordance with California Government Code Section 38773.1 or 38773.5. 
(Ord. 2080 § 2, 1994)  
1.20.040 - Treble damages for subsequent abatement judgments. 
Pursuant to California Government Code Section 38773.7, upon the entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period that finds an owner of property responsible for a condition that may be abated in accordance with California Government Code Section 38773.5, a court may order the owner to pay treble the costs of the abatement. These costs shall not include conditions abated pursuant to Section 17980 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 2080 § 3, 1994)  
Chapter 1.24 - HOLIDAYS 
Sections: 
 
1.24.010 - Holidays named. 
The first day of January, the third Monday in January, the twelfth day of February, the third Monday in February, the thirty-first day of March, the last Monday in May, the fourth day of July, the first Monday in September, the second Monday in October, the twenty-fifth day in December, every Sunday, and every day appointed by the President of the United States for a public fast, thanksgiving, or holiday are declared to be holidays. If any of the days specifically mentioned in this section by day of the month falls upon a Saturday, the Friday preceding is a holiday, and if any of the days specifically mentioned in this section by day of the month falls upon a Sunday, the Monday following is a holiday. The public offices of the city shall not be required to be closed on these holidays, except as required by a day declared by the President to be for a public fast, thanksgiving, or holiday, or as required by the city council by separate resolution or ordinance, or as agreed upon in a city council approved memorandum of understanding between the city and a recognized employee representative bargaining unit. 
If the provisions of this section are in conflict with the provisions of a city council approved memorandum of understanding reached pursuant to Government Code Section 3500, et seq., the memorandum of understanding shall be controlling without further legislative action. 
(Ord. 2314 § 1, 2008: Ord. 1255 (part), 1970; Ord. 1068 § 2, 1963)  
1.24.020 - Weekend holidays. 
If the city council deems it to the best interests of the city it may by resolution duly adopted provide that where any of the days hereinabove specifically mentioned in Section 1.24.010 by day of the month falls upon a Saturday in a given year, the Monday following, instead of the Friday preceding, shall be a holiday; and the council may similarly provide that where any of the days specifically mentioned in Section 1.24.010 by day of the month falls upon a Sunday in a given year, the Friday preceding, instead of the Monday following, shall be a holiday; provided that any such resolution is effective only for the specific holiday and the specific year for which it specifically provides a change. 
(Ord. 1068 § 3, 1963)  
1.24.030 - Variances. 
The city council may, by resolution, declare any city holiday be observed on a day different from the official holiday, if such change is in the best interests of the city. 
(Ord. 1248 (part), 1970)  
Chapter 1.28 - ARREST POWERS 
Sections: 
 
1.28.010 - Code conformance officer or compliance inspector, business license inspector, building inspector, fire chief, battalion chief, fire marshal and fire inspector. 
Any code conformance officer or compliance inspector, business license inspector, building inspector, fire chief, battalion chief, fire marshal, fire inspector and any other officer designated to enforce this code is authorized the powers of arrest and authority to issue citations for those specific ordinances and provisions of the code that they have a duty to enforce, as provided for in Section 836.5 of the California Penal Code. 
(Ord. 2244 § 2, 2004; Ord. 1882, 1986: Ord. 1785, 1982; Ord. 1698, 1979)  
Chapter 1.32 - PERMITS—INSURANCE REQUIREMENT 
Sections: 
 
1.32.010 - Permits—Insurance requirement. 
Prior to the issuance of a building permit, encroachment permit, or any other permit issued by their respective departments, the director of building and safety or city engineer may require an applicant for such a permit to file a certificate of insurance evidencing coverage for bodily injury and property damage liability. The director of building and safety or city engineer are authorized to approve the certificate of insurance both as to form and as to the amount of coverage provided. 
(Ord. 1918, 1987)  
Chapter 1.36 - ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES 
Sections: 
 
1.36.010 - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this chapter: 
A.  "Abatement" means any action the city may take on public or private property and any adjacent property as may be necessary to remove or alleviate a nuisance, including but not limited to demolition, removal, repair, boarding and securing or replacement of property. 
B.  "Abatement notice" means a notice issued by the city manager or his/her designee, or by a department director, which requires a responsible person to abate a public nuisance. 
C.  "Legal interest" means any interest that is represented by a document such as a deed of trust, quitclaim deed, mortgage, judgment lien, tax or assessment lien, mechanic's lien or other similar instrument which is recorded with the county recorder. 
D.  "Person" means any natural person, firm, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business trust, organization or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them or any other entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights or duties. 
E.  "Property owner" means the record owner of real property based on the county assessor's records. 
F.  "Public nuisance" means any condition on or affecting real property: 
1.  That is defined or declared to be a public nuisance in any section of this code; 
2.  That is caused, maintained or permitted to exist in a manner that constitutes a threat to the public's health, safety and welfare or which significantly obstructs, injures or interferes with the reasonable or free use of property in a neighborhood, community or any considerable number of persons; 
3.  That violates a statute or ordinance; or, 
4.  That is contrary to the terms of a judicial or regulatory directive, order or permit issued by a court, a governmental body or a regulatory or public agency. A public nuisance also has the same meaning as set forth in California Civil Code Section 3479. 
G.  "Responsible person" means a person who is designated by the city manager or his/her designee, or by a department director, to be responsible for causing or maintaining a public nuisance upon or affecting real property. The term "responsible person" shall also include but not be limited to a property owner, tenant, or any other person with a legal interest in the affected real property and any person in possession of the affected real property. 
(Ord. 2197 § 2 (part), 2002: Ord. 2081 (part), 1994)  
1.36.020 - Abatement procedures—Authorized. 
A.  Except in cases of emergency as set forth in Section 1.36.180, whenever the city manager or his/her designee, or a department director determines that public or private property, or a condition upon any portion of public or private property is a public nuisance as defined or declared in any section of this code, an abatement notice may be issued to the responsible person to abate the public nuisance. The public nuisance shall be abated by the responsible person within the time frames set forth in the abatement notice, unless a timely appeal is filed in accordance with Section 1.36.050. 
B.  The procedures established in Chapter 15.10 of this code may be utilized for the abatement of dangerous or unsafe nonresidential buildings or substandard residential buildings. 
C.  The procedures set forth in this chapter 1.36 for administrative abatement are in addition to the authority of the city attorney to initiate civil or criminal actions to abate a public nuisance. When judicial action is initiated, the city attorney may seek reimbursement of the city's direct costs for enforcement and abatement, including attorney's fees, personnel salaries and overhead. When applicable, the city attorney may seek restitution from any responsible person for temporary lodging assistance provided by any public agency to displaced tenants, and treble damages when and as allowed by law and this code. Recoveries may be credited to the abatement fund established under section 1.36.190. 
D.  Any building or engineering permit that is issued to correct a public nuisance violation shall not be subject to the normal six-month permit duration and expiration established under Section 15.08.045. An administering official may require corrective work to commence within thirty (30) calendar days following permit issuance and proceed to completion ninety (90) calendar days thereafter, at which time the permit shall expire, unless extended for good cause by the appropriate administering official. The administering official shall notify all responsible parties of the deadline for compliance. Issuance of a permit shall not bar initiation of civil or criminal enforcement proceedings against a responsible party for maintenance of the nuisance by failure to diligently correct the violation. 
E.  A notice of public nuisance should be promptly recorded against real property on which a serious public nuisance exists in order to prevent interim transfer to an unsuspecting purchaser and interference with the abatement process. Recordation should occur as soon as it is evident that the violation cannot or will not be timely or readily corrected. Sale or transfer shall neither extinguish the liability of the transferor responsible for the public nuisance nor any pending enforcement action against that violator, and any transferee, upon notice or later notification, shall become jointly responsible for abatement of the violation against that property. Without limiting the applicability of this subsection, a public nuisance is considered serious when it affects the fire and life safety or structural or habitability condition of a building or violates excavation or land grading requirements. 
(Ord. 2242 § 1, 2004; Ord. 2200 § 1, 2002: Ord. 2140 § 3 (part), 1998: Ord. 2090, 1995: Ord. 2081 (part), 1994)  
1.36.030 - Abatement—Notice. 
The abatement notice shall: 
A.  Be headed "Notice to Abate Public Nuisance;" 
B.  Contain a description of the property on which the public nuisance is located in general terms reasonably sufficient to identify the property; 
C.  Refer to this chapter, to such other relevant portions of this code, and to applicable state laws or regulations, which render the property a public nuisance; 
D.  Describe the action required to abate the public nuisance, which may include without limitation correction, repair, demolition, removal, obtaining the necessary permits, vacation of tenants or other appropriate action and shall establish time frames by which each action must occur; 
E.  Explain the consequences should the responsible person fail to comply with the terms of the notice; 
F.  Identify all applicable hearing and appeal rights. 
(Ord. 2081 (part), 1994)  
1.36.040 - Abatement—Notice—Service. 
A.  The notice required by Section 1.36.020 may be served by any of the following methods: 
1.  Personal service; or 
2.  Certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. Simultaneously, the same notice may be signed and sent by regular mail. If a notice that is sent by certified mail is returned unsigned then service shall be deemed effective pursuant to regular mail, provided the notice that was sent by regular mail is not returned; or 
3.  Posting the notice conspicuously on or in front of the property. 
B.  Service by certified and regular mail in the manner described above shall be to the responsible person's address as indicated on the current assessment roll of the San Diego County assessor. 
C.  Failure of a responsible party to actually receive notice regularly made in conformity with this Section 1.36.040 shall not affect the validity of the notice or the proceedings. 
(Ord. 2140 § 3 (part), 1998: Ord. 2081 (part), 1994)  
1.36.050 - Abatement—Notice—Appeal. 
Within ten days from the date of service of the abatement notice, the responsible person may appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk. Not less than five days nor more than twenty days after an appeal is filed with the city clerk, the city council shall hold a hearing on such appeal. 
(Ord. 2081 (part), 1994)  
1.36.060 - Abatement—Appeal—Hearing. 
A.  At the hearing of the appeal, after the city manager or his/her designee or the department director has presented evidence on the issue, any interested person may state his/her objections and protests and give evidence relative to the alleged public nuisance or the proposed abatement thereof. 
B.  After all such evidence is received and heard, the city council shall determine the issue. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. If it finds and determines that the condition of the property constitutes a public nuisance and that the public nuisance requires abatement, the city council may issue an abatement order requiring such action as it may deem necessary, including, but not limited to, any of the following actions: 
1.  Allow abatement by means of reinstitution of lawful use(s) of the property, including rehabilitation and repair of buildings or structures if necessary, within a stated period of time; or 
2.  Order the nuisance to be abated by removal of the cause thereof, including, if necessary therefor, the demolition and removal of any or all buildings or structures situated on the property, the filling of all excavations, and the excavation or removal of all underground tanks and appurtenances; and 
3.  Revoke any permits or variances that authorized or otherwise pertained to the discontinued use. 
C.  If the city council's abatement order is made pursuant to subsections 1 or 2 of subsection B of this section, the city council may condition its order upon commencement of such abatement within such period of time as the city council may find to be reasonable in the circumstances, and may order that, upon failure of such condition: 
1.  The city manager or his/her designee, or the department director shall abate the nuisance by city personnel, or by awarding a contract for the work of abatement in the name of the city; or 
2.  The city attorney commence an action to enjoin the nuisance. 
(Ord. 2081 (part), 1994)  
1.36.070 - Appeal—Planning commission—Advisory and appeals board. 
A.  In any nuisance abatement action initiated by the planning director, any responsible person who desires to appeal an abatement notice shall file an appeal with the planning commission, in accordance with the procedure set forth in Section 1.36.050. In any nuisance abatement action initiated by the fire chief or by the director of building and safety, any responsible person who desires to appeal an abatement notice shall file an appeal with the advisory and appeals board in accordance with the procedure set forth in Section 1.36.050. 
B.  Where an appeal has been filed with the planning commission or the advisory and appeals board, a hearing shall be held and a decision rendered by the appropriate body as set forth in Section 1.36.060. 
C.  The decision of the planning commission or the advisory and appeals board shall be final, unless within ten days from the date of service upon the responsible person of the decision of the planning commission or the advisory and appeals board pursuant to the procedure set forth in Section 1.36.030, the responsible person files an appeal with the city council. An appeal to the city council shall be initiated by filing a written appeal in accordance with the procedure set forth in Section 1.36.050. Upon such appeal, a hearing shall be held and a decision rendered by the city council as set forth in Section 1.36.060. 
(Ord. 2081 (part), 1994)  
1.36.080 - Abatement by city personnel or city contractor—Report and account. 
A.  If the responsible person fails or neglects to abate the public nuisance within the time frame specified by the city council, or within the time frame specified by the planning commission or the advisory and appeals board when a final decision is made by either of those bodies, the city manager or his/her designee or the department director shall cause the public nuisance to be abated. The abatement work may be done by city personnel or by private contractor. 
B.  City personnel or a private contractor can enter upon private property in a reasonable manner to abate the public nuisance as specified in the abatement notice or abatement order. 
C.  If the responsible person abates the public nuisance before the city performs the actual abatement pursuant to an abatement notice or abatement order, the city may still assess all costs incurred by the city at that point against the responsible person pursuant to the provisions set forth in this chapter. 
D.  When abatement is completed, a report describing the work performed and an itemized account of the total abatement costs shall be prepared by the city manager or his/her designee or by the department director. The report shall contain the names and addresses of the responsible person for each parcel, and the tax assessor's parcel number. 
E.  The city manager or his/her designee or the department director shall request the city clerk to schedule a confirmation of costs hearing pursuant to this chapter, unless waived in writing by all responsible persons. 
F.  All administrative and actual costs incurred by the city in abating the public nuisance may be assessed and recovered against the responsible person pursuant to this chapter. 
G.  Pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.5, attorneys' fees may be awarded to the prevailing party in any administrative or judicial proceeding to abate a public nuisance. If the responsible party is the prevailing party, attorneys' fees shall not exceed the amount of attorney fees incurred by the city in contesting or defending the action. 
H.  Pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.7, treble damages may be requested as part of any court order to abate a public nuisance which was the subject of a previous criminal or civil judgement within the preceding two-year period. 
I.  Any personal property that is useable or that has some utility value and which is removed from the premises as part of an abatement order shall be stored at the expense of the responsible party. The responsible party may reclaim the property within ninety days, but may not return the property to the premises from which it was abated without authorization of the city manager, unless the property is stored within properly conforming storage containers or structures. If the property is not reclaimed after ninety days, a notice shall be directed to the owner or other responsible party that the property will be treated as abandoned property and be disposed of according to Civil Code Section 2080, et seq. 
(Ord. 2151 § 3, 1998: Ord. 2140 § 3 (part), 1998: Ord. 2081 (part), 1994)  
1.36.090 - Abatement—Report and account—Hearing set. 
The city council shall consider the report and account at a public confirmation of costs hearing set for such purpose by the city clerk. Notice of such hearing shall be served at least ten days prior to the hearing upon the responsible person, as determined by the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current. The notice shall be served in the same manner as summons in a civil action in accordance with Article 3 (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. If the responsible person, after diligent search cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county pursuant to Section 6062 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 2081 (part), 1994)  
1.36.100 - Abatement—Report and account—Hearing procedure. 
The city council shall consider the report and account at the time set for the confirmation of costs hearing, together with any objections or protests by the responsible person or other interested persons. The responsible person or other interested persons may present a written or oral protest or objection to the report and account. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall by resolution either approve the report and account as submitted, or as modified or corrected by the city council. The amounts so approved shall be charged as a personal obligation of the responsible person, or collected by the recordation of a nuisance abatement lien against the property, or by placement of a special assessment against the property. 
(Ord. 2081 (part), 1994)  
1.36.110 - Resolution—Service. 
A copy of the resolution required by Section 1.36.100 shall be served on the responsible person, pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 1.36.030, not later than fifteen days after the date of adoption of such resolution. 
(Ord. 2081 (part), 1994)  
1.36.120 - Abatement costs—Collection by nuisance abatement lien or special assessment, or both. 
A.  Any and all costs incurred by the city by reason of involuntary abatement of any condition determined to constitute a public nuisance under this chapter shall be charged against the responsible person. 
B.  If the costs of abatement which are charged against the responsible person are not paid within thirty days of service of the resolution of the city council approving, modifying or correcting the report and account, such costs shall be collected by the recordation of a nuisance abatement lien in the office of the county recorder, or in the alternative, by placement of a special assessment on the property by delivery of a notice of special assessment to the county assessor, or both. Such costs shall also constitute a personal obligation of the property owner. 
(Ord. 2140 § 3 (part), 1998: Ord. 2081 (part), 1994)  
1.36.130 - Recovery of costs by nuisance abatement lien—Procedure. 
A nuisance abatement lien may be recorded against the property pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.1, as follows: 
A.  Prior notice shall be served upon the responsible person of the parcel abated by the city before recordation of the lien. 
B.  Prior notice shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action. 
C.  If the responsible person cannot be found after a diligent search, the notice can be posted on the property for a period of ten calendar days, and the notice shall be published in a general circulation newspaper. 
D.  A nuisance abatement lien shall be recorded by the city clerk in the county recorder's office and from the date of recording shall have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien. 
E.  A nuisance abatement lien shall specify the amount of the lien, the name and address of the responsible city department, the date of the abatement order, the street address, legal description and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel. 
F.  In the event that the nuisance abatement lien is discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the information specified in subsection E of this section shall be recorded by the city. 
G.  A nuisance abatement lien may be foreclosed by an action brought by the city for a money judgment. 
H.  The city may recover from the responsible person any costs incurred regarding the processing and recording of the nuisance abatement lien and providing notice to the property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien. 
(Ord. 2081 (part), 1994)  
1.36.140 - Recovery of costs by special assessment—Procedure. 
A special assessment may be placed against the property pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.5, as follows: 
A.  A notice of special assessment shall be delivered by the city to the county auditor, who shall place it on the county assessment roll. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. 
B.  The notice of special assessment shall include a copy of the resolution of the city council approving, modifying or correcting the report and account as required by Section 1.36.090. The city may record a copy of the notice of special assessment in order to inform any subsequent purchasers of the property concerning the abatement action and resulting costs. 
C.  The city shall file a withdrawal of the notice of special assessment in the event the responsible person pays in full the costs of abatement of the public nuisance. 
(Ord. 2081 (part), 1994)  
1.36.150 - Remedies not exclusive. 
The remedies and procedures set forth in this chapter are not exclusive. The city shall have the power to follow alternative procedures or remedies in accordance with the general law. 
(Ord. 2081 (part), 1994)  
1.36.160 - Nuisance—Penalty. 
Any person who permits, causes, maintains or allows a public nuisance as defined in Section 1.36.010 to occur or exist upon any real property or upon any lot or premises owned, leased, occupied, or controlled by said person or who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable as prescribed in Section 1.20.010. 
(Ord. 2197 § 2 (part), 2002: Ord. 2081 (part), 1994)  
1.36.170 - Appeal—Fee. 
In addition to and apart from any abatement costs collected under this chapter, any responsible person filing an appeal with the planning commission, the board of building appeals, or with the city council, shall pay a nonrefundable fee to the finance department at the time the appeal is filed. The amount of such fee shall be as determined from time to time by resolution of the city council. No additional fee shall be collected for an appeal to the city council, when an initial fee has been paid prior to an appeal to the planning commission or the advisory and appeals board. 
(Ord. 2081 (part), 1994)  
1.36.180 - Immediate action excusing prior notice for purposes of abating dangerous conditions or imminent threat to life-safety. 
The provisions for prior notice and hearing may be dispensed with when, in the opinion of the department director, immediate action is necessary to summarily abate a dangerous condition or an imminent threat to life-safety on public or private property. The director shall take only such immediate action as is reasonably necessary to summarily abate the danger or threat, and shall thereafter comply with Sections 1.36.020 through 1.36.030 regarding notice and hearing to the responsible party(ies) regarding the action taken by the director to summarily abate the condition. The purpose of any hearing will be restricted to affording the responsible party(ies) the opportunity to contest responsibility for the costs of the scope of summary abatement. If further corrective action and abatement is necessary, the director will comply with this Chapter 1.36, and such other sections of the code as may be applicable regarding further corrective action and abatement in due course. 
(Ord. 2140 § 3 (part), 1998)  
1.36.190 - Abatement fund. 
The city manager is authorized to establish and administer a public nuisance abatement fund to be used for public nuisance abatement. Revenues from collections and fines for public nuisance violations, nuisance abatement liens, nuisance abatement assessments and administrative citations (Chapter 1.44), administrative remedies (Chapter 1.48), and any related revenues shall be credited to that fund. Surplus in excess of anticipated needs shall be returned to the general fund. Permissible expenditures from the abatement fund include departmental reimbursement for personnel and direct and overhead costs in administering city and contract public nuisance abatement programs. 
(Ord. 2140 § 3 (part), 1998)  
Chapter 1.40 - CLAIMS FOR MONEY, DAMAGES OR REFUNDS OF MONEY 
Sections: 
 
1.40.010 - Claims for money, damages or refunds of money. 
A.  Claims Required. All claims against the city for money or damages not otherwise governed by the Government Claims Act, California Government Code Sections 900 et seq., or another state law (hereinafter in this section, "claims") shall be presented within the time, and in the manner, prescribed by Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the California Government Code (commencing with Section 900 thereof) for the claims to which that part applies by its own terms, as those provisions now exist or shall hereafter be amended, and as further provided by this ordinance. No order of a refund may be made until a written claim therefore has been presented to the city in accordance with this section. In accordance with California Government Code Sections 935(b) and 945.6, no suit for money, damages or a refund may be brought against the city until a written claim has been presented to the city council and has been acted upon or has been deemed to be rejected by the city council. No suit for money, damages or a refund may be maintained by a person who has not complied with the requirements of this section. Only the person who filed the claim may bring such a suit, and if another person should do so, judgment shall not be rendered for the plaintiff. 
B.  Form of Claim. All claims shall be made in writing and verified by the claimant or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator. All claims shall contain the information required by California Government Code Section 910. The foregoing reference to Government Code Section 910 shall not be construed to authorize a class claim, and no claim may be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless verified by every member of that class. 
C.  Claim Prerequisite to Suit. In accordance with California Government Code Sections 935(b) and 945.6, all claims shall be presented as provided in this section and acted upon by the city prior to the filing of any action on such claims, and no such action may be maintained by a person who has not complied with the requirements of this section. 
D.  Suit. Any action brought against the city upon any claim or demand shall conform to the requirements of Sections 940-949 of the California Government Code. Any action brought against any employee of the city shall conform with the requirements of Section 950-951 of the California Government Code. 
(Ord. 2103, 1996) 
(Ord. No. 2011-2369, § 1, 11-1-2011)  
Chapter 1.41 - COST RECOVERY FOR CODE ENFORCEMENT AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE SERVICES 
Sections: 
 
1.41.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The city of National City provides services to the community funded through the General Fund by tax revenues. Reimbursement may be sought for the increased costs of providing such services, whenever practicable, from parties who, by reason of neglect or malfeasance, cause incidents requiring police, fire and rescue services, or cause increased costs to the city for gaining compliance with municipal ordinances. Cost recovery is a mechanism whereby these costs may be levied upon responsible parties, rather than the taxpayers of National City. To accomplish this, the city of National City hereby establishes an omnibus cost recovery procedure in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2242 § 2 (part), 2004)  
1.41.020 - Administration. 
The administration of this chapter is under the direction of the city manager and, by delegation, the finance director. Each department director is responsible for tracking costs associated with cost recovery for mailers under their respective cognizance and forwarding cost recovery invoices to the finance director. The procedures set out in this chapter should be followed, as appropriate, without further council direction. 
(Ord. 2242 § 2 (part), 2004)  
1.41.030 - Definitions. 
"Actual cost(s)" includes applicable city charges for personnel salaries and overhead costs as contained in the National City Fee Schedule. 
"Expense of an emergency response" means the costs incurred by the city of National City in making an appropriate emergency response to an incident defined in Section 1.41.040. It consists of all costs directly arising because of the particular incident, including, but not limited to the actual costs of providing police, firefighting, hazardous material management, rescue and emergency medical services at the scene of the incident, as well as the actual salaries and fringe benefits of the personnel responding to the incident. Recoverable costs also include the actual costs for damage or destruction to city of National City property, any utility or service charges to the city from other public agencies resulting from the incident, and the actual cost of medical treatment for any city personnel injured during the response. 
"Intentionally wrongful conduct" means conduct intended to injure another person or property. 
"Responsible party" or "responsible person" within Chapter 1.41 means any person: 
A.  Who, by law is liable or made responsible for the payment to a governmental agency of its costs and expenses in providing police, fire, rescue and related emergency services; 
B.  Whose negligent or intentionally wrongful conduct proximately causes an incident affecting public health or safety which necessitates an emergency response or rescue effort by a governmental agency to deal with or prevent injury to persons or damage to property; 
C.  Any person who is indebted to the city by virtue of a duty, charge, tax or revenue imposed by law or ordinance; and 
D.  Any person defined in Section 1.36.010. If a responsible party is a minor, the parent or guardian of that minor shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for the expense of an emergency response, as allowed by law. 
(Ord. 2242 § 2 (part), 2004)  
1.41.040 - Emergency response cost recovery. 
A.  Cost recovery to recover the actual expenses of an emergency response or personnel injury from a responsible party may be initiated under the following situations: 
1.  Pursuant to Government Code Section 53150 et seq., each person who is under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or any drug, or their combined influence, and whose negligent operation of a motor vehicle, boat, vessel, or aircraft caused by that influence proximately causes any incident resulting in an emergency response, or whose intentionally wrongful conduct proximately causes any incident resulting in an emergency response shall be liable to the city for the expense of that emergency response, not to exceed one thousand dollars pursuant to Government Code Section 53155, or any higher amount as may from time to time be established by law. 
2.  The expense of an emergency response for the containment, confinement and/or mitigation of a hazardous substance or materiel release or threat pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 13009.6. 
3.  The expense of an emergency response for fire suppression activity from a responsible party for the intentional setting of fire or the spread of fire to adjoining properties, or for fire suppression costs on occupied or mortgaged property against which a current, uncorrected notice of violation of a fire hazard has been issued pursuant to Health and Safety Code Sections 13009 and 13009.1. 
4.  The costs of second and subsequent police responses pursuant to Chapter 10.46 from responsible parties for organizing and failing to maintain an orderly event on private property in compliance with law. 
5.  The expense of an emergency response for the rescue or medical treatment, or both, of persons placed in jeopardy or injured by the negligence or intentionally wrongful conduct of a responsible party. 
6.  The expenses for injury to public safety personnel authorized pursuant to Civil Code Section 1714.9 or Labor Code Section 3852, or for damage to public property. Any limitation on liability under Government Code Section 53155 noted in subsection (A)(1) shall not apply to any separate recovery for damage to public property or injury to city personnel which was directly or proximately caused by the acts or omissions of a responsible party. 
B.  The director of finance shall charge the expense of an emergency response to each responsible party based on cost data submitted by a department director. The charge constitutes a debt to the city of National City, and may be collected by the city in the same manner as in the case of an obligation to a municipality under a contract, expressed or implied. 
(Ord. 2242 § 2 (part), 2004)  
1.41.050 - Cost recovery for reinspection services for code enforcement and public nuisance abatement on real property. 
A.  Reinspection fees may be assessed as follows: 
1.  Reinspection fees may be charged to a responsible party for each subsequent reinspection and all succeeding reinspections for code violations which are not brought into compliance by the first regularly scheduled inspection after a notice of violation or administrative citation is issued by any building inspector, fire inspector or code compliance officer. Reinspection fees shall not be charged when the violation is brought into compliance prior to the first regularly scheduled inspection, or any authorized extension of that first inspection. 
2.  The initial notice of violation or administrative citation shall advise each responsible party that reinspection fees may be charged for each subsequent reinspection if the violation is not corrected prior to the first regularly scheduled inspection following issuance of the notice of violation or administrative citation. 
3.  Reinspection fees shall be based upon the average hourly salary rate and overhead for inspection services, computed on a one hour minimum charge for each reinspection. Reinspection fees may be posted in the National City Fee Schedule. 
4.  Depending on the seriousness of the violation, a minimum period for compliance may be prescribed and allowed for the first inspection following issuance of the notice of violation or administrative citation. Except for building code violations or conditions affecting immediate fire and life safety, the correction period shall not be less than ten days, nor exceed thirty days. Building code violations shall allow for a thirty-day correction period. Conditions affecting immediate fire or life safety concerns may require an immediate shutdown of the premises, or the affected portion if feasible, until correction is made, coupled with a defined period for compliance and reinspection, not to exceed thirty days. 
5.  Payment of reinspection fees shall not bar any criminal, civil or administrative action or penalty applicable to the violation. 
B.  The city attorney is authorized to seek restitution from responsible parties against whom civil, criminal, or administrative action is initiated for public nuisance abatement. Restitution shall be based on the full, direct costs of abatement services, and the average hourly salary rates and overhead of all enforcement personnel involved in the abatement process, as reflected in the National City Fee Schedule. Direct costs shall also include costs for legal services, based on actual billings for legal services or, when performed by the city attorney, the charge's for comparable, customary hourly attorney fees charged in San Diego County. 
C.  Upon prior notice to a responsible party, cost recovery for the full costs of abatement of a public nuisance may also be accomplished through an assessment lien adopted by resolution of the city council and filed with the county assessor against the real property interests of that responsible party. 
(Ord. 2242 § 2 (part), 2004)  
1.41.060 - Recordation and release of notices of violation. 
A.  After the issuance of a notice of violation or administrative citation affecting the use or occupancy of real property, a notice of violation may be recorded with the county recorder as an existing public nuisance against that property in the real property records of the County of San Diego as soon as it is determined that compliance is not forthcoming, or that the condition is serious enough to warrant immediate action. Normally, recordation should not precede the date of the first inspection set out in the notice of violation or administrative citation, except for serious violations. Without limiting the applicability of this subsection, a public nuisance may be considered serious when it affects the fire and life safety or structural or habitability condition of a building or violates excavation or land grading requirements. The property owner shall be given ten calendar days' advance notice of the intention to record and an opportunity to show why the recordation of the violation should not be made, before the violation may be recorded against that owner's property interest. Unless successfully protested, the violation shall thereafter be promptly recorded. Procedures for any requested hearing and related action are outlined in Chapter 1.42. 
B.  Once the violation against the property is corrected and any costs of abatement have been recovered, the city manager or designate shall promptly execute a Notice of Correction releasing the prior public nuisance recordation and deliver it to the property owner for recording. No fee shall be charged for issuing the release, nor shall the city be responsible for recording the release. 
(Ord. 2242 § 2 (part), 2004)  
1.41.070 - Withholding of licenses or permits for indebtedness to city related to use of property. 
A.  Except for those permits necessary to correct code violations, any business or residential rental tax license, development permit or building permit may be withheld or final inspection be postponed until payment to the city of any indebtedness for delinquent taxes, fees or sewer charges applicable to the use of the property for which the indebtedness was incurred. Processing may continue after all delinquencies are paid or a written agreement is executed with the finance director to pay the delinquencies and any interest and penalties due in monthly installments, or more often, over a period not to exceed one year. 
B.  The execution of an agreement under subsection A shall not excuse previously accrued penalties or interest against the account, but additional penalties or interest may not accrue on amounts included in the agreement while the debtor is not in breach of the agreement. If, however, a default in payment occurs, then the additional penalties and interest may reattach back to the date of execution of the agreement and shall become due and payable; any permit that was issued in reliance on the agreement shall be suspended or revoked pending full payment of the indebtedness, except to the extent necessary to allow correction of existing violations. 
(Ord. 2242 § 2 (part), 2004)  
1.41.080 - Collection. 
A.  Whenever charges for cost recovery are not paid within a reasonable time following demand, the director of finance and the city attorney, as applicable, are authorized to prosecute the claim to judgment in an appropriate court with jurisdiction and to take any other action appropriate for collection without further direction from the city council after demand has been refused. The council shall be notified when litigation is initiated. 
B.  The city attorney is authorized to collect any amounts due by civil or administrative action or both, together with all costs incurred in the collection of that indebtedness after demand for payment has been refused. Costs for legal services shall be based on actual billings for legal services or, when performed by the city attorney, the charges for comparable and customary hourly attorney fees charged in San Diego County. 
C.  Recovery of costs for emergency response is in addition to any separate right of the city to recover costs and damages from a responsible party whose negligence or wrongful conduct causes damage or injury to public property or personnel, or both, pursuant to Civil Code Section 1714.9 or Labor Code Section 3852. 
D.  Cost recovery may also be initiated by means of an assessment lien adopted by the city council upon prior notice to a responsible party for the costs of nuisance abatement or the amount of an administrative citation or administrative penalty issued against or pertaining to the real property which is the subject of the associated enforcement action. 
(Ord. 2242 § 2 (part), 2004)  
1.41.090 - Effect of criminal or civil proceedings on cost recovery or permit issuance. 
The initiation of administrative or civil proceedings for cost recovery does not bar the criminal prosecution of a responsible party for the associated violation. Similarly, criminal prosecution does not bar administrative or civil collection for cost recovery for the violation giving rise to the criminal prosecution. The existence of an issued permit shall not bar civil or criminal enforcement proceedings when corrective work under that permit is not proceeding diligently to completion. 
(Ord. 2242 § 2 (part), 2004)  
Chapter 1.42 - ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROCEDURE AND PROCESS 
Sections: 
 
1.42.010 - Purpose and intent. 
These procedures may be used to supplement or substitute for any administrative hearing or hearing procedure prescribed elsewhere in this code, except those required under Title 18 for land use hearings and appeals. The requirements and procedures of this chapter are applicable to administrative procedures and hearings regarding the denial, modification, suspension or revocation of a permit, license or entitlement. The procedures under this chapter may be used to substitute for administrative hearing procedures that are prescribed for the abatement of a public nuisance, the imposition of an administrative fine or penalty, or an administrative appeals procedure. Except for proceedings under Title 18, this authority includes, but is not limited to, the procedures as set forth in Chapters 1.36, 1.41, 1.44, 1.48, 6.04, 7.32, 8.16, 10.70 or Title 15. The procedures of this chapter shall not displace any requirement in those chapters regarding the deposit of any fine or penalty prescribed as a precondition of the administrative review process. 
(Ord. 2242 § 3 (part), 2004)  
1.42.020 - Administrative process. 
A.  Notice pursuant to Section 1.42.030 shall be served upon any responsible party or any party whose permit, license or entitlement has been denied or is to be suspended or revoked, or against whom nuisance abatement action, administrative citation or administrative penalty action is proposed. The party shall be allowed ten calendar days after notification to request an administrative hearing to appeal or contest the proposed action before it will become final. Unless waived by the city manager, the deposit of any fines or penalties is required. The proposed action or order by the city manager, department director or designate becomes final and conclusive if not appealed or contested within that time. 
B.  Except for actions affecting immediate fire and life safety concerns, the proposed action or order shall be stayed only for the duration of any time allotted for requesting an appeal, and, if appealed, shall be stayed until the review by the city manager of a decision by a hearing examiner pursuant to Section 1.42.020(F). Conditions affecting immediate fire and life safety may be summarily abated by city or contract forces, but only to the extent that the action taken is limited to removing only that condition or portion thereof that affects or constitutes an immediate fire or life safety concern. Other aspects of the nuisance condition that are not of an immediate concern shall be subject to due course abatement process. 
C.  Upon the filing of a request for a hearing or appeal, a hearing examiner shall be chosen by the parties, who shall be neutral and unbiased as to the matter in contention. Experience in the subject area is preferred but not a prerequisite. The city shall maintain a panel of candidates available to serve as hearing examiners for the administrative hearings. The enforcement officer or other designated city representative and the aggrieved party shall select a hearing examiner from the list by alternatively striking names from the panel list, beginning with the aggrieved party. The city and the aggrieved party may share the cost of the hearing examiner, or if the aggrieved party chooses, the city will pay the full cost of the hearing examiner if requested by the aggrieved party in writing prior to the hearing. 
The hearing should occur not later than sixty days from the time of the request for administrative hearing filed by the aggrieved party, unless waived by the city and the aggrieved party. 
D.  The hearing examiner shall notify the appellant of the time and place for the hearing in accordance with Section 1.42.030, allowing a minimum of ten calendar days before the hearing is to be held. 
E.  The hearing examiner shall conduct the administrative hearing in accordance with Section 1.42.040. Written findings affirming or denying the action appealed from shall be issued within fifteen calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing to all parties, unless the appeal or request for hearing is withdrawn by the requesting party. The hearing examiner may recommend conditions and deadlines for corrective action and may further recommend modification of the action below, or reduction, waiver or conditional suspension of any fines or penalties proposed, when, based upon the evidence, the hearing examiner concludes that such action is most likely to bring about compliance with the proposed order. The findings or recommendations may not contradict any provision of law or this code. 
F.  The hearing examiner's decision shall be based upon findings supported by substantial evidence. Substantial evidence is established when the weight of the evidence supporting the existence of a fact or event in contention has the more convincing force, when balanced against the evidence opposing the existence of the same fact or event in contention. 
G.  Except where a hearing examiner's findings are contrary to the evidence, law or procedure, a final order shall be issued by the city manager approving the hearing examiner's findings governing the proposed action. The city manager may disapprove or modify the examiner's findings and recommendations and issue a final order that is consistent with the evidence, law or procedure. 
H.  The date of mailing of the final order by the city manager to the party by first class mail, with certificate of service attached, shall constitute the date of exhaustion of administrative remedy. The final order shall advise the party that it has ninety calendar days from that date pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6 to file for a writ of mandamus or other applicable judicial review in superior court, twenty calendar days pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4 if the decision imposes an administrative penalty, fine or charge under Chapter 1.44 or 1.48, or five days following a vicious dog determination under Food and Agricultural Code Section 31622. Until a timely request for judicial review is filed, enforcement of the final order shall proceed in due course. 
I.  A party may request a transcript, if prepared, or be provided a copy of any tape recording of the proceedings, if made, upon payment of the costs of preparation or duplication. 
(Ord. 2277 § 1, 2005; Ord. 2242 § 3 (part), 2004)  
1.42.030 - Service of notices or orders. 
A.  Except as provided in Section 1.42.030(D), any notice required to be given under this code for the enforcement of a proposed order or for hearing or appeal purposes may be served upon the responsible party by any of the following methods, and a proof of service be kept in the file: 
1.  Personal service; or 
2.  Delivery by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. Simultaneously, a duplicate notice shall be sent by regular first class mail, postage prepaid, with return address on the outside envelope. If the notice sent by certified mail is returned unsigned, refused or marked as undeliverable, service shall be deemed effective pursuant to service of the duplicate notice sent by regular mail, provided that the duplicate notice sent by regular mail was also not returned as undeliverable. The notice shall advise the party that receipt of either notification constitutes service. Notice shall be mailed to the last address shown on the county tax assessor's records if the notice concerns real property, and to the last known address of a party to other proceedings as shown in official records of the city of National City; or 
3.  Posting the notice or order conspicuously on or in front of the property, together with delivery of the notice or order by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the party and a copy of the notice or order being left with any adult resident at the property. 
B.  Posting of a notice or service by certified mail and duplicate service by regular mail described in subsection (A)(2) or (A)(3) above shall be effective ten calendar days after mailing or posting. Personal service is effective upon service. 
C.  The service of an initial notice of violation need only be sent by regular mail. The above procedures are not required, but may be used when appropriate circumstances so indicate. Service of a notice of violation by regular mail is effective on the date of mailing. 
D.  Service of notice through which a lien will be placed upon real property by city council action will be in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Sections 415.10, 415.20, 415.30 or 415.40 if the responsible party resides out of state. 
E.  Proof of service of any notice required by this code may be made by certificate or affidavit of an officer or employee of this city or by affidavit of any person over the age of eighteen years. The proof of service shall show that service was done in conformity with this code and any other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. 
F.  The failure of any party or person with an interest in the property or the proceeding to actually receive any notice served in accordance with this section shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter. 
(Ord. 2242 § 3 (part), 2004)  
1.42.040 - Administrative hearing procedure. 
An administrative hearing before a hearing examiner should be conducted substantially in accordance with the following procedures: 
A.  The hearing examiner shall control the proceedings, take witness testimony under oath or affirmation, and determine the weight and credibility of the evidence and testimony. The hearing should be conducted in a civil, prompt and businesslike manner. Disruptive behavior shall not be allowed, and an abusive or disorderly party may forfeit the right to be present during any part of the proceedings when, after appropriate warning, the behavior persists. 
B.  Each party shall have the following rights: to be present throughout the proceeding; to be represented by legal counsel or other representative; to call and examine witnesses; to introduce evidence; to cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues even though the matter was not covered in direct examination; to impeach a witness; and to testify in his or her own behalf. A party may be called as a witness by the other party and be examined as if under cross-examination. 
C.  Except as noted in this subsection, the formal rules of evidence and procedure shall not apply to the hearing. Any relevant evidence may be admissible if it is the sort of evidence upon which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence but may not be sufficient by itself to support a finding unless it would also be admissible over objection in civil actions. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence should be excluded, and collateral or irrelevant inquiry may be limited by the hearing examiner. 
D.  The hearing examiner may require the proponent of testimony to be offered by a witness who does not speak the English language proficiently to provide an interpreter. The hearing examiner shall determine whether the interpreter is proficient in the English language and the language in which the witness will testify. The payment of costs for an interpreter is upon the party providing the interpreter. 
E.  The proponent for a department director may call witnesses and may introduce into evidence an administrative record which clearly demonstrates: a) the condition(s), act(s) or omission(s) upon which the proposed action is based or which establishes the responsibility of the party for the act or event; b) the regulatory authority for the proposed action; c) technical or factual data supporting the proposed action; and d) any other information or data relevant to the proposed action. An administrative record certified by a director which meets these criteria may constitute prima facie evidence in support of the proposed action. The burden of going forward may then shift to the opposing party, who may then cross-examine on the basis of the administrative record and call witnesses appropriate to aid in its examination of the administrative record. The opposing party and the director may call any additional witnesses and introduce any additional evidence appropriate for opposition, defense, excusal or mitigation of the proposed action. 
F.  The hearing may be continued from time to time upon request of a party to the hearing upon a showing of good cause. 
G.  Failure of a responsible party or applicant to appear at a scheduled hearing shall constitute a waiver of the hearing by that party and shall result in a denial of the relief sought. That determination shall be administratively final and conclusive and shall constitute the failure to exhaust administrative remedy on the part of the responsible party or applicant. 
H.  Failure to follow the procedures outlined above shall not invalidate the proceedings, findings or recommendations of the hearing examiner, unless the omission constitutes a denial of administrative due process, in which case a new administrative hearing may be ordered by the city manager before another hearing examiner. 
I.  Appeal proceedings under Chapter 1.44 to contest an administrative citation may proceed as informally as necessary to ensure a fair hearing. The above procedures may be used to supplement the informal proceedings prescribed in that chapter. 
(Ord. 2242 § 3 (part), 2004)  
Chapter 1.44 - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.44.010 - Applicability. 
A.  This chapter provides for administrative citations which are in addition to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, which may be pursued by the city to address any violation of this code and bring about compliance. 
B.  The administrative citations process set forth in this chapter may be utilized for compliance efforts to correct noncontinuing or continuing violations of this code, such as those that pertain to licensing, animal control, minor building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, fire, grading or zoning violations, subject to the provisions of Section 1.44.030D. 
C.  Use of this chapter or determination of what constitutes a minor violation shall be at the sole discretion of the city official charged with responsibility for enforcement of the particular code. 
(Ord. 2242 § 4 (part), 2004; Ord. 2140 § 3 (part), 1998: Ord. 2121 (part), 1996)  
1.44.020 - Enforcement officer defined. 
For purposes of this chapter, "enforcement officer" means any public officer, city employee or agent of the city with the authority by statute, ordinance or regulation to enforce any provision of this code. 
(Ord. 2140 § 3 (part), 1998: Ord. 2121 (part), 1996)  
1.44.030 - Administrative citation. 
A.  Whenever an enforcement officer determines that a violation has occurred, the enforcement officer shall have the authority to issue an administrative citation to any person responsible for the violation. 
B.  An administrative citation should provide the following information whenever possible: 
1.  The date of the violation; 
2.  The identity of the responsible person (owner, tenant, etc.), if available; 
3.  The address or a definite description of the location where the violation occurred; 
4.  The section of this code violated and a description of the violation; 
5.  The amount of the fine for the code violation; 
6.  A description of the fine payment process, including a description of the time within which and the place to which the fine shall be paid; 
7.  An order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the code violation described in the administrative citation; 
8.  A description of the administrative citation review process, including the time within which the administrative citation may be contested and directions on how to contest the administrative citation may be obtained; 
9.  A statement that the property will be reinspected for compliance, and reinspection fees charged for each reinspection thereafter; and 
10.  The name and signature of the citing enforcement officer. The signature of the responsible party may be requested but is not necessary. If refused, the issuing officer may note this fact. 
C.  The administrative citation may, but need not, be signed by the person responsible for the violation. 
D.  The following procedures will apply in issuing administrative citations for minor code violations of a continuing nature, such as building, plumbing, mechanical, grading, zoning, fire or electrical code: 
1.  First, a notice of violation shall be issued allowing a minimum period for voluntary compliance and reinspection at no charge for particular violation(s). Except for building code violations or conditions affecting immediate fire and life safety, the correction period should not be less than ten days nor exceed thirty days. Building code violations shall allow for a thirty-day correction period. If conditions affecting immediate fire or life safety concerns require an immediate shutdown of the premises, or any affected portion if feasible, until correction is made, the citation shall establish a defined period for compliance and reinspection not to exceed thirty days. However, under this circumstance, a separate order to stop work or vacate the premises may be required. 
2.  If, upon reinspection, voluntary compliance is not obtained and the condition(s) not satisfactorily corrected, an administrative citation may then be issued which addresses all remaining violations collectively, imposes a fine and establishes a further date for compliance and reinspection. A maximum of fifteen days may be allowed. Reinspection fees are chargeable at this point. 
3.  A second or subsequent administrative citation may be issued and a further fine and reinspection fee be imposed if, upon subsequent reinspection, compliance has not been obtained for the particular violation(s) cited under a preceding administrative citation. 
4.  If compliance is obtained after an administrative citation is issued and the same or similar violation occurs again, an administrative citation and assessment of the penalty applicable to a second violation may be issued instead. 
E.  An administrative citation may be used for code violations that are not of a continuing nature but may be characterized as a single event or occurrence, such as animal control violations, dumping, pollution or littering, without prior issuance of a notice of violation where the issuing officer concluded that enforcement action, rather than a verbal warning, is warranted. 
(Ord. 2242 § 4 (part), 2004; Ord. 2140 § 3 (part), 1998: Ord. 2121 (part), 1996)  
1.44.040 - Method of service. 
A.  The administrative citation and all notices required to be given under this chapter shall be served on the person charged in the citation by any of the following methods: 
1.  Personal service; or 
2.  Certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. Simultaneously, the same notice may be signed and sent by regular mail. If a notice that is sent by certified mail is returned unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective pursuant to regular mail, provided the notice that was sent by regular mail is not returned; or 
3.  Posting the notice conspicuously on or in front of the property, and mailing a copy to the property owner or other responsible party. 
B.  Service by certified and regular mail in the manner described above shall be effective on the date of mailing. Service by mail shall be to the responsible person's address as indicated on the current assessment roll of the San Diego County assessor. 
C.  Failure of a responsible party to actually receive notice regularly made in conformity with this Section 1.44.040 shall not affect the validity of the notice or the proceedings. 
(Ord. 2242 § 4 (part), 2004; Ord. 2140 § 3 (part), 1998: Ord. 2121 (part), 1996)  
1.44.050 - Amount of fines. 
The following fines shall be imposed for each separate violation of the same code section: 
A.  One hundred dollars for a first violation; 
B.  Two hundred dollars for a second violation within the same year; and 
C.  Five hundred dollars for each additional violation in the same year. 
(Ord. 2121 (part), 1996)  
1.44.060 - Payment of the fine. 
A.  The fine shall be paid to the city within thirty days from the date of administrative citation. 
B.  Any administrative citation fine paid pursuant to subsection A of this section shall be refunded in accordance with Section 1.44.100 if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person charged in the administrative citation was not responsible for the violation or that there was no violation as charged in the administrative citation. 
C.  Payment of a fine under this chapter shall not excuse or discharge any continuation or repeated occurrence of the code violation that is the subject of the administrative citation. 
(Ord. 2121 (part), 1996)  
1.44.070 - Hearing request. 
A.  Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was not a violation of the code or that he or she is not the responsible person by requesting a hearing with the city department specified on the administrative citation within thirty days from the date of the administrative citation, together with an advance deposit of the fine. 
B.  The request for hearing may be made via the administrative citation form in the space provided for such action. 
C.  The person requesting the hearing shall be notified by the department of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. 
D.  If the enforcement officer submits an additional written report concerning the administrative citation to the hearing officer for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of this report also shall be served on the person requesting the hearing at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. 2242 § 4 (part), 2004; Ord. 2121 (part), 1996)  
1.44.080 - Hearing officer. 
Upon the filing of a request for a hearing of an administrative citation, a hearing officer shall be chosen by the parties, who shall be neutral and unbiased as to the matter in contention. Experience in the subject area is preferred but not a prerequisite. The city shall maintain a panel of candidates available to serve as hearing officers for the administrative citation hearings. The enforcement officer or other designated city representative and the aggrieved party shall select a hearing officer from the list by alternatively striking names from the panel list, beginning with the aggrieved party. The city and the aggrieved party may share the cost of the hearing officer, or if the aggrieved party chooses, the city will pay the full cost of the hearing officer, if requested by the aggrieved party in writing prior to the hearing. 
The hearing should occur not later than sixty days from the time of the request for administrative hearing filed by the aggrieved party, unless waived by the city and the aggrieved party. 
(Ord. 2277 § 2, 2005: Ord. 2242 § 4 (part), 2004; Ord. 2121 (part), 1996)  
1.44.090 - Hearing procedure. 
A.  Before a hearing to contest an administrative citation is held, the fine must be deposited in advance in accordance with Section 1.44.060. 
B.  A hearing before the hearing officer shall be set for a date that is not less than fifteen days and not more than forty-five days from the date that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  At the hearing, the party contesting the administrative citation shall be given the opportunity to testify and to present evidence concerning the administrative citation. 
D.  The failure of any recipient of an administrative citation to appear at the administrative citation hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine and the exhaustion of his/her administrative remedies. 
E.  The administrative citation and any additional report submitted by the enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. 
F.  The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the enforcement officer or the recipient of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision. 
(Ord. 2140 § 3 (part), 1998: Ord. 2121 (part), 1996)  
1.44.100 - Hearing officer's decision. 
A.  After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision to uphold or cancel the administrative citation and shall list in the decision the reasons for that decision. The decision of the hearing officer shall be administratively final and constitutes the exhaustion of administrative remedy. Unless appealed to the superior court as provided by statute (see Section 1.44.120), the fine and any reinspection fee imposed by the administrative citation is final. 
B.  If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, then the fine amount on deposit with the city shall be retained by the city. 
C.  If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be canceled, then the city shall promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine, together with interest at the average rate earned on the city's portfolio for the period of time that the fine amount was held by the city. 
D.  The recipient of the administrative citation shall be served with a copy of the hearing officer's written decision. 
E.  The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of the hearing officer shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the amount of administrative citation fines upheld by the hearing officer. 
(Ord. 2242 § 4 (part), 2004; Ord. 2121 (part), 1996)  
1.44.110 - Recovery of administrative citation fines and costs. 
Any past due administrative citation fine or late payment charge may be collected by any available legal means. The finance director is primarily responsible for collecting fines and reinspection fees. The city attorney is authorized to file civil process before the superior court to enforce collection. 
(Ord. 2242 § 4 (part), 2004; Ord. 2121 (part), 1996)  
1.44.120 - Right to judicial review. 
Any person aggrieved by an administrative decision of a hearing officer on an administrative citation may obtain review of the administrative decision by filing an appeal to be heard with the San Diego County superior court within twenty days upon payment of the filing fee in accordance with the timelines and provisions as set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4. Unless appealed within that time, the fine is final. 
(Ord. 2242 § 4 (part), 2004; Ord. 2121 (part), 1996)  
Chapter 1.48 - ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES 
Sections: 
 
1.48.010 - Applicability. 
A.  This chapter provides for administrative remedies, which are in addition to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, which may be pursued by the city to address any violation of this code. 
B.  Use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city. 
(Ord. 2122 (part), 1996)  
1.48.020 - Director and authority—Defined. 
For purposes of this chapter, "director" means the head of any city department or his/her designee, who is charged with responsibility for enforcement of any provision of this code. A director has the authority to record notices of violation against real property on which violations are determined to exist. 
(Ord. 2140 § 4 (part), 1998: Ord. 2122 (part), 1996)  
1.48.030 - Compliance order. 
A.  Whenever the director determines that a violation of any provision of this code within the director's responsibility is occurring or exists, the director may issue a written compliance order to any person responsible for the violation. 
B.  A compliance order issued pursuant to this chapter shall contain the following information: 
1.  The date and location of the violation; 
2.  The identity of the responsible party, if known or available; 
3.  The section of this code violated and a description of the violation; 
4.  The actions required to correct the violation; 
5.  That a notice of violation may be recorded in the real property records of the county of San Diego if compliance with the order is not achieved; 
6.  The time period after which administrative penalties will begin to accrue if compliance with the order has not been achieved; 
7.  A statement that the failure to appeal or request a hearing within the times prescribed constitutes a waiver of the right to a hearing and renders the notice of compliance a final order; 
8.  Either a copy of this chapter or an explanation of the consequences of noncompliance with this chapter and a description of the hearing procedure and appeal process. 
C.  The compliance order need not be signed by the person responsible for the violation. 
(Ord. 2140 § 4 (part), 1998: Ord. 2122 (part), 1996)  
1.48.040 - Method of service. 
A.  The compliance order and all notices required to be given under this chapter shall be served by any of the following methods: 
1.  Personal service; or 
2.  Certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. Simultaneously, the same notice may be signed and sent by regular mail. If a notice sent by certified mail is returned unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective pursuant to regular mail, provided the notice that was sent by regular mail is not returned; or 
3.  Posting the notice conspicuously on or in front of the property. 
B.  Service by certified and regular mail in the manner described above shall be effective on the date of mailing if directed to the responsible person's address as indicated on the current assessment roll of the San Diego County assessor. 
C.  Failure of a responsible party to actually receive notice made in conformity with this Section 1.48.040 shall not affect the validity of the notice or proceedings. 
(Ord. 2140 § 4 (part), 1998: Ord. 2122 (part), 1996)  
1.48.050 - Hearing—Review board—Planning commission or advisory and appeals board. 
In any case where a compliance order is issued by the planning director, and a hearing is to be held on such compliance order, the hearing shall be held and a decision rendered by the planning commission; in any case where a compliance order is issued by the fire chief, the director of building and safety, the city engineer or the director of public works, and a hearing is to be held on such compliance order, the hearing shall be held and a decision rendered by the advisory and appeals board. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "review board" refers to either the planning commission or the advisory and appeals board, as appropriate. In any case where a hearing is held before the review board pursuant to this chapter, the director of the city department which issues the compliance order shall serve as the secretary of the review board. If the review board cannot meet within the prescribed time, then the city council shall act as the review board, in which case the decision shall be final and constitute the exhaustion of administrative remedy. 
(Ord. 2140 § 4 (part), 1998: Ord. 2122 (part), 1996)  
1.48.060 - Hearing. 
A.  If the director determines that all violations have been corrected within the time specified in the compliance order, no further action shall be taken. 
B.  If full compliance is not achieved within the time specified in the compliance order, the director shall advise the secretary to the review board to set a hearing before the board. 
(Ord. 2122 (part), 1996)  
1.48.070 - Hearing—Notice—Scheduling—Purpose. 
A.  The secretary to the review board shall cause a written notice of hearing to be served on the person responsible for the violation, and, where real property is involved, a notice of hearing shall be served on the property owner at the address as it appears on the last equalized county assessment roll available on the date the notice is prepared. 
B.  Every notice of hearing on a compliance order shall contain the date, time and place at which the hearing shall be conducted by the review board. 
C.  Each hearing shall be set for a date not less than fifteen days nor more than forty-five days from the date of service of the notice of hearing unless the director determines that the matter is urgent or that good cause exists for an extension of time. 
D.  The purpose of the hearing is to provide the full opportunity for a person subject to a compliance order to object to the determination that a violation has occurred and/or that the violation has continued to exist, or that the person served with the compliance order is the person responsible for the violation. The failure of any person subject to a compliance order, pursuant to this chapter, to appear at the hearing shall constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. 
(Ord. 2122 (part), 1996)  
1.48.080 - Hearing—Procedures. 
A.  At the place and time set forth in the notice of hearing, the review board shall conduct a hearing on the compliance order issued pursuant to Section 1.48.030. 
B.  At said hearing, after the director and any representatives of the city have presented evidence pertaining to the compliance order, the person responsible for the violation, the property owner, and any interested person may present evidence on the issue. 
(Ord. 2122 (part), 1996)  
1.48.090 - Administrative order. 
A.  Within a reasonable time after all evidence is received and the hearing is concluded, the review board shall render a decision, which shall be set forth in a written administrative order. 
B.  The administrative order shall contain findings on the following issues with respect to each violation: 
1.  The existence of the violation; 
2.  The failure of the person responsible for the violation to take corrective action within the required time period set forth in the compliance order. 
C.  The finding of the review board shall be supported by evidence received at the hearing. 
D.  If the review board finds that no violation has occurred or that the violation was corrected within the time period specified in the compliance order, the administrative order shall contain a finding of those facts. 
E.  If the review board finds that a violation has occurred, that the violation was not corrected within the time period specified in the compliance order, and that the person responsible for the violation was named in the compliance order, the administrative order shall contain a finding of those facts, and shall impose any or all of the following: 
1.  An order to correct and to record notice of violation with the county recorder, if appropriate, including a schedule for correction where appropriate; 
2.  Administrative penalties as provided in Section 1.48.100; 
3.  Administrative costs as provided in Section 1.48.110. 
F.  The administrative order shall be served upon the person responsible for the violation pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 1.48.040. 
(Ord. 2140 § 4 (part), 1998; Ord. 2122 (part), 1996)  
1.48.100 - Administrative penalties. 
A.  In any case where violation of this code would otherwise constitute a misdemeanor, the review board may impose administrative penalties for such violation in an amount not to exceed a maximum of one thousand dollars per day for each ongoing violation, except that the total administrative penalty shall not exceed one hundred thousand dollars exclusive of administrative costs, interest and restitution for compliance reinspections, for any related series of violations. 
B.  In any case where violation of this code would otherwise constitute an infraction, the review board may impose administrative penalties for such violation as follows: 
1.  One hundred dollars for a first violation; 
2.  Two hundred dollars for a second violation within the same year; and 
3.  Five hundred dollars for each additional violation in the same year. 
C.  In determining the amount of the administrative penalty, the board may take any or all of the following factors into consideration: 
1.  The duration of the violation; 
2.  The frequency, recurrence and number of violations, related or unrelated, by the same violator; 
3.  The seriousness of the violation; 
4.  The good faith efforts of the violator to come into compliance; 
5.  The economic impact of the penalty on the violator; 
6.  The impact of the violation on the community; 
7.  Such other factors as justice may require. 
D.  Administrative penalties imposed by the appeals board shall accrue from the date specified in the compliance order and shall cease to accrue on the date the violation is corrected as determined by the Director or the review board. 
E.  The review board, in its discretion, may suspend the imposition of applicable penalties for any period of time during which: 
1.  The violator has filed for necessary permits; and 
2.  Such permits are required to achieve compliance; and 
3.  Such permit applications are actively pending before the city, state or other appropriate governmental agency. 
F.  Administrative penalties assessed by the review board are due by the date specified in the administrative order. 
G.  Administrative penalties assessed by the review board are a debt owed to the city and, in addition to all other means of enforcement, if the violation is located on real property, may be enforced by means of a lien against the real property on which the violation occurred. 
H.  If the violation is not corrected as specified in the review board's order to correct, administrative penalties shall continue to accrue on a daily basis until the violation is corrected, subject to the maximum amount set forth in subsections A and B of this section. 
I.  If the violator gives written notice to the director that the violation has been corrected and if the director finds that compliance has been achieved, the director shall deem the date the written notice was postmarked or personally delivered to the director or the date of the final inspection, whichever first occurred, to be the date the violation was corrected. If no written notice is provided to the director, the violation will be deemed corrected on the date of the final inspection. 
J.  The director will record a notice of correction with the county recorder when the violation has been corrected, and will record a release of lien when satisfied. 
(Ord. 2140 § 4 (part), 1998: Ord. 2122 (part), 1996)  
1.48.110 - Administrative costs. 
A.  The review board shall assess administrative costs against the violator when it finds that a violation has occurred and that compliance has not been achieved within the time specified in the compliance order. 
B.  The administrative costs may include any and all costs incurred by the city in connection with the matter before the review board including but not limited to, costs of investigation, staffing costs incurred in preparation for the hearing and for the hearing itself, and costs for all reinspections necessary to enforce the compliance order. 
(Ord. 2122 (part), 1996)  
1.48.120 - Failure to comply with administrative order. 
Failure to pay the assessed administrative penalties and administrative costs specified in the Administrative order of the review board may be enforced as: 
A.  A personal obligation of the violator; and/or 
B.  If the violation is in connection with real property, a lien upon the real property. The lien shall remain in effect until all of the administrative penalties, interest and administrative costs are paid in full. 
(Ord. 2122 (part), 1996)  
1.48.130 - Right of judicial review. 
The administrative order is final, unless appealed. Any person aggrieved by an administrative order of the review board may obtain judicial review of the administrative order by filing an appeal within the timelines and provisions set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4. 
(Ord. 2140 § 4 (part), 1998: Ord. 2122 (part), 1996)  
1.48.140 - Recovery of administrative civil penalties. 
The city may collect the assessed administrative civil penalties and administrative costs by use of all available legal means, including recordation of a lien pursuant to Section 1.48.170. 
(Ord. 2122 (part), 1996)  
1.48.150 - Report of compliance after administrative order. 
If the director determines that compliance has been achieved after a compliance order has been sustained by the review board, the director shall file a report indicating that compliance has been achieved, and shall record a notice of compliance in the real property records if the notice of violation was recorded. 
(Ord. 2140 § 4 (part), 1998: Ord. 2122 (part), 1996)  
1.48.160 - Compliance dispute. 
A.  If the director does not or refuses to file a report pursuant to Section 1.48.150 above, a violator who believes that compliance has been achieved may request a compliance hearing with the secretary to the board. 
B.  The hearing shall be noticed and conducted in the same manner as a hearing on a compliance order provided in Section 1.48.050 through 1.48.090 of this chapter, except that no fees shall be required. 
C.  The review board shall determine if compliance has been achieved and, if so, when it was achieved. 
(Ord. 2140 § 4 (part), 1998: Ord. 2122 (part), 1996)  
1.48.170 - Lien procedure. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any administrative penalty and/or administrative cost imposed by the review board pursuant to this chapter in connection with real property has not been satisfied in full within ninety days of service of the administrative order, and/or has not been successfully challenged by a timely appeal to the municipal court, this obligation may constitute a lien against the real property on which the violation occurred. 
B.  The lien provided herein shall have no force and effect until recorded with the county recorder. Once recorded, the administrative order shall have the force and effect and priority of a judgment lien governed by the provisions of Section 697.340 of the Code of Civil Procedure and may be extended as provided in Sections 683.110 to 683.220, inclusive, of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
C.  Interest shall accrue on the principal amount of the judgment remaining unsatisfied pursuant to law. 
D.  Prior to recording any such lien, the director of finance shall prepare and file with the city clerk a report stating the amounts due and owing. 
E.  The city clerk shall fix a time, date and place for hearing such report and any protests or objections thereto by city council. 
F.  The director of finance shall cause written notice to be served on the property owner not less than ten days prior to the time set for the hearing. Such notice shall be served as provided in Section 1.48.040.  
1.48.180 - Public hearing and protests. 
A.  Any person whose real property is subject to a lien pursuant to Section 1.48.170 may file a written protest with the city clerk and/or may protest orally at the city council meeting. 
B.  Each written protest or objection must contain a description of the property in which the protesting party is interested and the grounds of such protest or objection. 
C.  The city council, after the hearing, shall adopt a resolution confirming, discharging or modifying the amount of the lien. 
(Ord. 2122 (part), 1996)  
1.48.190 - Recording of lien. 
Thirty days following the adoption of a resolution by the city council imposing a lien, the city clerk shall file the same as a judgment lien in the office of the county recorder of San Diego County. The lien may carry such additional administrative charges as set forth by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2122 (part), 1996)  
1.48.200 - Satisfaction of lien. 
Once payment in full is received by the city for outstanding penalties and costs, the director of finance shall either record a notice of satisfaction or provide the property owner or financial institution with a notice of satisfaction so they may record this notice with the office of the county recorder. Such notice of satisfaction shall cancel the city's lien. 
(Ord. 2122 (part), 1996)  
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
Chapters:  
Chapter 2.01 - CITY MANAGER* 
 
2.01.010 - Office created—Qualifications. 
A.  The office of city manager is established. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications, and shall hold office during the pleasure of the city council. No person elected to membership on the city council shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed following the expiration of the last term for which he was elected. 
B.  During the absence or disability of the city manager the council may designate some properly qualified person to perform the duties of the office of city manager. 
(Ord. 782 § 1, 1950)  
2.01.020 - Powers—Duties. 
The city manager shall be the administrative head of the city government under the direction and control of the council, except as otherwise provided by ordinance. The city manager shall be responsible to the city council for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under the city manager's control. In addition to the city manager's general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be the duty and the city manager shall have power: 
A.  To see that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced; 
B.  To employ, discipline or remove all heads of departments and all subordinate officers and employees of the city, to transfer employees from one department to another; and to consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments, or units under the city manager's jurisdiction with the approval of the city council in each instance. Nothing contained in this chapter shall apply, however, to the city clerk, city attorney, or city treasurer; 
C.  To exercise control over all departments and divisions of the city government and over all appointive officers and employees thereof subject to the approval of the city council, except as provided in this chapter; 
D.  To attend all meetings of the council and its committees unless excused therefrom by the council or the committee and except when the removal of the city manager is under consideration by the council; 
E.  To recommend to the council for adoption such measures and ordinances are deemed necessary or expedient; 
F.  To keep the city council at all times advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the city; 
G.  To prepare and submit to the city council the annual budget; 
H.  To prepare and recommend to the city council a salary plan; 
I.  To purchase all supplies for all of the departments or divisions, and no expenditure shall be submitted or recommended to the city council, except from report or approval of the city manager. The city manager may delegate the provisions of this subsection; 
J.  To make investigations into the affairs of the city or any department or division thereof or any contract, or the proper performance of any obligation running to the city; 
K.  To investigate all complaints in relation to all matters concerning the administration of the government of the city and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the city, and to see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed; 
L.  To exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, streets and other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the city council; 
M.  To prepare and submit to the city council an organization chart showing the organization plan for all departments of the city government; 
N.  To issue on behalf of the council all licenses and permits not otherwise provided for by ordinance; 
O.  To superintend the construction of all public work within the city; 
P.  To develop and organize accessory public improvement projects and assist the city council and the various departments in carrying the same through to successful conclusion; 
Q.  To serve as public relations officer of the city government and to follow through and endeavor to adjust all just complaints filed against any employee, department, division, or service thereof; 
R.  To make and keep up to date an inventory of all property, real and personal, owned by the city; 
S.  To receive and open all mail addressed to the city council and give immediate attention thereto to the end that all administrative business referred to in such communications and not necessarily requiring councilmanic action, may be disposed of between council meetings; providing that all actions taken pursuant to such communications shall be reported to the city council at its next meeting thereafter; 
T.  To approve, execute and issue all contracts and agreements or amendments thereto in an amount not to exceed fifty thousand dollars, except as otherwise provided by ordinance or resolution, and to delegate that authority; 
U.  To reject claims and demands against the city and, with the concurrence of the city attorney to approve, settle or compromise such claims and demands in amounts not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars except for the settlement of workers' compensation settlements provided for in this chapter; 
V.  To approve change orders for previously authorized procurements of supplies and equipment, professional services agreements and public works contracts in amounts not exceeding an aggregate of twenty-five percent over the original authorized contract price or fifty thousand dollars, whichever is greater, without prior city council approval, and to delegate such authority; 
W.  To serve as executive director and secretary of the community development commission of the City of National City, and to delegate that authority; 
X.  To approve, settle, or compromise workers' compensation awards, and to delegate that authority, as follows: (i) in amounts not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars for discretionary comprise and release settlements and discretionary stipulations with request for awards; (ii) in amounts not to exceed fifty thousand dollars for non-discretionary compromise and release settlements; and (iii) all non-discretionary stipulations with request for awards. 
(Ord. 2288, 2006; Ord. 2281, 2006; Ord. 2263, 2005: Ord. 1479 (part), 1975; Ord. 885 § 1, 1955: Ord. 782 § 2, 1950) 
(Ord. No. 2010-2333, 3-16-2010; Ord. No. 2015-2406, 9-15-2015)  
2.01.030 - Intermediary role. 
Except for the purpose of inquiry, the city council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city manager, and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the city manager. 
(Ord. 885 § 2, 1955: Ord. 782 § 3, 1950)  
2.01.040 - Compensation. 
The city manager shall receive such salary as the city council shall from time to time determine and fix by resolution or motion. 
(Ord. 782 § 4, 1950)  
Chapter 2.04 - CITY COUNCIL 
 
2.04.010 - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the city council shall be held in the Civic Center, on the first and third Tuesday of each and every month at the hour of six p.m., beginning with the third Tuesday after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. 
(Ord. 2185, 2001: Ord. 2101, 1996: Ord. 1740 § 1, 1981)  
2.04.020 - Dispensing with meetings. 
In the event that the time of a regular meeting of the city council falls on a holiday or election day, no meeting will be held that week. Any regular meeting may be dispensed with by a vote of the city council. 
(Ord. 1740 § 2, 1981)  
Chapter 2.08 - REMOVAL OF APPOINTIVE OFFICERS 
 
2.08.010 - Scope. 
The provisions of this chapter apply only to city officers who are appointed directly by the city council. Nothing in this chapter affects members of the competitive service. 
(Ord. 1075 § 1, 1963)  
2.08.020 - Removal requirements. 
An appointed city officer who is not in the competitive service shall be removed from office only upon an affirmative vote by three members of the city council in regular meeting, subject, however, to the provisions of the next succeeding sections. In case of his intended removal by the city council, a city officer shall be furnished with a written notice stating the council's intention to remove him and the reason therefor, at least thirty days before the effective date of his removal. 
(Ord. 1075 § 2, 1963)  
2.08.030 - Hearing. 
Within seven days after the delivery to the officer of such notice, he may by written notification to the city clerk, request a hearing before the city council. Thereafter, the city council shall fix a time within thirty days for the hearing which shall be held at its usual meeting place. The officer shall appear at the hearing and may be accompanied by counsel. 
(Ord. 1075 § 3, 1963)  
2.08.040 - Suspension pending hearing. 
After furnishing a city officer with written notice of intended removal, the city council may suspend him from duty, but his compensation shall continue until his removal by resolution of the council passed subsequent to the aforesaid hearing. 
(Ord. 1075 § 4, 1963)  
2.08.050 - Discretion of council. 
In removing a city officer, the city council shall use its uncontrolled discretion and its action shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearing. The purpose of the hearing is to allow the officer affected to present to the city council his grounds of opposition to his removal prior to the council taking final action. 
(Ord. 1075 § 5, 1963)  
2.08.060 - Limitation on removal. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, a city officer shall not be removed from office during or within a period of ninety days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the city at which election a member of the city council is elected. The purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected member of the city council or reorganized city council to observe the actions and ability of city officers in the performance of their powers and duties of office. After the expiration of said ninety day period, the provisions of Section 2.08.050 as to the removal of said city officers shall apply. 
(Ord. 1075 § 6, 1963)  
Chapter 2.10 - AMBULANCES* 
 
2.10.010 - Intent. 
It is the intent of this chapter to ensure that efficient and effective emergency and non-emergency ambulance services are available within the city by the establishment of a competitively awarded single-provider ambulance system for the city. 
(Ord. 1921 (part), 1987)  
2.10.020 - Selection of operator. 
The fire chief shall, from time to time, establish policies for selection and designation of an ambulance service operator. Any and all ambulance service operators not so selected and designated are hereby prohibited from engaging in such work within the city. 
(Ord. 1921 (part), 1987)  
2.10.030 - Request for proposals. 
The fire chief shall prepare a request for proposal which identifies the city's needs, expectations of service, and specific performance standards. After consideration and evaluation of proposals submitted by all interested ambulance service operators, the city council may award the ambulance service operator who in the judgment of the city council best meets the city's needs, a contract for services. The city council shall reserve the right in its sole discretion to reject any and all proposals. 
(Ord. 1921 (part), 1987)  
2.10.040 - Scope of service. 
The selected operator shall perform according to the following general standards, in addition to those specified in a request for proposal and/or contract: 
A.  Meet or exceed all state and county standards for staffing, equipment and vehicles, and prehospital emergency medical care; 
B.  Respond to all emergency calls for service within the city as requested by the city or its agent with advanced life support capabilities; 
C.  Respond to all requests for emergency, and non-emergency medical care and transportation services; 
D.  Respond to all calls for transportation and/or medical care services from the general public without regard to patient's ability to pay; 
E.  Manage its resources so as to provide emergency and non-emergency ambulance services to all parts of the city in accordance with performance guidelines and/or criteria; 
F.  Established rates by contract and approved by the city council shall apply to services rendered within the city's jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 1921 (part), 1987)  
2.10.050 - Violation. 
Violation of any provision of this chapter by an ambulance service operator shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 1921 (part), 1987)  
2.10.060 - Rate schedule. 
The operator designated as the ambulance service operator pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall submit a rate schedule in conjunction with its proposal which shall be strictly adhered to and shall not be changed or modified during the term of the contract without the approval of the city council. Said rate schedule shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk. Said rates shall not exceed the rates prevailing in the county for similar type delivery systems. 
The rate schedule shall provide a schedule for the general public on a fee-for-service basis, and additional schedules in order to specify rates for services eligible for reimbursement under private, county, state or federal medical care programs which require unusual or specific types of services depending upon level of services required. (Example being: interhospital transfers, intracity transfers, or guaranteed payment by hospitals, nursing homes, or other medical facilities). 
(Ord. 1921 (part), 1987)  
2.10.070 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases are defined: 
A.  "Ambulance" means a vehicle constructed, modified or equipped, and used for the purpose of transporting sick, injured, convalescent, infirm or otherwise incapacitated persons. 
B.  "Ambulance service" means the activity, business or service, for hire, profit, or otherwise, of transporting one or more persons by ambulance within the city. 
The following exceptions shall not apply to this definition and shall not be within the scope of this chapter: 
1.  Ambulance services provided by an employer for his or her own employees; 
2.  Ambulance services operated or provided by another local, state or federal agency; 
3.  Ambulance services involving pickup of persons from locations outside of the city and delivery to locations within the city; 
4.  Ambulance services rendered under mutual aid agreements in cases of disaster or major emergencies. 
C.  "Ambulance service operator" means any person(s) or entity which operates or owns an ambulance service. 
(Ord. 1921 (part), 1987)  
2.10.080 - Complaints. 
The city or any person who believes, or has reason to believe, that he or another party has been required to pay an excessive charge for services, or received inadequate services, or services not in compliance with local, county, or state regulations, may file a written complaint with the fire chief setting forth such allegations. The fire chief shall notify the ambulance service operator of such complaint in writing, and the ambulance service operator shall file a written response with the fire chief within fifteen calendar days after receipt of notification. 
(Ord. 1921 (part), 1987)  
Chapter 2.12 - FIRE DEPARTMENT 
 
2.12.010 - Created. 
There is created a fire department in and for the city. 
(Ord. 649 § 2, 1937)  
2.12.020 - Composition. 
The fire department shall consist of one chief engineer, one assistant chief engineer, and such battalion chiefs, officers and members as may be required from time to time, who shall be provided by the city council. The salary of the chief engineer shall be fixed by the city council at the same time, and in the same manner as the salaries of all officers are fixed and determined. 
(Ord. 649 § 3, 1937)  
2.12.030 - Retention of members. 
All active officers, members and employees of the fire department at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter takes effect shall be retained as members of the National City fire department, and shall only be removed for cause as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 649 § 4, 1937)  
2.12.040 - Chief—Duties—Authority. 
The fire department shall be under the management of the chief and his successors in office, subject to the approval of the city council. Said chief shall organize the department, and shall organize when he may deem it necessary a department of fire prevention. The chief engineer shall be chief executive officer of such department. Said chief shall create and establish such fire companies as he deems necessary, prescribe the number and duties of the officers and employees of the department and the uniform and badges to be worn by them, have control of the property and equipment of the department and exercise full power and authority over all appropriations made for the use of the department, subject to the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. 649 § 5, 1937)  
2.12.050 - Membership—Requirements. 
All persons appointed to positions in the department must at the time of their appointment be citizens of the United States, not less than twenty-one nor more than thirty-one years of age, of good character and sobriety, and able to read and write English; all officers down to the grade of lieutenant must have been residents of the city at least one year next preceding the date of their appointment; they must pass a mental and physical examination under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the chief, and must, upon such examination, be found in sound bodily health. 
(Ord. 649 § 6, 1937)  
2.12.060 - Religion—Political affiliation. 
No officer, member or employee of the fire department shall be appointed or removed because of his religious or political opinion, except that political activity may be cause for suspension or removal. 
(Ord. 649 § 7, 1937)  
2.12.070 - Membership—Dismissal. 
No officer, member or employee of the fire department shall be dismissed by the city council, except for cause, nor until he has had a hearing before the chief of the department. In case of charges preferred against the chief of the fire department, they shall be heard before the city council, and if said charges be sustained, he may be removed by a two-thirds vote of the entire council. The accused shall be furnished with a written copy of the charges against him at least three days before his trial, and shall have the right to appear in person or by counsel and examine witnesses in his behalf. 
(Ord. 649 § 8, 1937)  
2.12.080 - Regulations—Suspension of members. 
The chief of the fire department shall provide rules and regulations for the government of the department and provide penalties for the violation of the same. The chief may suspend any member of the department, for a term not to exceed thirty days, where, in his judgment, such suspension is necessary for the good of the service. 
(Ord. 649 § 9, 1937)  
2.12.090 - Chief—Appointment—Leave of absence. 
In case of a vacancy, the city council shall appoint a chief engineer. The chief engineer shall be charged with a special duty of superintending the extinguishing of fires. The chief engineer shall be the chief executive officer of the fire department, fire marshal, superintendent of the fire alarm and telegraph systems, and it shall be his duty and that of the assistant chiefs to see that all laws, rules and regulations of the city, made by the chief and city council, under the jurisdiction of the fire department are enforced. The city council may grant such leave of absence with full pay not to exceed one year, to any fireman who has contracted sickness or disability in the line of duty. The chief of the fire department may require the said fireman to report for duty upon satisfactory proof that the said fireman is able to perform his duty. The chief of the fire department may grant such leave of absence not to exceed thirty days with full pay, or for other reasons, a leave of absence of thirty days, without pay, subject to approval of the city council. 
(Ord. 649 § 10, 1937)  
2.12.100 - Chief—Reports to council. 
The chief engineer may suspend any subordinate officer, member or employee of the fire department for incompetence, or for any violation of the rules and regulations of the fire department, and shall forthwith report in writing such suspension, with his reasons therefor, to the city council for its action. He shall diligently observe the condition of the apparatus and workings of the department, and report in writing thereon at least once a month to the city council and make such recommendations and suggestions respecting the same as he deems proper. In the absence or inability of the chief engineer, the assistant chief engineer shall perform his duties. 
(Ord. 649 § 11, 1937)  
2.12.110 - Fire fighting—Authority. 
The chief engineer, or in his absence, the assistant chief engineer, or in their absence, any battalion chief in charge, may, during a conflagration, cause to be cut down or otherwise removed, any buildings or structures for the purpose of checking the progress of such conflagration, and shall have authority to board any vessel attached to, or alongside of, any wharf or pier within the city limits of the San Diego Bay, provided such vessel is on fire and a menace to life and property, and if in his judgment it shall be necessary to remove such vessel from such wharf or pier or other vessels, he shall have authority to do so. 
(Ord. 649 § 12, 1937)  
Chapter 2.16 - FINANCE DEPARTMENT 
 
2.16.010 - Created—Purpose. 
In order to establish a central agency for the uniform processing and development of all fiscal, accounting, licensing and budgetary functions within the city government, there is established a department of finance. 
(Ord. 1185 (part), 1967 NCC 1631)  
2.16.020 - Director—Office created. 
The office of director of finance is created and established as the head of the finance department. The director of finance should be the chief accounting officer of the city and shall consolidate all accounting matters of the city in this office, as an entirely separate and distinct entity from all other departments. 
(Ord. 1185 (part), 1967 NCC 1631.1)  
2.16.030 - Director—Qualifications. 
The director of finance shall be qualified by sufficient professional and technical accounting training, skill, and experience. He shall show evidence of public administration training and executive ability. 
(Ord. 1185 (part), 1967 NCC 1631.2)  
2.16.040 - Director—Appointment. 
The office shall be appointive; the director of finance shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(Ord. 1185 (part), 1967 NCC 1631.3)  
2.16.050 - Director—Bond. 
The director of finance shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the city council, in such sum as may be determined by the city council and shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of the duties imposed on the director of finance as described in this chapter, provided that such bond shall be at least equal to the bond required of the city clerk under the provisions of Government Code Section 36518. The cost of securing such bond shall be a proper charge upon the city. 
(Ord. 1185 (part), 1967 NCC 1631.4)  
2.16.060 - Director—Compensation. 
The city finance director shall receive such compensation as the city council from time to time determines and fixes by budget or resolution, and said compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the city council designates. 
(Ord. 1185 (part), 1967 NCC 1631.5)  
2.16.070 - Director—Eligibility. 
Residence in the city is not deemed a necessary qualification for appointment to this office. 
(Ord. 1185 (part), 1967 NCC 1631.6)  
2.16.080 - Director—Absence. 
Should the director of finance be absent or disabled, the city manager shall designate a temporary acting director of finance. 
(Ord. 1185 (part), 1967 NCC 1631.7)  
2.16.090 - Director—Powers—Duties— Responsibilities. 
The director of finance, as chief fiscal officer of the city under the direction and control of the city manager, shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all fiscal and accounting functions of the city. All of the duties, responsibilities and authority imposed upon the city clerk as chief accounting officer for the city are hereby transferred to and imposed upon the director of finance. 
(Ord. 1185 (part), 1967 NCC 1631.8)  
2.16.100 - Director—Enumerated duties. 
The director of finance shall be vested and charged with the following duties and responsibilities: 
A.  Assist and advise the city manager and city council in all matters pertaining to city finance; 
B.  Supervise and control all personnel in the finance office; 
C.  Maintain and operate the general accounting system of the city and of each of the respective departments, divisions and services thereof. He shall prescribe the accounting and bookkeeping procedure that may now or hereafter be established or in operation in any department; 
D.  Perform such accounting functions and duties in accordance with the latest and most modern accounting methods as the science of accounting progresses; 
E.  Supervise the keeping of current inventories of all property of the city by all city departments, offices and agencies; 
F.  Assume, maintain and perform all functions and duties as the city council may now or hereafter prescribe by ordinance relating to the administration of taxes, licenses, and permit fees levied or charged by the city and for the collection thereof; 
G.  Assume and perform all duties relating to the preparation, preauditing, presenting, and disbursement of claims, warrants, invoices, payrolls, demands or other charges against the city government and with the advice of the city attorney when necessary, determine the regularity, legality and correctness of such claims, demands or charges to insure the budget appropriations are not exceeded; 
H.  Assist in the purchase of all services, supplies, goods, wares, merchandise, equipment and material which may be required by the city; 
I.  Assist in the preparation of the annual budget and in the administration thereof as the city manager directs; 
J.  Perform cost accounting as directed by the city manager; 
K.  Assist the city manager and the city council in formulating a long range financial plan and program; 
L.  Develop and prescribe forms and procedures of all other departments which pertain to revenue, receipts or expenditures in any manner; 
M.  Have the right to audit the accounting functions performed by all other departments and divisions of the city; 
N.  Prepare financial statements and statistical reports; submit to the city council through the city manager a monthly statement of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the city; and as of the end of each fiscal year, submit a complete financial statement and report; 
O.  Perform such additional duties and functions as may be hereafter prescribed or required by the city council or the city manager. 
(Ord. 1185 (part), 1967 NCC 1631.9)  
2.16.110 - Director—Duties—Transfer. 
The director of finance shall perform all the financial and accounting duties heretofore imposed upon the city clerk, and the city clerk shall be, and he is, relieved of all such duties, including all such duties imposed upon the city clerk by Sections 37200 through 37210 inclusive of the Government Code of the state. 
(Ord. 1185 (part), 1967 NCC 1631.10)  
Chapter 2.20 - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH 
 
2.20.010 - Health officer designated. 
The city manager is appointed the health officer. 
(Ord. 1364 (part), 1973)  
2.20.020 - Board of health designated. 
The city council is designated as the board of health. 
(Ord. 1364 (part), 1973)  
2.20.030 - County contracts authorized. 
The city manager is authorized and directed to contract with the county for health services. 
(Ord. 1364 (part), 1973)  
Chapter 2.36 - OFFICERS' SALARIES 
 
2.36.010 - Designated. 
The city council shall by resolution prescribe the time and method of paying salaries and wages of the officers and employees of the city. 
(Ord. 817 § 2, 1951)  
Chapter 2.42 - DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS CITY PROPERTY 
 
2.42.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Surplus city property" means supplies or equipment belonging to the city which are no longer used or which have become obsolete or worn out or which are otherwise of no further use. 
B.  "Immediate family" means the husband, wife, mother and father of both husband and wife, son, daughter, brother and sister of the employee, or any relative by blood or marriage residing in the same household. 
(Ord. 1673 § 1 (part), 1979)  
2.42.020 - Duty to report surplus equipment and supplies. 
All using agencies shall submit to the purchasing agent, at such times and in such forms as prescribed, reports listing all available surplus city property. The purchasing agent shall have authority to exchange for, or trade in, such property on new supplies and equipment in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 1673 § 1 (part), 1979)  
2.42.030 - Disposal required. 
The purchasing agent shall determine if any surplus city property can be used by any agency of the city. If such supplies or equipment cannot be used or are unsuitable for city use, the purchasing agent shall, in the manner provided in this chapter, dispose of such supplies and equipment that cannot be exchanged for or traded in on new equipment or supplies. 
(Ord. 1673 § 1 (part), 1979)  
2.42.040 - Manner of disposal. 
A.  If the surplus city property which is not required for city use has been assigned an estimated market value of less than one thousand dollars by the purchasing agent, he/she may dispose of such property on the open market without advertising for bids. 
B.  If the surplus city property which is not required for city use has been assigned an estimated market value of one thousand dollars or more by the purchasing agent, he/she shall dispose of the property: 
1.  Through the solicitation of sealed bids, with the award going to the highest responsive, responsible bidder. All notices shall be published by the purchasing agent in a commercially reasonable manner, using any appropriate mediums of printed or electronic commerce which, in the opinion of the purchasing agent, are reasonably likely to ensure an optimum bidding process; 
2.  Through participation in the San Diego County cooperative auction; 
3.  Through consignment of items to a vendor to sell on behalf of the city. The purchasing agent shall enter into an agreement with the vendor that has the potential of generating the most market interest and, therefor, the highest net proceeds for the city. The consignment vendor shall, at its expense, advertise the item(s) for sale, in accordance with subsection (B)(1) of this section, and shall accept offers on behalf of the city, with the city having final acceptance authority; 
4.  Through a negotiated agreement with another public agency, public safety organization, government agency or other nonprofit agency which may have limited funds, and an expressed need for such item(s). 
C.  The purchasing agent shall have the authority to combine any surplus city property with lost and unclaimed property for the purpose of disposal by public auction in accordance with Chapter 2.44 of this title. 
D.  The amount received for any property sold pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in the city's general fund. 
(Ord. 2284, 2006: Ord. 2044, 1992; Ord. 1673 § 1 (part), 1979)  
2.42.050 - City personnel prohibited from purchasing. 
No city officer or employee or any member of the immediate family living in the same household of a city officer or employee shall purchase surplus city property sold in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 1673 § 1 (part), 1979)  
Chapter 2.44 - UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 
 
2.44.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Lost and unclaimed property" means goods or chattels which are no longer possessed by their lawful owner and for which demand by right has not been asserted by such lawful owner. 
B.  "Perishable property" means goods or chattels which are subject to decay, deterioration, or spoilage. 
(Ord. 1673 § 1 (part), 1979)  
2.44.020 - Lost property. 
All lost property in the possession of any city personnel shall be placed in the custody of the police department to be held and disposed of in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 1673 § 1 (part), 1979)  
2.44.030 - Retention authorized—Tagging required. 
A.  All lost and unclaimed property in the possession of the police department shall be held by the department for a period of at least three months, except animals and perishable property. Lost and unclaimed animals shall be turned over to a public animal shelter. Lost and unclaimed perishable property need be held by the department only long enough to permit compliance with the notice and auction requirements of this chapter. 
B.  All lost and unclaimed property in the possession of the department shall be tagged showing the date and circumstances of its acquisition by the department. 
(Ord. 2156, 1999: Ord. 1673 § 1 (part), 1979)  
2.44.040 - Restoration to owner—Costs. 
A.  If, during the time lost and unclaimed property is in the possession of the police department, the owner of said property appears and proves his ownership, the department shall restore the property to him. 
B.  The department may require that the reclaiming owner pay to the department the reasonable costs of storage and care of the property and the costs of publication incurred by reason of compliance with the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1673 § 1 (part), 1979)  
2.44.050 - Transfer to finder. 
Personal property, except bicycles, which has been held by the department for ninety days, and which has not been returned to the rightful owner, shall be subject to and may be transferred to the finder thereof in accordance with Section 2080.3 of the California Civil Code. 
(Ord. 1673 § 1 (part), 1979)  
2.44.060 - Disposition to city. 
If after the expiration of the applicable retention period, the city manager or his/her authorized designee determines any unclaimed property in the possession of the police department is needed for public use, such property shall be retained by the city. 
(Ord. 1673 § 1 (part), 1979)  
2.44.070 - Disposition to public authorized. 
After the expiration of the applicable retention period, all lost and unclaimed property remaining in the custody of the police department shall be sold at public auction to the highest responsible bidder in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord, 1673 § 1 (part), 1979)  
2.44.080 - Auction procedure. 
The purchasing agent shall conduct periodic public auctions for the sale of lost and unclaimed property. The date of a public auction shall be not less than seven days following the publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, printed and published in the county, of a notice of the sale at public auction of lost and unclaimed property. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to specify minimum bids. All purchases at public auction shall be for cash and shall be final. All purchasers at public auction shall take immediate possession of purchased property and property purchased at public auction shall not be reclaimable by the original owner. 
(Ord. 1673 § 1 (part), 1979)  
2.44.090 - Auctioneer—Selection and compensation. 
A.  The city manager shall be responsible for the selection of an auctioneer. The city may use either a member of staff for this purpose or may solicit the services of a qualified private auctioneer. 
B.  A city staff member who serves as an auctioneer shall be compensated in accordance with provisions of the National City Civil Service Rules. A private auctioneer may be compensated with a percentage of the gross proceeds or other fee as approved by the city manager prior to conduct of the auction. 
(Ord. 1673 § 1 (part), 1979)  
2.44.100 - Auction proceeds. 
All proceeds from the sale at public auction of surplus, lost, or unclaimed property, except private auctioneer compensation, shall be deposited in the city's general fund. 
(Ord. 1673 § 1 (part), 1979)  
2.44.110 - Authorization to destroy. 
After the expiration of the applicable retention period, all lost and unclaimed property which is deemed to be of limited or no value, or which is a thing which is commonly not the subject of sale, may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the city. All unclaimed property remaining unsold after being offered for sale at public auction may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the city. 
(Ord. 1673 § 1 (part), 1979)  
2.44.120 - City personnel prohibited. 
No city officer or employee or any member of the immediate family living in the same household of a city officer or employee, shall purchase unclaimed property sold in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 1946, 1988)  
Chapter 2.48 - DISASTER COUNCIL 
 
2.48.010 - Purpose. 
The declared purpose of this chapter is to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the city in the event of an emergency, the direction of the emergency organization, and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. 
(Ord. 1335 § 1, 1972)  
2.48.020 - Emergency defined. 
As used in this chapter, "emergency" means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of this city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. 
(Ord. 1335 § 2, 1972)  
2.48.030 - Disaster council—Membership. 
The city disaster council is created and shall consist of the following: 
A.  The mayor, who shall be chairman; 
B.  The director of emergency services, who shall be vice chairman; 
C.  The assistant director of emergency services; 
D.  Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of this city, adopted pursuant to this chapter; 
E.  Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Ord. 1335 § 3, 1972)  
2.48.040 - Disaster council—Powers and duties. 
It is the duty of the disaster council, and it is empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairman or, in his absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice chairman. 
(Ord. 1335 § 4, 1972)  
2.48.050 - Emergency services director— Assistant—Created. 
A.  There is created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services. 
B.  There is created the office of assistant director of emergency services, who shall be appointed by the director. 
(Ord. 1335 § 5, 1972)  
2.48.060 - Emergency services director— Assistant—Powers and duties. 
A.  The director is empowered to: 
1.  Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a "local emergency" if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect; 
2.  Request the Governor to proclaim a "state of emergency" when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with emergency; 
3.  Control and direct the efforts of the emergency organization of the city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter; 
4.  Direct cooperation between the coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of the city; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them; 
5.  Represent the city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein; 
6.  In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as herein provided, the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the Governor or the director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a "state of war emergency," the director is empowered: 
a.  To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council, 
b.  To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use, 
c.  To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a "state of emergency" in the county in which the city is located or the existence of a "state of war emergency," to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers, 
d.  To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency, and 
e.  To execute all of his ordinary powers as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the city council, all powers conferred upon him by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority. 
B.  The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council. 
C.  The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency program of this city; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. 
(Ord. 1335 § 6, 1972)  
2.48.070 - Emergency organization. 
All officers and employees of the city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Section 2.48.060A(6)(c), be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in the city during such emergency, constitute the emergency organization of the city. 
(Ord. 1335 § 7, 1972)  
2.48.080 - Emergency plan. 
The disaster council is responsible for the development of the city emergency plan, which provides for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of the city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and provides for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plans shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 1335 § 8, 1972)  
2.48.090 - Expenditures. 
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. 
(Ord. 1335 § 9, 1972)  
2.48.100 - Violations designated—Penalty. 
It is an infraction punishable as prescribed in Section 1.20.010 for any person during an emergency to: 
A.  Wilfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter; 
B.  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of the city, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof; 
C.  Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. 
(Ord. 1621, 1978; Ord. 1358 § 2 (part), 1973; Ord. 1335 § 10, 1972)  
Chapter 2.55 - FISCAL ADMINISTRATION 
 
2.55.010 - Purpose and intent. 
In enacting this chapter, it is the purpose and intent of the city council to establish requirements for the development, adoption, and maintenance of the city budget, and to set forth sound standards for the management of the city's assets. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2437, § 2, 9-19-2017)  
2.55.020 - Fiscal year. 
The city's fiscal year shall begin on the first day of July of each year and end on the thirtieth day of June of the following year. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2437, § 2, 9-19-2017)  
2.55.030 - Preliminary budget. 
A.  At least thirty days prior to the end of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit the preliminary budget for the ensuing fiscal year to the city council at a regular city council meeting or other properly noticed public meeting of the city council. 
B.  Upon receipt of the preliminary budget, the city council may direct or authorize the city manager to make revisions to the same at any regular city council meeting or other properly noticed public meeting of the city council prior to adoption of the budget. 
C.  At a regular city council meeting, or other properly noticed public meeting of the city council at which the city manager presents the preliminary budget to the city council, any member of the public may appear and be heard regarding any item in the preliminary budget or for requests to include additional items. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2437, § 2, 9-19-2017)  
2.55.040 - Adopted budget. 
A.  After the city manager has made all revisions to the preliminary budget directed or authorized by the city council pursuant to subsection B of Section 2.55.030, but not later than June 30 th of each year, the city council shall by resolution adopt the budget for the ensuing fiscal year as finally determined. 
B.  The resolution of adoption of the budget shall specify, at a minimum, the following: 
1.  Appropriations by fund, budget unit, and category; 
2.  Interfund transfers; and 
3.  Estimated financing sources by fund available to meet the budget requirements. 
C.  The city council may set forth appropriations in greater detail than required in subsection B of this section and may authorize any additional controls for the administration of the budget as it deems necessary. The city council may delegate the authority to exercise said additional administrative controls to the city manager. 
D.  There shall be a schedule in or supporting the adopted budget document, or a separate ordinance or resolution, setting forth the number and classifications of positions approved by the city council. 
E.  The adoption of the budget may be accomplished by a resolution in which the adoption is effectuated by reference to the financing uses in the budget as finally determined, provided that the minimum requirements set forth in subsection B of this section are met in the budget document. If adopted by reference, the budget shall have the same effect as if the resolution of adoption had been accomplished by passage of the resolution in full in a manner provided by law. 
F.  A copy of the adopted budget shall be placed and shall remain on file with the city clerk where it shall be available for inspection. 
G.  In accordance with Government Code Section 53901, a copy of the adopted budget shall be filed with the county auditor within sixty days after the beginning of the City's fiscal year, and the annual budget shall be held on file by the county auditor where it shall be available for public inspection during reasonable business hours. 
H.  1.  If at the beginning of any fiscal year, the budget has not been adopted, the director of finance shall approve payments for the support of the various budget units in accordance with the following authorizations: 
a.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection 2, the totals in the preliminary budget as submitted by the city manager, less the amounts for capital assets, transfers out, and new permanent employee positions, are deemed appropriated until adoption of the budget. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "new permanent employee positions" does not include any employee position created in lieu of an employee position that has been abolished. 
b.  Amounts for capital assets, transfers out, and new permanent employee positions are deemed appropriated until the adoption of the budget if specifically approved by the city council. 
c.  If the preliminary budget has not been submitted to the city council because of an emergency as defined in Section 2.48.020, the amounts deemed appropriated for the new fiscal year shall be based upon the final adjusted budget of the preceding year, less the amounts for capital assets and transfers out unless specifically approved by the city council. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "final adjusted budget" includes the adopted budget, plus adjustments authorized by the city council and encumbrances. 
2.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, prior to the adoption of the budget, the city council may impose expenditure limitations that are more restrictive than those contained in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2437, § 2, 9-19-2017)  
2.55.050 - Appropriations and transfers. 
A.  In accordance with Article XIIIB of the Constitution of the State of California, the total annual appropriations subject to limitation of the city shall not exceed the appropriations limit of the city for the prior fiscal year adjusted for the change in the cost of living and the change in population, except as otherwise provided in Article XIIB of the Constitution of the State of California. 
B.  1.  Transfers and revisions to the adopted appropriations may be made as follows: 
a.  Transfers and revisions resulting in an increase in the combined total of appropriations and transfers of any fund, by the approval of the city council. 
b.  Between budget units within a fund, subject to the restriction of subsection 1 of this section, by the approval of the city manager. 
2.  The city manager is authorized to transfer monies up to the maximums set forth in the budget. 
C.  Any unencumbered balance remaining to the credit of any appropriation, except for those associated with capital assets, shall lapse at the end of the fiscal year and shall revert to the available balance of the fund from which appropriated. 
D.  The budget for each fund maintained by the city, including transfers and revisions made after adoption, shall be balanced. A balanced budget shall be defined as that for which financing uses do not exceed available funding sources. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2437, § 2, 9-19-2017)  
2.55.060 - Delegation of city manager budgetary powers and duties. 
The powers and duties assigned to the city manager by this chapter may be delegated. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2437, § 2, 9-19-2017)  
Chapter 2.60 - PUBLIC CONTRACTS AND PURCHASING SYSTEM* 
 
2.60.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The city council adopts a public contract and purchasing system through this chapter in order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies, equipment, materials and professional and other services at the lowest possible cost at the best value commensurate with the quality needed, to exercise positive financial control and assure quality of procurement and to clearly define the authority for purchasing and contracting functions. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.60.020 - Authority of city manager—Establishment of contracting authority. 
A.  Centralized purchasing and contracting is established under the authority of the city manager for the purchase of supplies, equipment and professional and other services. The city manager shall have and may exercise all authority delegated in this chapter, and may further approve alternate methods of procurement on a trial basis and recommend changes to the city council regarding the city's procurement methods. 
B.  The city manager shall have the authority to approve and execute contracts and awards as set forth in Section 2.60.035 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.60.030 - Purchasing agent—Designation—Contracting authority. 
A.  Through the city manager, a purchasing agent may be designated to purchase supplies, equipment and services pursuant to this chapter on behalf of the city. The purchasing agent may assign employees to perform the functions and duties provided for in this chapter, with the concurrence of the city manager. 
B.  Under the direction of the city manager, the purchasing agent shall have the authority to approve and execute contracts and awards as set forth in Section 2.60.035 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.60.035 - Establishment of bid limits and contracting and award authority. 
A.  Formal bid limits and requirements are established for purchases and contracts exceeding fifty thousand dollars. Informal bid limits are established for purchases and contracts exceeding two thousand five hundred dollars. 
B.  The city manager shall have the authority to approve, execute, and award purchases and contracts not exceeding fifty thousand dollars. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to approve, execute, and award purchases and contracts not exceeding fifteen thousand dollars. The city council shall, by resolution, approve all purchases and contracts exceeding fifty thousand dollars. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005; Ord. No. 2016-2417, § 1, 12-20-2016)  
2.60.040 - Purchasing agent—Powers and duties. 
The purchasing agent shall have the following powers and duties: 
A.  Negotiate, purchase and obtain supplies, contractual services and equipment used by the city in accordance with city and state law and the various rules, regulations and authority currently or previously prescribed by the city manager and city council; 
B.  Procure for the city the needed quality in supplies, services and equipment at the best value to the city, utilizing such technical or functional specifications, or combination, as will best meet the city's requirements; 
C.  Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain full and open competition on all purchases; 
D.  Prepare and recommend to the city manager rules and regulations governing purchase of supplies, services and equipment for the city, and revisions as necessary; 
E.  Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, pricing, market conditions and new products, and secure for the city the benefits of research done in the field of purchasing by other governmental jurisdictions, national technical societies, trade associations having national recognition, and by private businesses and organizations; 
F.  Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary for the operation of the purchasing system, and utilize electronic data processing and technology in the administration and discharge of procurement and contracting duties; 
G.  Prepare and maintain a vendors' catalog file or as appropriate, utilize and maintain electronic database files and the Internet media for procurement; 
H.  Exercise proprietary review over all purchases and make recommendations to the city manager as appropriate; 
I.  Utilize electronic data management systems and programs in coordination with the finance and information management directors for requisition, invoice management and payment; 
J.  Promulgate rules and procedures as may be necessary to implement this chapter. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.60.050 - Exceptions to centralized purchasing. 
The purchasing agent, when authorized by the city manager, may authorize a department to directly purchase supplies and equipment when such purchases may be made more advantageously or expeditiously by the respective department. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.60.060 - Estimates of requirements. 
The purchasing agent may request all using city departments or offices to file detailed estimates of their anticipated requirements in order to take advantage of volume or selective buying. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.60.070 - Requisitions. 
City departments or offices shall submit requests for supplies, equipment and services to the purchasing agent on standard requisition forms prescribed by the purchasing agent. The purchasing agent shall examine each requisition and estimate and shall have the authority to revise it as to quantity, quality or estimated cost; provided, however, that any change in quality does not vary substantially from the standards of the using department or office. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.60.080 - Purchase order—Encumbrance of funds. 
Except in cases of emergency or when otherwise authorized by the city manager, all purchases, other than those made pursuant to Section 2.60.050 of this chapter, shall be made by purchase order issued by the purchasing agent upon certification that: 
A.  There is to the credit of each using department concerned a sufficient unencumbered appropriated balance in excess of all unpaid obligations to defray the amount of the order; 
B.  The order is provided for in the budget of the using department or has been approved by city council resolution; or 
C.  Purchases of capital equipment and assets or services, if not provided for in the budget, have been previously approved by city council resolution. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.60.090 - Standardization of supplies. 
The purchasing agent shall standardize procurement of supplies, equipment and material in cooperation with using departments. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.60.100 - Unauthorized purchases. 
No city officer or employee shall order or purchase any supplies, equipment, materials or contractual services or make any contract within the purview of this chapter, except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the regulations and procedures established thereunder and the approval of the purchasing agent. Any purchase or contract made contrary to this chapter is null and void. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.60.110 - Formal bidding procedure—Generally. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection B of this section or Section 2.60.230 of this chapter, all city purchases exceeding the formal bid limit, as adjusted pursuant to Section 2.60.280, shall be purchased only after a formal competitive bid process by formal written contract with the lowest responsible bidder submitting the best responsive bid, after due notice inviting bids. 
B.  Formal competitive bidding may be waived by the city council, or the city manager within the limits of contracting authority, where it has been determined that: (1) competitive bidding is or would be impractical or impossible; (2) the circumstances are such that no obvious, ascertainable advantage to the city could result; or (3) in the case of technology and computer systems and software acquisition, delay would unduly impair or jeopardize the city's ability to efficiently operate its data management systems. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.60.115 - Procurement specifications and "brand names." 
A.  The purchasing agent shall ensure that the procurement of city systems and equipment is made by technical or functional specifications, or such combination thereof as the purchasing agent shall determine which will best meet particular functional needs or objectives required by the city. The requesting department shall be responsible for preparing adequate specifications, with the assistance of the purchasing agent when necessary. 
B.  Specifications shall normally describe a system or commodity in terms of its dimensions, physical characteristics, performance criteria, system compatibility, maintenance objectives and requirements, adaptability criteria, and any other factors that will allow a particular item to be offered by a vendor at a stated price. Specifications may include reference to a brand name and type or model for illustrative purposes on an "or equal" basis. When described in an "or equal" manner, the description shall be construed as a term of specification which describes an item or component that has been evaluated by the city as best meeting the specific operational, design, performance, maintenance, quality, compatibility or reliability standards and requirements of the city, thereby incorporating these requirements by reference within the specification. Whenever possible, at least two brand names should be used for specification purposes, followed by the words "or equal." Exceptions to an "or equal" designation are permissible for replacement parts, for testing and evaluation purposes, or for system compatibility. A bid offering an equivalent ("or equal") shall be subject to evaluation by the city prior to award that the item meets the city's requirements. Any product testing shall be at the bidder's expense, and the burden shall be on the bidder to establish that the item meets the city's needs. The city reserves the right in its absolute and sole discretion to reject a proposed item that does not meet city requirements. 
C.  Functional specifications may be issued to allow for a particular operational or functional need to be best met by current technology, without the need for specific description of each component. Specifications shall include, as applicable, the particular functions to be served or the results to be obtained, operational requirements, any fiscal, mechanical or structural constraints and the operating environment. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.60.120 - Formal bidding procedure—Notice inviting bids. 
When formal bidding is required, a notice inviting bids for city specifications shall be published by the purchasing agent at least ten calendar days before the date set for the receipt of bids designated in the notice. All notices shall be published by the purchasing agent in a commercially reasonable manner, using any appropriate medium of printed or electronic commerce which, in the opinion of the purchasing agent, are reasonably likely to ensure an optimum bidding process. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.60.130 - Formal bidding procedure—Bidder's list. 
The purchasing agent shall also solicit bids from all responsible prospective suppliers who have requested to be placed on a bidder's list. The bidder's list may be kept in an electronic format. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.60.140 - Formal bidding procedure—Bidder's security. 
The purchasing agent may require each bidder to post security in a predetermined amount in cash, certified or cashier's check, surety bond or in any other form of security approved by the city attorney. If a bidder's security is required, no bid shall be considered submitted until the required security is submitted therewith. All bidders' security is refundable, except that a successful bidder shall forfeit the deposited security if the bidder fails to execute a contract within ten calendar days after notice of award has been mailed or given, or fails to otherwise complete the transaction. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.60.150 - Formal bidding procedure—Bid opening. 
Bids shall be submitted to the purchasing agent or designate. Bids may be opened in public, when so designated by the purchasing agent in the public notices. All bids must be signed by an authorized signatory of the bidder. The purchasing agent may accept electronic or facsimile signatures on electronically submitted bids when followed up by receipt of an original signature. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.60.160 - Formal bidding procedure—Compilation of bids and recommendations. 
A.  The purchasing agent shall compile the bids and submit them to the city manager together with a recommendation for award, taking into consideration any recommendation of the department head involved, the amount of bid, compliance with specifications, the responsibility of bidder, and any other factors that determine the best value and optimum procurement for the city. In determining the responsibility of the bidder to perform and provide best value, the purchasing agent will be guided by, but not be limited to, a consideration of the following factors: 
1.  The experience of the city in dealing with the bidder; 
2.  The experience of other governmental agencies in their previous transactions with the bidder; 
3.  Knowledge of the quality and fitness of the product offered by the bidder, substantiated by reports of using departments within the city or other governmental agencies, whenever possible; 
4.  The availability of options to renew contracts for continuing purchases at the same bid price, in those circumstances where price increases are expected or have been experienced in the past; 
5.  A determination as to whether the quoted price represents "best value" for the city, and is both realistic and feasible in terms of vendor performance and potential city satisfaction. "Best value" shall include consideration of sales tax rebate, when applicable, warranty protection, costs of maintenance and availability of parts and services. 
B.  Within the limits of their contracting authority, the city manager or the purchasing agent may reject any or all bids or accept a part of a bid for any one or more commodities or contractual services included in the proposed contract, when it is determined that the public interest will be best served thereby. The purchasing agent may waive any irregularity in bid submission when it is in the best interests of the city to do so. 
C.  Upon compliance with the formal competitive bidding process, the city manager is authorized to award and execute contracts within established approval authority, and any contracts exceeding that authority for a procurement previously authorized in the budget or by resolution of the city council. 
D.  The city manager shall forward the compilation of bids and recommendations with respect to any awards exceeding his or her authority to the city council for review and award. 
E.  Documents submitted by bidders shall not be available for public review until the purchasing agent or city manager awards the contract, or a recommendation is forwarded by the city manager to the city council for award. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.60.165 - Protests. 
Protests concerning an award or proposed award may be presented by an unsuccessful bidder to the purchasing agent in writing, only within the five days following the announcement of award or the bid opening, whichever shall occur last. Any protest filed after that time shall be invalid and shall be disregarded. A protesting bidder must submit complete supporting documentation at the time of protest. The purchasing agent shall determine whether the protest is justified, and may either amend or rescind the award, if justified, and take no action when the protest is not justified. The decision of the purchasing agent shall be final regarding the recommendation for the award of the contract, except that the city manager may review and take further action on any timely filed protest, or forward the protest to the city council when authority for award rests with the council. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.60.170 - Formal bidding procedure—Action following recommendation. 
The city council or the city manager within authorized limits, may award a contract to the lowest responsible bidder submitting the best value bid that optimally meets the city's criteria in all respects. The decision to select the lowest responsible bidder shall be administratively final at the level where the award of the contract is authorized. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.60.180 - Formal bidding procedure—Rejection of bids. 
The city council or the city manager within authorized limits, may reject any or all bids and authorize the readvertising of bids or, in the alternative, purchase commodities or services pursuant to the open market procedure set forth in this chapter, when any of the following circumstances are found to exist: 
A.  That the supplies or services may be purchased at less cost in the open market; 
B.  That the services or supplies are urgently required for the preservation of life, health or property or that the public interest would be best served by using the open market procedure; or 
C.  That the city manager within contracting authority, or the city council by resolution, has determined that it is in the city's best interests to do so. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.60.190 - Formal bidding procedure—Tie bids. 
In the event two or more bids are received which are for the same total amount or unit price and in all other respects are equal, the contract may be awarded to a local bidder, or by draw when there is no local bidder or more than one local bidder is available. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.60.200 - Formal bidding procedure—Performance bond or security. 
The purchasing agent may require a performance bond or other form of security in an amount reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. If a performance bond or security is required, the form and amount shall be described in the notice inviting bids. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.60.210 - Open market procedure—Used when informal bidding required. 
Purchases of supplies, services and equipment of an estimated value not exceeding the formal bid limit, as adjusted pursuant to Section 2.60.280, may be made by the purchasing agent in the open market without observing the formal bidding procedure prescribed in Sections 2.60.110 through 2.60.200 of this chapter. However, informal bidding shall be required and whenever practicable, shall be based on at least three bids, and be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder submitting in all respects the best bid for best value. When it is not practicable or possible to obtain bids from at least three vendors, the purchasing agent may then select the lowest responsible bid from those available and qualified vendors submitting responsive bids. The purchasing agent may solicit bids by direct mail request to prospective vendors, by telephone, by public notice on a bulletin board in the civic center, by any feasible electronic medium, or by any combination of the preceding. The purchasing agent shall keep a record of all purchases in accordance with the city records retention schedule, and such records shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.60.220 - Open market procedure—Exception to bidding requirements. 
In any of the following instances, the city manager or purchasing agent may dispense with the requirements of bidding when any of the following applies, provided the circumstances are completely documented: 
A.  The estimated amount involved is less than the informal bid limit; 
B.  The commodity, regardless of value, can be obtained from only one source. Sole source procurements may be used when there is only one source from which a particular commodity is available and there is no adequate substitute. Sole source procurement may also be used when it is clear that competitive bidding will not produce any competitive advantage or would be impractical or not meet an urgent city procurement need; 
C.  The commodity or service to be procured, regardless of value, is required to integrate with or be compatible with existing furnishings, materials, systems, programs or equipment and the procurement can be timely made from a manufacturer or supplier who previously satisfactorily supplied the particular commodity or service; 
D.  The purchasing agent or city manager within the limits of contracting authority, or the city council by resolution, determines by best business judgment that due to special circumstances, it is to the city's best interest to purchase a commodity directly or enter into a contract without compliance with the bidding procedure; 
E.  Due to the exigencies and availability of state and federal grants, immediate action is necessary to take advantage and allow receipt of those grants for procurement of equipment, materials or services, and compliance with the normal time limits established within this chapter would therefore be impossible or impracticable; provided, however, that the city manager shall notify the council at the first available opportunity thereafter; or 
F.  A particular type or make of commodity, furnishing and type of material, system or equipment has been standardized by the city manager or city council by written directive or resolution. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.60.230 - Emergency purchases—Emergency defined. 
A.  In case of an emergency which requires immediate purchase of supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services, the city manager may authorize the purchasing agent to secure in the open market at the lowest obtainable price any supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services, regardless of the amount of the expenditure; provided, however, that any expenditure exceeding the city manager's established approval authority shall be later ratified by resolution of the city council after the emergency is resolved. 
B.  In case of emergency, and when the prior consent of the purchasing agent or city manager is impracticable, any using department may purchase directly any supplies, materials or equipment without competitive bid, provided that the immediate procurement is essential to prevent delays in the work of the using department which may affect the life, health or convenience of citizens. The head of the using department shall send the purchasing agent a requisition and a copy of the delivery record, together with a full written explanation of the circumstances of the emergency as soon as the emergency has been resolved, which shall thereafter be filed by the purchasing agent as a permanent public record of the purchase. The city manager's signature shall be required on all procurements exceeding the formal bid limit, and the city council's action by way of ratification shall be required for all procurements exceeding the city manager's authority. 
C.  Determination of an "emergency" under this section is defined as any breakdown in machinery or equipment, the interruption of an essential service, or any threat to public health, safety or welfare. Determination of emergency shall not require a formal proclamation, but shall be based upon the sound judgment and discretion of the city manager or purchasing agent, as applicable. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.60.240 - Emergency purchases—Civil defense and disaster. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall limit the authority of the director of emergency services to make emergency purchases and take such other emergency steps as are or may be authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.60.250 - Services, supplies and equipment not governed by this chapter. 
The following services, supplies, and equipment shall not be subject to the competitive bidding provisions of this chapter, except that the procurement and contracting authority based on the monetary limits specified in this chapter shall also be applicable to the authority to execute contracts for such procurements: 
A.  "Public projects" as defined in Section 22002 of the California State Public Contract Code and as referenced in section 22030, et seq. 
B.  Utility services and related charges; 
C.  Work or services performed by another public or quasi-public entity; 
D.  Real property purchases and related title and escrow fees; 
E.  Credit card purchases of gasoline, oil or emergency automotive needs; 
F.  Transportation and freight charges when not specifically included on a purchase order; 
G.  Insurance and bond premiums; 
H.  Advertising; 
I.  Real property leases; 
J.  Demolition or abatement of dangerous structures or hazardous or unsafe conditions; 
K.  Professional services agreements governed by Section 2.60.270 of this chapter; or 
L.  Alternative bid procedures for public projects governed by Chapter 2.62. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005; Ord. No. 2016-2417, § 1, 12-20-2016)  
2.60.260 - Cooperative purchasing. 
The purchasing agent shall have authority to join with other public jurisdictions to take advantage of cooperative purchasing opportunities, including but not limited to any federal, state or local agency pricing program or structure that is determined by the purchasing agent to allow a procurement that is in the best interests of the city. The purchasing agent may buy directly from a vendor at a price established through competitive bidding by another public agency whose procedures have been determined by the purchasing agent to be in substantial compliance with the city's procurement procedures, irrespective of the contracting limits of that jurisdiction or agency, even if the city had not initially joined with that public agency in the cooperative purchase. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.60.270 - Authorization and change orders for professional services agreements and public works contracts, and for previously authorized procurements. 
In addition to the authority granted for procurement of supplies and equipment, the city manager is authorized to execute public works contracts, agreements for professional services for architectural, engineering, environmental, land surveying or construction project management pursuant to Section 4526 of the Government Code, and agreements for services of other professionals required for the proper, efficient administration of the city. The city manager shall approve and execute all contracts according to the limits of the manager's approval authority established in Section 2.60.035 of this chapter, and may approve change orders for previously authorized procurements of supplies and equipment, professional services agreements and public works contracts in amounts not exceeding an aggregate of twenty-five percent over the original authorized contract price or the limits established in Section 2.60.035 of this chapter for the city manager, whichever is greater, without prior city council approval. Engagement of qualifying professional vendors shall be based upon demonstrated competence and the qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the city's requirements in accordance with the procedures set forth in the document entitled "Procedures for Selection of Professional Services Firms" on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005; Ord. No. 2016-2417, § 1, 12-20-2016)  
2.60.280 - Periodic review and index adjustment. 
The bid limits for formal and informal bidding and award and the authority of the city manager and purchasing agent may be adjusted annually in response to the San Diego All Urban Consumers Consumer Price Index (CPI). The purchasing agent shall calculate the effect of the cumulative change in the CPI to authorized bid limits. Adjustments to the formal bid limit will be made in five thousand-dollar increments whenever the calculated value exceeds a previously set limit by more than two thousand five hundred dollars. Adjustments to the informal bid limit will be made by one thousand-dollar increments whenever the calculated value exceeds a previously set bid limit by more than five hundred dollars. The contracting authority of the city manager and purchasing agent and other limits set forth in this chapter may be adjusted upwards accordingly, pursuant to ordinance. 
(Ord. 2262 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 2.62 - ALTERNATIVE BID PROCEDURES FOR PUBLIC PROJECTS 
 
2.62.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish alternative competitive bidding procedures for public projects, consistent with the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act ("Act"). 
(Ord. No. 2016-2413, § 1, 10-4-2016)  
2.62.015 - Definitions. 
The definitions set forth in this section and in Public Contract Code Section 22002 shall govern the application and interpretation of this Chapter: 
"Public project" means any of the following: 
A.  Construction, reconstruction, erection, alteration, renovation, improvement, demolition, and repair work involving any publicly owned, leased, or operated facility. 
B.  Painting or repainting of any publicly owned, leased, or operated facility. 
C.  In the case of a publicly owned utility system, "public project" shall include only the construction, erection, improvement, or repair of dams, reservoirs, power plants, and electrical transmission lines of two hundred thirty thousand volts and higher. 
"Public project" does not include maintenance work. 
"Maintenance work" includes all of the following: 
A.  Routine, recurring, and usual work for the preservation or protection of any publicly owned or publicly operated facility for its intended purposes. 
B.  Minor repainting. 
C.  Resurfacing of streets and highways at less than one inch. 
D.  Landscape maintenance, including mowing, watering, trimming, pruning, planting, replacement of plants, and servicing of irrigation and sprinkler systems. 
E.  Work performed to keep, operate, and maintain publicly owned water, power, or waste disposal systems, including, but not limited to, dams, reservoirs, power plants, and electrical transmission lines of two hundred thirty thousand volts and higher. 
"Facility" means any plant, building, structure, ground facility, utility system, subject to the limitation found in of subdivision (C) of the definition of "public project", real property, streets, and highways, or other public work improvement. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2413, § 1, 10-4-2016)  
2.62.020 - Bid limits and applicable procedures. 
A.  Bid limits. 
1.  Public projects of forty-five thousand dollars or less. Public projects of forty-five thousand dollars or less (less than informal) may be performed by the employees of a public agency by force account, by negotiated contract, or by purchase order. 
2.  Public projects greater than forty-five thousand dollars but less than or equal to one hundred seventy-five thousand dollars. Public projects greater than forty-five thousand dollars and up to one hundred seventy-five thousand dollars (informal bid), may be let to contract through informal procedures as set forth in this chapter and the Act. 
3.  Public projects greater than one hundred seventy-five thousand dollars. Public projects of more than one hundred seventy-five thousand dollars (formal bid) shall, except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in the Public Contract Code, be let to contract by formal bidding procedure. 
B.  Statutory maximum amounts as amended. The dollar limits described in this section are intended to match the limits established in Public Contract Code Sections 22032 and 22034 as amended by the state legislature or adjusted by the state controller under Section 22020. State amendments or adjustments to the dollar limits made after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall act as amendments to the dollar amounts set forth herein without further city council action. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2413, § 1, 10-4-2016)  
2.62.030 - Less than informal bid procedures. 
A.  Awarding authority. 
1.  City engineer and purchasing agent authority. 
a.  Public projects up to twenty-five thousand dollars or less may be awarded by the city engineer. 
b.  Public projects of forty-five thousand dollars or less may be awarded by the purchasing agent. 
2.  Three vendor bids. 
a.  If the public project of forty-five thousand dollars or less is being performed by negotiated contract or purchase order, the city engineer, or designee, may make reasonable efforts to contact and obtain bids from at least three vendors and award to the contractor providing the best value to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2413, § 1, 10-4-2016)  
2.62.040 - Informal bid procedures. 
These procedures apply to public projects subject to informal bid. 
A.  Awarding authority. 
1.  City manager authority. 
a.  The city manager or designee is authorized to award and execute informal bid contracts for public projects pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  Written estimate. The dollar limits set forth for informal bidding apply to the city engineer's written estimate of the cost to complete any public project. 
C.  Splitting projects. It shall be unlawful to split or separate into smaller work orders or projects any project for the purpose of evading the provisions of this section requiring work to be done by contract after competitive bidding. 
D.  Qualified contractors list for informal bidding. A list of qualified contractors shall be developed and maintained by the city engineer in accordance with the provisions of Section 22034 of the Public Contract Code and criteria promulgated from time to time by the Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission. This list of qualified contractors shall be maintained according to work categories. 
E.  Noticing and award of informal bid contracts. Any contract awarded pursuant to this section shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. The following shall apply to informal bids for public projects: 
1.  Required notice. All contractors on the list developed as required by Section 2.62.040(D) for the category of work being bid shall be mailed, faxed, or emailed a notice inviting informal bids unless the product or service is proprietary. The purchasing agent or city engineer may elect to mail, fax, or email a notice inviting informal bids to all construction trade journals specified in Public Contract Code Section 22036. 
2.  Time for providing notice. All mailing of notices to contractors pursuant to this Section 2.62.040 shall be completed not less than ten calendar days before bids are due. 
3.  Description of project. The notice inviting informal bids shall describe the project in general terms and how to obtain more detailed information about the project, and state the time and place for the submission of bids. 
4.  Change orders. The city manager may approve change orders for public projects in amounts not exceeding an aggregate of twenty-five percent or fifty-thousand dollars, whichever is greater, over the original authorized contract price without prior city council approval. 
5.  Bids exceeding one hundred seventy-five thousand dollars. If all bids received are in excess of one hundred seventy-five thousand dollars, the city council may, by adoption of a resolution by a four-fifths vote, award the contract, at one hundred eighty-seven thousand five hundred dollars or less, to the lowest responsible bidder, if it determines the cost estimate of the public agency was reasonable. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2413, § 1, 10-4-2016)  
2.62.050 - Formal bid procedures. 
These procedures apply to public projects subject to formal bid. 
A.  Notices inviting formal bids. 
1.  Contents of notice. Notices inviting formal bids shall state the time and place for the receiving and opening of sealed bids and distinctly describe the project. 
2.  Publication date of notice. The notice shall be published at least fourteen calendar days before the date of opening the bids in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the city or otherwise comply with the applicable requirements of Public Contract Code Section 22037. 
3.  Mailing date of notice. The notice shall be mailed at least fifteen calendar days before the date of opening the bids to all construction trade journals specified in Public Contract Code Section 22036. The notice inviting formal bids may also be sent electronically, if available, by either facsimile or electronic mail, within the same time frame specified for regular mail, to all construction trade journals specified in Public Contract Code Section 22036. 
B.  Plans and specifications for formal bids. The city engineer, as the city council's designated representative, shall adopt plans, specifications, and working details for all public projects subject to the form bidding procedures. Any person may examine the plans, specifications, or working details, or all of these, adopted by the city engineer for any public project. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2413, § 1, 10-4-2016)  
2.62.060 - Award of bids; rejection of bids; failure to receive bids. 
This section applies to public projects subject to either formal bid or informal bid. 
A.  Rejecting bids. In its discretion, the city council may reject any bids presented, if the city, prior to rejecting all bids and declaring that the project can be more economically performed by employees of the agency, furnishes a written notice to an apparent low bidder. The notice shall inform the bidder of the agency's intention to reject the bid and shall be mailed at least two business days prior to the city council meeting at which the city intends to reject the bid. If after the first invitation of bids all bids are rejected, after reevaluating its cost estimates of the project, the city council shall have the option of either of the following: 
1.  Abandoning the project or re-advertising for bids in the manner described by this chapter. 
2.  After passing by a resolution by a four-fifths vote of the city council declaring that the project can be performed more economically by the city employees, have the public project done by force account without further complying with this chapter. 
B.  Lowest responsible bidder. If a contract is awarded, it shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the city may accept the one it chooses. 
C.  No bids received. If no bids are received through the formal or informal procedure, the project may be performed by the employees of the city, by force account, or negotiated contract without further complying with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2413, § 1, 10-4-2016)  
2.62.070. - Emergencies. 
In cases of emergency when repair or replacements are necessary, the city council may proceed at once to replace or repair any public facility without adopting plans, specifications, strain sheets, or working details, or giving notice for bids to let contracts. The work may be done by day labor under the direction of the city manager, by contractor, or by a combination of the two. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the city shall comply with Chapter 2.5 of Part 3 of Division 2 of the Public Contract Code (commencing with Section 22050). 
(Ord. No. 2016-2413, § 1, 10-4-2016)  
Chapter 2.63 - CONTRACTOR RESPONSIBILITY 
 
2.63.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Awarding authority" means the City of National City. 
B.  "Contract" as used within this chapter, means any contracts for the performance of public works construction, alteration, demolition, installation, or repair work within the meaning of California Labor Code Section 1720(a). 
C.  "Contractor" means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or any combination thereof, which enters into a contract with the awarding authority. 
D.  "Subcontractor" means any person not an employee who enters into a contract with a contractor to assist the contractor in performing a contract. 
E.  "Bidder" means any person or entity that applies for any contract whether or not the application process is through an invitation for bid, request for proposal, request for qualifications or other procurement process. 
F.  "Bid" means any application submitted by a bidder in response to an Invitation to bid, request for proposal, or request for qualifications or other procurement process. 
G.  "Invitation for bid" means the process through which the awarding authority solicits bids, including requests for proposals and requests for qualifications. 
(Ord. 2018-2450, § 1, 10-16-2018)  
2.63.020 - Determination of contractor responsibility. 
A.  Prior to awarding a contract, the city engineer, or designee, shall make a determination that the prospective contractor is one that has the necessary quality, fitness, and capacity to perform the work set forth in the contract. Responsibility will be determined by the city engineer, or designee, from reliable information concerning a number of criteria, including but not limited to: management expertise; technical qualifications; experience; organization; material; equipment and facilities necessary to perform the work; financial resources; satisfactory performance on other contracts; satisfactory record of compliance with relevant laws and regulations; and satisfactory record of business integrity. 
B.  The lowest monetary and responsive bidder shall complete and submit a questionnaire developed by the city engineer, or designee, which will provide information the awarding authority needs in order to determine if the bidder meets the criteria set forth in subsection "A" of this section, within the timeframe identified in the standard contract documents. Failure of the bidder to complete and submit the questionnaire in a timely manner may result in the city engineer, or designee, making a determination of non-responsiveness. If no bid is required, the prospective contractor must submit a questionnaire. The response to the questionnaire must be signed under penalty of perjury. If, after execution of a contract, the city engineer, or designee, learns that the contractor submitted false information on the questionnaire, the city engineer, or designee, may terminate the contract and pursue the remedies set forth in Section 2.63.060 of this chapter. The contractor shall be obligated to update its responses to the questionnaire during the term of the contract within thirty calendar days after any change to the responses previously provided if such change would affect contractor's fitness and ability to continue performing the contract. The city engineer, or designee, may consider failure of the contractor to update the questionnaire with this information as a material breach of the contract and invoke the remedies set forth in Section 2.63.060 of this chapter. 
C.  Consistent with Public Contract Code Section 20101, as amended, questionnaires and financial statements shall not be public records and shall not be open to public inspection. However, the one-page "Contact Information" page that contains the names, business address, and phone numbers of the contractor who submits a questionnaire is subject to public inspection because it contains no financial, proprietary, or other confidential information. To determine bidder responsibility, the awarding authority may rely on a number of criteria, including but not limited to the following: (1) criteria described in Subpart A of this section; (2) responses to the questionnaire; (3) information from compliance and regulatory agencies; and (4) independent investigation. 
D.  Before awarding the contract to a bidder other than the low monetary bidder, the city engineer, or designee, must notify the low monetary bidder of any evidence reflecting upon their responsibility received from others or adduced as a result of independent investigation and afford them an opportunity to rebut such adverse evidence at a responsibility hearing. At the responsibility hearing, the low monetary bidder will be allowed to present evidence that the low monetary bidder is qualified to perform the contract. The low monetary bidder must exercise its right to request a hearing within five calendar days after receipt of the notice described in this subsection D. Failure to submit a written request for a hearing within the time frame set forth in this section will be deemed a waiver of the right to a responsibility hearing. If so waived, the awarding authority may determine whether the contract should be awarded to another bidder, or whether the bidder is non-responsible for the contract or future contracts. The determination by an awarding authority that the bidder is non-responsible shall be final and constitute exhaustion of the bidder's administrative remedies. 
E.  A list of individuals and entities which have been determined to be non-responsible by the awarding authority shall be maintained by the city engineer, or designee. After two years from the date the individual or entity has been determined to be non-responsible, the individual or entity may request removal from the list by the awarding authority. If the individual or entity can satisfy the awarding authority that it has the necessary quality, fitness, and capacity to perform work in accordance with the criteria set forth in subsection A of this section, its name shall be removed from the list. Unless otherwise removed from the list by the awarding authority, names shall remain on the list for five years from the date of being declared non-responsible. 
F.  Contractors shall ensure that their subcontractors meet the criteria for responsibility as set forth in subsection A of this section. 
(Ord. 2018-2450, § 1, 10-16-2018)  
2.63.030 - Compliance with all laws. 
A.  Contractors shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws in the performance of the contract, including but not limited to laws regarding health and safety, labor and employment, wage and hours, and licensing laws which affect employees. 
B.  Contractors shall notify the awarding authority within thirty calendar days after receiving notification that any government agency has initiated an investigation which may result in a finding that the contractor is not in compliance with subsection A of this section. Initiation of an investigation is not, by itself, a basis for a determination of non-responsibility by the awarding authority. 
C.  Contractors shall notify the awarding authority within thirty calendar days of all findings by a government agency or court of competent jurisdiction that the contractor has violated subsection A of this section. 
D.  Upon award of a contract, contractors shall complete a pledge of compliance, on file with the city engineer, attesting under penalty of perjury to compliance with subsection A of this section. Whenever any contract, which was not initially subject to this chapter is amended, the contractor shall complete a pledge of compliance attesting under penalty of perjury to compliance with subsection A of this section. 
E.  Contractors shall ensure that their subcontractors complete a pledge of compliance attesting under penalty of perjury to compliance with subsection A of this section. 
F.  Contractors shall ensure that their subcontractors comply with subsections B and C of this section. 
(Ord. 2018-2450, § 1, 10-16-2018)  
2.63.040 - Exemptions. 
In order to promote the purposes of this chapter and to protect the awarding authority's interests, the following contracts are exempt from its application: Contracts with a governmental entity such as the United States of America, the State of California, a county, city or public agency of such entities, or a public or quasi-public corporation located therein and declared by law to have such public status. 
(Ord. 2018-2450, § 1, 10-16-2018)  
2.63.050 - Administration. 
A.  The city engineer, or designee, shall develop a questionnaire to be used by awarding authorities for determining bidder responsibility within sixty days after the effective date of this ordinance. 
B.  The city engineer, or designee, shall monitor compliance with this Chapter including investigation of alleged violations. 
(Ord. 2018-2450, § 1, 10-16-2018)  
2.63.060 - Enforcement. 
A.  Contracts shall provide that violation of this chapter may constitute a material breach thereof and may entitle the awarding authority to terminate the contract and otherwise pursue legal remedies that may be available. 
B.  Contract amendments shall provide that violation of Section 2.63.030 may constitute a material breach thereof and may entitle the awarding authority to terminate the contract and otherwise pursue legal remedies that may be available. 
C.  Violations of this chapter may be reported to the city engineer, or designee, which shall investigate such complaint. Whether based upon such complaint or otherwise, if the city engineer, or designee, has determined that the contractor has violated any provision of this chapter, with the exception of any combination of subsections A, B, and C of Section 2.63.030, the city engineer, or designee, shall issue a written notice to the contractor citing the violation and number of calendar days after receipt of notice for which the violation is to be corrected. If the contractor has not corrected the violation, or taken reasonable steps to correct the violation within ten calendar days, then the city engineer, or designee, may: 
1.  Request the awarding authority to declare a material breach of the contract and exercise its contractual remedies thereunder, which are to include but not be limited to termination of the contract. 
2.  Request the awarding authority to declare the contractor to be non-responsible in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 2.63.020 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2018-2450, § 1, 10-16-2018)  
2.63.070 - Application of this chapter. 
This chapter shall be applicable to invitations for bids issued thirty days after this chapter's passage. 
(Ord. 2018-2450, § 1, 10-16-2018)  
2.63.080 - Consistency with federal or state law. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to those instances in which its application would be prohibited by federal or state law or where the application would violate or be inconsistent with the terms or condition of a grant or contract with an agency of the United States, the State of California or the instruction of an authorized representative of any such agency with respect to any such grant or contract. 
(Ord. 2018-2450, § 1, 10-16-2018)  
2.63.090 - Severability. 
The city council declares that the judicial invalidity of any subsection or portion of this chapter shall not affect the validity of any other remaining section or portion; that the city council would have adopted each of those remaining portions, notwithstanding any later declared invalidity. If any provision determined invalid under the preceding sentence can either be judicially severed or interpreted in a way that could harmonize it with the remaining provisions, then it may be severed or interpreted and applied so as to give full purpose, meaning, and effect to the remaining provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2018-2450, § 1, 10-16-2018)  
Chapter 2.64 - HOUSING AUTHORITY AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 
 
2.64.010 - Housing authority—Declaration of need. 
It is declared that, because of the existence of unsafe and insanitary inhabited dwelling accommodations in National City, there is a need for a housing authority to function in the community. 
(Ord. 1484 § 1, 1975)  
2.64.020 - Housing authority—Established. 
The housing authority of the city is established. 
(Ord. 1484 § 3, 1975)  
2.64.030 - Housing authority—City council designated to act. 
The city council declares itself to be the Housing Authority of the city. 
(Ord. 1484 § 5, 1975)  
2.64.040 - Community development commission—Declaration of need. 
It is declared that there is a need for a community development commission to function in the community. 
(Ord. 1484 § 2, 1975)  
2.64.050 - Community development commission—Established. 
The community development commission of the city is established. 
(Ord. 1484 § 4, 1975)  
2.64.060 - Community development commission—Purpose—Operating authority. 
The community development commission of the city is created and established in order that the city will be enabled to operate and govern its redevelopment agency and its housing authority under a single board and as a single operating entity. 
(Ord. 1484 § 8, 1975)  
2.64.070 - Community development commission—City council designated to act. 
The city council declares itself to be the community development commission of the city. 
(Ord. 1484 § 6, 1975)  
2.64.080 - Community development commission—Powers and duties. 
The community development commission shall be vested with all of the powers, duties and responsibilities of both the redevelopment agency and the housing authority of the city, and shall be vested with any other powers, duties and responsibilities regarding community development which the legislative body may delegate to the community development commission subject to such conditions as may be imposed by the legislative body. 
(Ord. 1484 § 7, 1975)  
2.64.090 - Community development commission—Chairman and vice-chairman. 
The mayor of the city shall be the chairman, and the vice-mayor of the city shall be the vice-chairman of the community development commission. 
(Ord. 1484 § 9, 1975)  
2.64.100 - Community development commission—Executive director and secretary. 
The executive director and secretary of the redevelopment agency of the city shall be the executive director and secretary of the community development commission. 
(Ord. 1484 § 10, 1975)  
2.64.110 - Community development commission—Bylaws adopted. 
The bylaws of the redevelopment agency of the city adopted by Resolution No. 68-8 on October 29, 1968, as subsequently amended, are adopted as the bylaws of the community development commission. 
(Ord. 1484 § 11, 1975)  
2.64.120 - Community development commission—Manual of Administrative Policies and Procedures adopted. 
The Manual or Administrative Polices and Procedures of the redevelopment agency of the city as adopted by said agency by its Resolution No. 69-1 on January 7, 1969, as subsequently amended are adopted as the Manual of Administrative Policies and Procedures of the community development commission. 
(Ord. 1484 § 12, 1975)  
2.64.130 - Filing of ordinance required. 
The housing authority and the community development commission hereby authorized to function shall each cause a certified copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter to be filed with the Secretary of State and with the Department of Housing and Community Development, state of California. 
(Ord. 1484 § 13, 1975)  
Chapter 2.65 - PROPERTY ACQUISITION BY EMINENT DOMAIN 
 
2.65.010 - Acquisition of real property. 
Without limitation, the community development commission (CDC) may acquire real property, any interest in property, and any improvements on it by any means authorized by law including, without limitation, by gift, grant, exchange, purchase, cooperative negotiations, lease, option, bequest, or devise. 
In addition, the CDC may also employ eminent domain in projects involving land acquisition of any real property identified in Exhibit "A," incorporated herein by reference. Land acquisition by eminent domain shall occur only in designated "acquisition areas." 
To the extent required by law, the CDC shall not acquire real property on which an existing building is to be continued on its present site and in its present form and use without the consent of the owner, unless: (1) such building requires structural alteration, improvement, modernization or rehabilitation; or (2) the site or lot on which the building is situated requires modification in size, shape or use; or (3) it is necessary to impose upon such property any of the standards, restrictions and controls of this plan and the owner fails or refuses to participate in the plan by executing an owner participation agreement. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, or otherwise provided by law, no eminent domain proceeding to acquire property within acquisition areas of the project area shall be commenced after twelve years following the date of adoption of the ordinance adopting the redevelopment plan. Accordingly, under the existing plan, no eminent domain proceeding to acquire property shall be commenced after August 18, 2007. Such time limitation may be extended only by amendment of the plan. 
(Ord. 2293 (part), 2007)  
2.65.020 - Acquisition of personal property. 
Where necessary in the implementation of this plan, the CDC is authorized to acquire personal property in the project area by any lawful means. 
(Ord. 2293 (part), 2007)  
2.65.030 - Exclusion of single-family residential properties. 
In existing and added areas, single-family residential properties are specifically excluded from the use of eminent domain. 
(Ord. 2293 (part), 2007)  
2.65.040 - Relocation program. 
In accordance with the provisions of the California Relocation Assistance Law (Government Code Section 7260 et seq.), the guidelines adopted and promulgated by the California Department of Housing and Community Development (the "relocation guidelines") and the method of relocation adopted by the CDC, the CDC shall provide relocation benefits and assistance to all persons (including families, business concerns and others) displaced by CDC acquisition of property in the project area or as otherwise required by law. Such relocation assistance shall be provided in the manner required by the method of relocation. In order to carry out a redevelopment project with a minimum of hardship, the CDC will assist displaced households in finding decent, safe and sanitary housing within their financial means and otherwise suitable to their needs. The CDC shall make a reasonable effort to relocate displaced individuals, families, and commercial and professional establishments within the project area. The CDC is also authorized to provide relocation for displaced persons outside the project area. 
(Ord. 2293 (part), 2007)  
2.65.050 - Relocation benefits and assistance. 
The CDC shall provide all relocation benefits required by law and in conformance with the method of relocation, relocation guidelines, Relocation Assistance Act, the Redevelopment Law, and any other applicable rules and regulations. 
(Ord. 2293 (part), 2007) 
EXHIBIT A 
LOCATION OF REAL PROPERTY POTENTIALLY 
SUBJECT TO ACQUISITION BY EMINENT DOMAIN 
Pursuant to Section 603 of the Redevelopment Plan, the CDC may acquire the following properties through the use of eminent domain: 
"Existing Area", as defined in Section 300(m) of the Plan, means the merged National City Redevelopment Project Area originally formulated by Ordinance No. 1762 adopted by the City Council on December 1, 1981, and subsequently amended by Ordinance No. 1821 on May 22, 1984, Ordinance No. 1851 on April 16, 1985, and Ordinance No. 91-2013 on June 18, 1991, as depicted on Exhibit A of the Plan, as follows: 
• All parcels located immediately east and adjacent to National City Boulevard, between Division Street and the south City limits. 
• All parcels located immediately west and adjacent to National City Boulevard, between Division Street and State Route 54. 
• All parcels located immediately north and adjacent to Civic Center Drive, between Interstate 5 and National City Boulevard. 
• All parcels located immediately south and adjacent to Civic Center Drive, between Interstate 5 and National City Boulevard. 
• All parcels located immediately north and south and adjacent to 8th Street, between Interstate 5 and "D" Avenue. 
• Assessor's Parcel Numbers 556-560-41, 556-560-42, 556-560-43, and 556-560-44 located immediately southwest of the intersection of Plaza Boulevard and Highland Avenue. 
"Added Area", as defined in Section 300(A) of the Plan, means the territories included in the Project Area by Ordinance No. 95-2095 adopted by the City Council on July 18, 1995, as depicted on Exhibit "D" of the Plan, as follows: 
All property in the Added Area, excepting San Diego Unified Port District property. 
IN EXISTING AND ADDED AREAS, SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES ARE SPECIFICALLY EXCLUDED FROM THE USE OF EMINENT DOMAIN. 
  
Chapter 2.68 - RETIREMENT SYSTEM 
 
2.68.010 - Amendment to contract. 
An amendment to the contract between the city council and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees' Retirement System is authorized, a copy of the amendment being attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter, marked "Exhibit A," and by such reference made a part of this chapter as though herein set out in full. 
(Ord. 1725 § 1, 1980)  
2.68.020 - Administration. 
The city manager is authorized, empowered, and directed to execute the amendment for and on behalf of the agency. 
(Ord. 1725 § 2, 1980)  
Chapter 2.70 - REORGANIZATION 
 
2.70.010 - Deannexation of territory. 
No territory shall be deannexed from the City of National City unless and until such deannexation has been approved by a vote of the people. 
(Ord. 1804, 1983)  
Chapter 2.72 - TERM LIMIT FOR THE OFFICE OF MAYOR 
 
2.72.010 - Term limit for the office of mayor. 
No person shall be eligible for nomination and election to the office of mayor for more than three consecutive terms, and no person who has held the office of mayor for three consecutive terms, may again seek nomination and election to the office of mayor until one election cycle following the termination of the third term for mayor has elapsed; provided, however, that any person who is appointed by the city council to fill the office of mayor or elected in a special election for the balance of a regular term of mayor for a period of two years or less may seek nomination and election for three full terms thereafter. This section shall apply prospectively to full terms commencing after the November 2, 2004 general municipal election. 
(Ord. 2257 § 1, 2004)  
Chapter 2.73 - TERM LIMITS FOR ELECTED CITY OFFICES 
 
2.73.010 - Limits on consecutive terms of office for other elected officials in the city. 
No person shall be eligible for nomination and election to serve in the offices of members of the city council, city clerk, and city treasurer for more than three consecutive terms in the same elected office, and no person who has held the office of member of the city council, city clerk, or city treasurer for three consecutive terms may again seek nomination and election to that same elected office until one election cycle following the termination of the third term in that same elected office has elapsed. This limitation on terms shall not apply to any unexpired term to which a person is elected or appointed to fill a vacancy in the offices of members of the city council, city clerk, or city treasurer, if the remainder of the term is less than one-half of the full term of office. 
This section shall apply prospectively to full terms of office commencing after the June 5, 2018 statewide primary election. 
(Ord. No. 2018-2450A, § 3, 7-17-2018)  
2.73.020 - Lifetime limits terms of office for all elected officials in the city. 
A.  No person shall be eligible for nomination and election to serve in any elective city office, which shall include the offices of mayor, members of the city council, city clerk, and city treasurer, for more than six terms in all elected offices combined. This limitation on terms shall not apply to any unexpired term to which a person is elected or appointed to fill a vacancy in any elective city office, if the remainder of the term is less than one-half of the full term of office. 
B.  This section shall apply prospectively to full terms of office commencing after the June 5, 2018 statewide primary election. 
(Ord. No. 2018-2450A, § 3, 7-17-2018)  
Chapter 2.74 - ETHICS TRAINING 
 
2.74.010 - Ethics training—Required. 
The following persons shall receive training required by Government Code Section 53235 at least every two years, in a program approved by the city manager: 
A.  Mayor and members of the city council. 
B.  City clerk. 
C.  City treasurer. 
D.  Members of all boards and commissions identified in Title 16 of this code. 
E.  All employees who are required to file a statement of economic interests pursuant to the Political Reform Act, Government Code Section 87100, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2429, 2-7-2017)  
Title 3 - PERSONNEL 
Chapters:  
Chapter 3.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
3.04.010 - Purpose. 
Pursuant to the authority granted to the legislative body of any city in the state of California under provisions of Chapter 45, State Statutes, the following civil service system is adopted in order to accomplish the following purposes: 
A.  To obtain and retain the best qualified persons available for service with the city; 
B.  To promote and increase economy and efficiency in the service of the city; 
C.  To provide a comprehensive personnel system for the city civil service wherein: 
1.  Positions involving comparable duties and responsibilities are similarly classified and compensated, 
2.  Appointments are based upon merit and fitness ascertained from practical and competitive examinations, 
3.  Civil service employment is made a career by providing for security of tenure and the advancement of the employee within the service whenever practicable, 
4.  The rights and interests of the civil service employee are given due consideration consistent with the best interests of the city, 
5.  A high morale is developed among city civil service employees by providing adequately for leaves of absence, vacations and other considerations for the general welfare of the employees, 
6.  Tenure of civil service employment is subject to good behavior, efficiency, necessity of the performance of the work, and the appropriation of sufficient funds. 
(Ord. 1076 § 2(1), 1963)  
3.04.020 - Applicability. 
In accordance with Section 45000 et seq., of the California Government Code, the provisions of this title and city civil service rules apply to the classified service which includes all offices, positions and employment in the service of the city, except: 
1.  Elective officials; 
2.  Members of appointive boards, commissions, and committees; 
3.  City manager; 
4.  Assistant city manager; 
5.  City attorney; 
6.  Senior assistant city attorney; 
7.  City librarian; 
8.  Records management officer; 
9.  All department directors as so designated by city manager; 
10.  Persons engaged under contract or grant to supply expert, professional or technical services for a definite period of time; 
11.  Volunteer personnel who receive no regular compensation from the city; 
12.  Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of any emergency condition, such as an extraordinary fire, flood or earthquake; 
13.  Employees who are employed for less than twenty hours per week or who are employed temporarily for a definite period not exceeding twelve consecutive months. 
(Ord. 2181, 2001: Ord. 2072 § 1, 1994: Ord. 1943 § 1, 1988: Ord. 1441 (part), 1974; Ord. 1076 § 2(2), 1963)  
3.04.030 - Employees—Status. 
A.  Any person holding a position included in the competitive service, who, on the effective date of the ordinance codified herein, has served continuously in such position for one year prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified herein, shall assume regular status in the competitive service in the position held on such effective date without qualifying examination or working test and shall thereafter be subject in all respects to the provisions of this title. 
B.  Any other persons holding positions or employment in the competitive service shall be regarded as holding their positions or employment as probationers who are serving out the balance of their probationary periods before obtaining regular status in their present class. Their probationary period shall be computed from the date of appointment or employment. 
(Ord. 1076 § 2(3), 1963)  
Chapter 3.08 - ADMINISTRATION 
Sections: 
 
3.08.010 - Director of human resources. 
Under the authorization granted by Article 45005 of the State Statutes, there is created the office of the director of human resources. The city manager shall be ex officio director of human resources. The city manager may delegate any of the powers and duties conferred upon him as director of human resources under this title to any other officer or employee of the city or may recommend that such powers and duties be performed under contract as provided in Section 3.08.050. The director of human resources shall: 
A.  Attend all meetings of the civil service commission and serve as its secretary; 
B.  Administer all the provisions of this title and of the civil service rules not specifically reserved for the city council or the civil service commission; 
C.  Prepare and recommend to the civil service commission revisions and amendments to the civil service ordinance codified in this title and the civil service rules. The city attorney shall approve the legality of such provisions and amendments prior to their submission to the commission. Such revisions and amendments shall become effective upon approval by the city council; 
D.  Prepare and recommend to the commission revisions to the position classification plan including class specifications. Such revisions shall become effective upon approval by the city council; 
E.  Under direction of the city council prepare revisions to the compensation plan covering all classifications in the competitive service. The revisions shall become effective upon approval by the council. 
(Ord. 2221 § 1, 2003: Ord. 1076 § 3(1), 1963)  
3.08.020 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 3, adopted Feb. 5, 2013, repealed § 3.08.020 which pertained to the civil service commission and derived from Ord. No. 1076 § 3(2), 1963; Ord. No. 1826, 1984; Ord. No. 1943 § 2, 1988; Ord. No. 2134, 1997; and Ord. No. 2221 § 2, 2003.  
3.08.030 - Civil service rules. 
Civil service rules prepared by the director of human resources, subject to this title and to revision by the commission and the city council, shall be adopted and may be amended from time to time by resolution of the city council. The rules shall establish specific procedures and regulations governing the following phases of the civil service system: 
A.  Preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of the position classification plan covering all positions in the competitive service, including employment requirements and qualifications for each class; 
B.  Public announcements of all tests and the acceptance of applications for employment; 
C.  Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use of resulting employment lists containing names of persons eligible for appointment; 
D.  Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists and the making of temporary and emergency appointments; 
E.  Evaluation of employees; 
F.  Transfer, promotion, demotion and reinstatement of employees in the competitive service; 
G.  Separation of employees from the city service through layoff, suspension, and dismissal; 
H.  The establishment and maintenance of suitable methods for effective communication between employees and their supervisors, between employees and city manager, and between employees and the civil service commission relating to conditions of employment in the city service; 
I.  Content maintenance and use of personnel records and forms. 
(Ord. 2221 § 3, 2003: Ord. 2072 § 2, 1994: Ord. 1076 § 3(3), 1963)  
3.08.040 - Funds. 
The council shall appropriate such funds as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 1076 § 3(4), 1963)  
3.08.050 - Special service—Contract. 
The council may contract with any qualified person or agency for the performance of such technical services as may be desired in the establishment or operation of the civil service system. The contract may include delegation to the person or agency so retained of all or a part of the responsibility and duties imposed in this title upon the director of human resources, including his/her duties under Section 3.08.020, but shall not include the delegation of powers to be vested only in the council or civil service commission. 
(Ord. 2221 § 4, 2003: Ord. 1076 § 3(5), 1963)  
Chapter 3.12 - EMPLOYMENT 
Sections: 
 
3.12.010 - Examinations—Generally. 
A.  Appointments to vacant career positions in the competitive service shall be based on merit and fitness to be ascertained, so far as practicable, by competitive examinations. 
B.  Notice of time, place and general scope of every examination shall be posted in a conspicuous place, in the civic center, at the office of the appropriate department, and such other places as the personnel director deems appropriate not less than five working days prior to the last date for accepting applications to take such examinations. 
C.  Examination for the establishment of the eligible lists shall be competitive and of such character as fairly to test and determine the qualifications, fitness and ability of competitors actually to perform the duties of the class of position for which they seek appointment. Examinations may be assembled or unassembled, written or oral, or in the form of a demonstration of skill or any combination of these. Any investigation of character, personality, education and experience and any tests of intelligence, capacity, technical knowledge, manual skill or physical fitness may be employed. 
D.  The commission shall establish minimum standards for determining the fitness and qualifications of the employee for each class of position and for such purposes may require such certificates of citizens, physicians, public officers or others having knowledge of the applicant as the good of the service may require. It may require necessary documentary evidence of honorable discharge from the armed forces of the United States, possession of valid license for various purposes or other evidence of identification, fitness and qualification. 
E.  Examination papers of candidates are not subject to public inspection; however, within the provisions of the personnel rules, a candidate may compare his own answers against the correct answers for errors in scoring and may at a separate time review all nonstandardized questions and correct answers used in his examination. 
F.  Candidates may appeal to the commission their score on any phase of the examination including written, oral or performance examination or their rejection for consideration for candidacy upon the grounds of substantive irregularity, bias, fraud or error. Candidates' judgment of the suitability or appropriateness of the examination are not grounds for appeal. A candidate's appeal must be submitted in writing to the commission in the proper form and within the time limits established by the personnel rules and must state specifically and particularly wherein he/she believes the provisions of this title or the personnel rules have been violated or an error has been made. The decision of the commission shall be final. Appointments legally made from an appropriate list resulting from an examination shall not be invalidated if the eligible list is subsequently amended as a result of scoring or grading changes made by the civil service commission. 
(Ord. 2022 (part), 1991; Ord. 1440 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1076 § 4(1), 1963)  
3.12.020 - Employment lists. 
A.  Priority for consideration for employment shall be given to the various employment lists in the following order: recall lists, promotional lists, transfer lists, reemployment lists and open-competitive lists. 
B.  The recall list for any position consists of the names of probationary and career employees who have been laid off or demoted, for lack of work or lack of funds, from a position in the same class or an equivalent class to that in which the vacancy exists. Such names shall be placed on the recall list in reverse order of layoff and shall remain on the list for a maximum of three years. Employees whose positions have been reallocated to a lower class, but who have not been demoted for cause, shall also have their names placed on the reemployment list for the class from which their position was reallocated. 
C.  The promotional list consists of the names of career employees who have been successful in a promotional examination for a higher class. 
D.  The transfer list consists of the names of career employees who request transfer to another position for which they meet the qualifications and are at substantially the same salary range. 
E.  The reemployment list consists of the names of former career employees who request reinstatement to a formerly held or comparable classification for which they qualify. 
F.  The open-competitive list consists of the names of persons not employed by the city who have been successful in an examination, or of employees of the city who have passed the examination but who have not completed the initial probationary period in the competitive service, or in the case where an examination has been designated as open- competitive only, the names of all passing candidates, whether career employees, noncareer employees, or persons not employed by the city, shall be placed on the list in order of their scores. 
G.  Employment lists expire at such time as the civil service commission determines, provided that: 
1.  Names shall remain on the recall list for a period of not more than thirty-six months; 
2.  Promotional lists shall have an eligibility period of not more than twenty-four months. 
3.  Transfer, reemployment, and open-competitive list shall have an expiration date of not more than twelve months. 
H.  The appointing authority may, with the approval of the personnel director, reinstate to a vacant position any person who has resigned in good standing from a position in a class in the competitive service, provided that such re-instatement is accomplished within twelve months of the date of resignation. 
(Ord. 2022 (part), 1991: Ord. 1943 § 3, 1988: Ord. 1076 § 4(2), 1963)  
3.12.030 - Appointment. 
A.  The city manager shall be the appointing authority. However, each department director shall recommend the persons to be hired for vacancies in his/her department consistent with the provisions of this title and the personnel rules. Appointments must be approved by the city manager. 
B.  When appointment is to be made to a vacancy in the competitive service, the names of the most qualified persons, based on the provisions of this title, who are willing to accept appointment shall be certified to the appointing authority in the order in which they appear on the employment lists consistent with the personnel rules. The appointment shall be limited to any of those certified candidates except, when the appointing authority finds none of the certified candidates acceptable, he/she may request that the personnel director authorize the certification of additional candidates from available eligible lists. Based upon the determination that the certified candidates have been fairly considered and that the certification of additional candidates will best serve the interests of the city and the civil service system, the personnel director may authorize the certifications of the next three highest eligible candidates consistent with the personnel rules. 
C.  In the event that there are less than five names on all available eligibility lists, the appointing authority may request that the personnel director again recruit and merge new eligibles onto the appropriate list consistent with the personnel rules. 
D.  In the absence of an appropriate and valid eligible list, the appointing authority may make a provisional appointment of a person meeting the minimum qualifications for the classification in which the vacancy exists. No person may be employed by the city under provisional appointment for a total of not more than one hundred eighty calendar days except that in the event of extreme critical conditions, a provisional appointment may be extended for an additional ninety-day period with the approval of the civil service commission. Except as provided above, eligible list shall be established as soon as possible for any permanent position filled by provisional appointment. No special credit or preference shall be allowed in any examination for service rendered under a provisional appointment. Provisional appointments are limited to initial entry into the classified service. 
E.  Appointments to noncareer positions may be, but need not be, made from appropriate eligible lists. Persons appointed to those positions shall not by virtue of this appointment be in the competitive service. Appointments of this type shall include employment for the replacement of employees on leave of absence or during the period of suspension of an employee or while final action on proceedings to review the suspension, demotion or dismissal of an employee is pending. No person shall be employed for a period inconsistent with the personnel rules. 
(Ord. 2022 (part), 1991: Ord. 1076 § 4(3), 1963)  
3.12.040 - Personal requirements. 
The personnel director may refuse to examine or to declare as eligible or may withdraw from certification prior to appointment anyone who comes under any of the following categories, any applicant who: 
A.  Lacks any of the requirements established by the commission for the examination or class for which he applies; 
B.  Is physically or mentally so disabled as to be rendered unfit to perform the duties of the position for which he seeks appointment; 
C.  Is addicted to the use of intoxicating beverages to excess; 
D.  Is addicted to the use of narcotics or habit forming drugs; 
E.  Has been convicted of a felony or convicted of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
F.  Has intentionally attempted to practice any deception or fraud in his application, in his examination or in securing his eligibility; 
G.  Has waived appointment or interview more than once after certification from the same employment list; 
H.  Has failed to reply within a reasonable time to communications concerning his availability for appointment. 
(Ord. 2022 (part), 1991: Ord. 1076 § 4(4), 1963)  
3.12.050 - Examinations—Promotional. 
A.  Examinations may be specified by the personal director as open only to present qualified city employees on a promotional basis or open to all qualified persons or a combination thereof. It shall be the policy of the commission to encourage the general practice of promotion within the city service whenever, in their view, a sufficient number of qualified candidates are available and such a policy will continue to contribute to a sound and efficiently operating city organization. 
B.  When the vacancy to be filled is other than for a position in the competitive service, then the city council shall determine whether the examination to fill said vacancy shall be a promotional examination or an open examination open to all qualified persons or a combination thereof. In the event the vacancy to be filled is other than for a position in the competitive service, then the city manager shall notify the city council of such fact and shall advise the personnel director of the council's instructions in regard to the type of recruitment and examination. 
(Ord. 2022 (part), 1991: Ord. 1281 (part), 1971; Ord. 1076 § 4(5), 1963)  
3.12.060 - Veterans. 
The civil service commission may determine that all honorably discharged veterans of the armed forces of the United States who served during time of war or their widows who receive a total passing score in examinations for entrance into the competitive service may be given a veteran's preference consistent with personnel rules. No additional veteran's points shall be credited on any promotional examination. 
(Ord. 2022 (part), 1991: Ord. 1076 § 4(6), 1963)  
3.12.070 - Age limits. 
As stated in Sections 45050, 45051, 45052, 45053 and 45054 of the California Government Code, any person possessing all the minimum qualifications for a position is eligible to take any civil service examinations regardless of age and no rule or policy shall be adopted prohibiting the employment of any person otherwise qualified in any city employment solely because of age with the following exceptions: 
A.  This section does not require nor authorize the city to employ any person in a particular city employment if he has attained the retirement age for the particular employment prescribed by the retirement system which covers city employees; 
B.  A person shall not be employed in the competitive service while he is receiving a retirement allowance under any retirement system of the city by reason of prior service with the city. 
(Ord. 2022 (part), 1991: Ord. 1943 § 4, 1988: Ord. 1440 § 2, 1974; Ord. 1076 § 4(7), 1963)  
3.12.080 - Probation. 
Any employee may be released at any time without cause during the first year of service in a regular appointment, including promotional. The personnel rules shall define qualifying service and procedures for release during the probationary period. This action may not be appealed or subject to the grievance procedure except upon the grounds of violation of Chapter 3.32. An employee released during the probationary period from a position to which he has been promoted shall be reinstated to the position from which he was promoted unless he is dismissed from the city's service as provided in this title and the personnel rules. An employee in the competitive service promoted or transferred to a position which is not in the competitive service shall be reinstated to the position from which he was promoted or transferred if within one year after such promotion or transfer action is taken to reject or dismiss him, unless he is discharged in the manner provided in this title and the personnel rules for positions in the competitive service. 
(Ord. 2022 (part), 1991: Ord. 1943 § 5, 1988: Ord. 1076 § 4(8), 1963)  
3.12.090 - Emergency employment. 
Irrespective of anything to the contrary in this title, the city council by a four-fifths vote may provide for the emergency employment of any person to hold any office or position in the city. Such person shall not be subject to the requirements, regulations and qualifications of the civil service system nor acquire civil service or other permanent status because of the emergency appointment; however, the civil service commission may provide that an emergency appointee selected from an eligible list, who is otherwise eligible for permanent appointment, may become a regular member of the competitive service. No emergency appointee may be employed by the city for more than ninety days in any twelve-month period during peacetime except that in the event emergency conditions still persist, an emergency appointment may be extended for an additional ninety days. Pursuant to Sections No. 45080, 45081, 45082 and 45083 of the California Government Code, and irrespective of anything to the contrary in this title, during any wartime emergency the city council by a four-fifths' vote may authorize emergency appointments for the duration of the war as defined in Section 45083 of the Government Code. The council first shall find that the national mobilization of trained manpower makes it impractical for the city to recruit personnel pursuant to the regular requirements established in this title. 
(Ord. 2022 (part), 1991: Ord. 1076 § 4(9), 1963).  
Chapter 3.16 - SERVICE 
Sections: 
 
3.16.010 - Conduct. 
Every city employee shall fulfill to the best of his ability the duties of the office or position conferred upon him and shall prove himself in his behavior inside and outside the service worthy of the esteem which his office or position requires. In his official activities the city employee shall pursue the common good and not only be impartial but so act as to neither endanger his impartiality nor to give occasion for distrust of his impartiality. 
(Ord. 1076 § 5(1), 1963)  
3.16.030 - Conflict of interest prohibited. 
A city employee shall not engage in any employment, activity or enterprise which has been determined to be inconsistent, incompatible or in conflict with his duties as a city employee or with the duties, functions or responsibilities of his department. Each department head shall determine and prescribe subject to approval of the commission, those activities which, for employees under his jurisdiction, will be considered inconsistent, incompatible or in conflict with their duties as city employees. 
(Ord. 1076 § 5(3), 1963)  
3.16.040 - Military service—Reinstatement. 
Any member of the competitive service who is called or volunteers to serve in a branch of the military service or Peace Corps of the United States shall, upon his return, and with an honorable discharge or certificate of honorable service, be entitled to reinstatement in his classification or a classification which is judged equivalent by the civil service commission. However, he must apply officially for reinstatement within thirty days of the time he is discharged from service. 
(Ord. 1076 § 5(4), 1963)  
3.16.060 - Leave—Injury or disease. 
As required and in accordance with Section 45010 California Government Code, any period of time during which an employee is required to be absent from his position by reason of an injury or disease for which he is entitled to receive compensation under the provisions of Division 4 (commencing with Section 3201) of the Labor Code is not a break in his continuous service for the purpose of his right to salary adjustments, sick leave, vacation or seniority. 
(Ord. 1191 (part), 1968; Ord. 1076 § 5(6), 1963)  
Chapter 3.20 - ABOLITION OF POSITION 
Sections: 
 
3.20.010 - Layoff. 
Whenever, in the judgment of the council, it becomes necessary in the interests of economy or because the necessity for positions in the competitive service no longer exists, the city council may abolish it and shall order layoffs, demotions or transfers for employees holding such positions without filing written charges. An employee may appeal the method of application of the layoff procedure but not the decision to layoff employees. As required by Section 45100 of the California Government Code, seniority shall be observed in effecting such reduction in personnel. 
Reduction in personnel will be accomplished by implementing the appropriate personnel rules which have been adopted by the commission and approved by the council or implementing the procedures in the applicable memorandum of understanding with the various bargaining groups. 
(Ord. 2072 § 4, 1994: Ord. 1943, § 6, 1988: Ord. 1076 § 6(1), 1963)  
3.20.020 - Re-employment. 
The names of probationary and career employees who were laid off or who accepted downgrade in lieu of layoff shall be placed on recall lists for classes which, in the opinion of the personnel officer, require basically the same qualifications and duties and responsibilities as those of the class of positions from which the layoff was made. Names of persons laid off or demoted shall be placed upon recall lists in the manner stated in the personnel rules. 
(Ord. 2072 § 5, 1994: Ord. 1076 § 6(2), 1963)  
Chapter 3.24 - DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS 
Sections: 
 
3.24.010 - Authority—Procedure. 
Department heads or their designees are vested with the responsibility and authority to impose discipline upon employees. It is the intent and spirit of this title to provide a fair and just approach to the treatment of city employees but in no sense to handicap or curtail the responsible administrative officer in securing efficient service. Under this authority a department director or his/her designee may impose action to dismiss, demote, suspend, or reduce the pay of an employee subject to duly adopted personnel rules. 
(Ord. 2072 § 6, 1994: Ord. 1943 § 7, 1988: Ord. 1076 § 7(1), 1963)  
3.24.020 - Cause. 
In order to bring one of the disciplinary actions stated in Section 3.24.010 against a regular career employee who has successfully completed the initial probationary period, a department head or his/her designee must cite one or more of the causes cited in the personnel rules. 
(Ord. 2072 § 7, 1994: Ord. 1076 § 7(2), 1963)  
Chapter 3.28 - APPEAL AND HEARING 
Sections: 
 
3.28.010 - Procedure. 
Any employee in the competitive service shall have the right to appeal to the civil service commission in accordance with duly adopted personnel rules. 
(Ord. 2072 § 8, 1994: Ord. 1943 § 8, 1988: Ord. 1076 § 8(1), 1963)  
3.28.020 - Recommendation—Basis. 
The civil service commission may recommend modification or rejection of a disciplinary action only on one or more of the following criteria: 
A.  There is not substantial evidence to support the need for the disciplinary action. 
B.  A substantive violation or omission of procedure for disciplinary action was made. 
C.  The action taken resulted from political, religious or ethnic bias or prejudice or was based on sex, sexual orientation, marital status, national origin, age or nonjob-related disability. 
D.  The action taken was unreasonable, capricious or arbitrary in view of the events, the circumstances surrounding the events, and the past record of the employee. 
(Ord. 1943 § 4, 1988: Ord. 1076 § 8(2), 1963)  
Chapter 3.32 - PROHIBITIONS AND OFFENSES 
Sections: 
 
3.32.010 - Examinations—Dishonesty prohibited. 
In accordance with Articles No. 45200 and 45201, state statutes, it is unlawful for any person: 
A.  Willfully, by himself or in cooperation with another person, to defeat, deceive or obstruct any person with respect to his right of examination, application or certification for employment under the civil service system of the city; 
B.  Willfully and falsely to mark, grade, estimate or report upon the examination or proper standing of any person examined or certified under this civil service system of the city or to aid in so doing or make any false representation concerning the same or the person examined; 
C.  Willfully to furnish to any person any special or secret information for the purpose of either improving or injuring the prospects or chances of any person examined, certified or to be examined or certified under the civil service system of the city; 
D.  To impersonate another person or to permit or aid in any manner any other person to impersonate him in connection with any examination, application or request to be examined under the civil service system of the city; 
E.  To furnish or obtain examination questions or other examination material prepared and intended for use in any examination under the civil service system of the city before such examination; 
F.  To use any unfair means to cause or attempt to cause any eligible person to waive any rights obtained under the civil service system of the city. 
(Ord. 1076 § 9(1), 1963)  
3.32.030 - Soliciting contributions. 
No officer, agent, clerk or employee under the government of the city and no candidate for any city office shall directly or indirectly solicit or receive or be in any manner concerned in soliciting or receiving any assessment, subscription, contribution or political service whether voluntary or involuntary for any political purpose whatsoever from anyone on an employment list or holding any position under the provisions of this title. No officer or employee in the competitive service shall directly or indirectly solicit or receive or be in any manner concerned in soliciting or receiving any assessment, subscription or contribution whether voluntary or involuntary for any purpose affecting his working conditions from any person other than an officer or employee in the competitive service. 
(Ord. 1076 § 9(3), 1963)  
3.32.040 - Discrimination. 
No person in the competitive service or seeking admission thereto shall be employed, promoted, demoted or discharged or in any way illegally favored or discriminated against because of political opinions or affiliations or because of ethnic background, religious belief, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, marital status or disability. 
(Ord. 1943 § 10, 1988: Ord. 1076 § 9(4), 1963)  
Chapter 3.36 - LONGEVITY PAY 
Sections: 
 
3.36.020 - Break in service—Authorized. 
Vacations, sick leave, military leave and absence authorized by the city manager shall not be considered as interruption of service or seniority. 
(Ord. 2072 § 10, 1994: Ord. 1023 § 1, 1962: Ord. 916 § 2, 1957)  
3.36.030 - Break in service—Unauthorized. 
In the event an officer or employee ceases to be employed by the city for a reason other than military service, all rights to previously earned seniority shall be forfeited and expire, and if said officer or employee subsequently is reemployed by the city he shall not be entitled to any seniority by reason of any prior employment. 
(Ord. 2072 § 11, 1994: Ord. 916 § 3, 1957)  
Chapter 3.40 - POLICE STANDARDS 
Sections: 
 
3.40.010 - State aid desired. 
The city council declares that it desires to qualify for state aid for the training of police officers under the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4, of the Penal Code of California. 
(Ord. 996 § 1, 1961)  
3.40.020 - Applicability. 
In accordance with Section 45000 et seq., of the California Government Code, the provisions of this title and city civil service rules apply to the classified service which includes all offices, positions and employment in the service of the city, except: 
1.  Elective officials; 
2.  Members of appointive boards, commissions, and committees; 
3.  City manager; 
4.  Assistant city manager; 
5.  City attorney; 
6.  Senior assistant city attorney; 
7.  City librarian; 
8.  Records management officer; 
9.  Special assistant to the Mayor; 
10.  All department directors as so designated by city manager; 
11.  Persons engaged under contract or grant to supply expert, professional or technical services for a definite period of time; 
12.  Volunteer personnel who receive no regular compensation from the city; 
13.  Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of any emergency condition, such as an extraordinary fire, flood or earthquake; 
14.  Employees who are employed for less than twenty hours per week or who are employed temporarily for a definite period not exceeding twelve consecutive months. 
(Ord. 2219, 2003: Ord. 1973 § 1, 1989: Ord. 996 § 2, 1961)  
3.40.030 - Adherence to standards. 
Pursuant to Section 13512 of Chapter 1, Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code, the Commission on Police Officer Standards and Training and its representatives may make such inquiries as deemed appropriate by the commission to ascertain that the city's police officers and public safety dispatcher personnel adhere to standards for selection and training established by the Commission. 
(Ord. 1973 § 2, 1989)  
Title 4 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 4.04 - FUNDS 
Sections: 
 
4.04.010 - Funds designated. 
The arrangement of funds in the city treasury is so altered that there shall be in the treasury the funds following: 
A.  There shall be the following funds applicable to the purposes classified by the State Controller under the head "General Government": 
1.  A salary fund; 
2.  An election fund; 
3.  A light and water fund; 
4.  A general fund; 
5.  An engineering fund. 
B.  There shall be the following funds applicable to the purposes classified by the State Controller under the head "Protection of Life and Property": 
1.  A police fund; 
2.  A fire fund; 
3.  A pound fund. 
C.  There shall be the following funds applicable to the purposes classified by the State Controller under the head "Health Conservation and Sanitation": 
1.  A health fund; 
2.  A street cleaning and sprinkling fund; 
3.  A sewer repair fund. 
D.  There shall be applicable to the purpose classified by the State Controller under the head "Education" a library fund. 
E.  There shall be the following funds applicable to the purposes classified by the State Controller under the head "Charities and Corrections": 
1.  An indigent fund; 
2.  A jail building fund; 
3.  A jail fund. 
F.  There shall be applicable to the purpose classified by the State Controller under the head "Recreation," a park fund. 
G.  There shall be the following funds applicable to the purposes classified under the head "Streets and Highways": 
1.  A street maintenance and repair fund; 
2.  A street lighting fund. 
H.  There shall be the following funds applicable to the purposes classified by the State Controller as "Public Works": 
1.  A new building fund; 
2.  A new street fund; 
3.  A new bridge fund; 
4.  A new sewer fund. 
I.  The following funds now existing in the city treasury are hereby continued in existence: 
1.  Sinking fund No. 1; 
2.  Sinking fund No. 2; 
3.  The fire department hose bond fund; 
4.  The fire alarm bond fund. 
J.  There shall be a fund to be known as the Judgment and Bail Fund applicable to the purposes classified by the State Controller as "Judgments and Miscellaneous other Expenditures." 
(Ord. 390 § 1, 1912)  
4.04.020 - Disposition of moneys. 
All moneys now in the city treasury in funds other than sinking funds are disposed of as follows: 
A.  All moneys in the existing salary fund are transferred to the new salary fund which is declared to be a continuation of the present salary fund; 
B.  All moneys in the existing general fund are transferred to the new general fund which is declared to be a continuation of the present general fund; 
C.  All moneys in the existing library fund are transferred to the new library fund, which is declared to be a continuation of the present library fund; 
D.  All moneys in the existing dog fund are transferred to the new pound fund; 
E.  All funds heretofore existing in the city treasury and not expressly continued in existence are abolished. 
(Ord. 390 § 2, 1912)  
4.04.030 - Reports—Classification of funds. 
In all quarterly and annual reports of the city clerk and city treasurer hereafter to be rendered the funds reported as received and disbursed shall be classified with respect to the funds established or continued in this chapter. 
(Ord. 390 § 3, 1912)  
Chapter 4.06 - ADMINISTRATION AND COLLECTION 
Sections: 
 
4.06.020 - Cost recovery for penalties and interest on certain indebtedness owed to the city. 
A.  Except as provided otherwise by ordinance, franchise or an agreement approved by the city council, penalties or interest, or both, shall be charged against unpaid taxes, debts and other revenues owed to the city as follows: 
1.  Interest. Interest shall be charged at the rate of one and one-half percent per month or fraction thereof on the unpaid balance, exclusive of penalties, of all taxes or debts owed to the city after the date the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
2.  Penalty. Penalty shall be assessed on the unpaid balance after the due date against unpaid taxes, revenues and other fees established by ordinance at the rate of ten percent or at the rate of twenty-five percent for the intentional or fraudulent failure to pay the amount due. The penalty shall be assessed on a one-time basis. 
B.  The finance director may authorize the execution of an agreement to pay the delinquencies in subsection A and any interest and penalty due in monthly installments over a period not to exceed one year. Execution of the agreement shall not exonerate previously accrued interest and penalty against the account, but no further interest shall accrue on amounts included in the agreement while the debtor is not in breach of the agreement. If, however, a default in payment occurs, then the deferred interest on the unpaid balance shall reattach back to the date of execution of the agreement and shall become due and payable. 
C.  The city manager or the finance director, upon the concurrence of the city attorney, may waive penalties or interest, or both, in whole or in part, when it is determined that such waiver is in the best public interest. 
(Ord. 2234 § 1 (part), 2003)  
4.06.030 - Cost recovery for audit services. 
The costs and related charges incurred by the city in auditing tax and revenue accounts are subject to cost recovery when an underreporting of tax or revenue is determined by audit. Recoverable costs shall include the costs paid to an auditor or audit recovery service, or the salary and overhead of city staff auditors performing the audit. Interest and penalties shall be due on the underreported revenue or tax deficiency from the date the amount was due until it is paid in accordance with Section 4.06.020. When appropriate, collection costs shall also be subject to cost recovery pursuant to Section 4.06.040. 
(Ord. 2234 § 1 (part), 2003)  
4.06.040 - Collection. 
A.  Whenever charges are not paid within a reasonable time following demand, the director of finance and the city attorney, as applicable, are authorized to prosecute the claim to judgment in an appropriate court with jurisdiction and to take any other action appropriate for collection without further direction from the city council after demand has been refused. The council shall be notified when litigation is initiated. 
B.  The city attorney is authorized to collect any amounts due by civil or administrative action, or both, together with all costs incurred in the collection of that indebtedness after demand for payment has been refused. Costs for legal services shall be based on actual billings for legal services or, when performed by the city attorney, the charges for comparable and customary hourly attorney fees charged in San Diego County. 
(Ord. 2234 § 1 (part), 2003)  
Chapter 4.08 - CAPITAL OUTLAY FUND 
Sections: 
 
4.08.010 - Created. 
There is created a fund to be known as the capital outlay fund. 
(Ord. 725 § 1, 1946)  
4.08.020 - Function—Resources. 
The capital outlay fund shall be an accumulation of moneys of the city as a reserve for future expenditures. Any unencumbered surplus in any municipal fund that may be used for the general expense of the city remaining on hand at the end of each fiscal year may be transferred to such fund. 
(Ord. 1720 (part), 1980: Ord. 725 § 2, 1946)  
4.08.030 - Disbursal. 
The city council may, at its option, from time to time, by resolution, transfer any unencumbered surplus to any existing fund. 
(Ord. 1720 (part), 1980: Ord. 725 § 3, 1946)  
Chapter 4.12 - GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND 
Sections: 
 
4.12.010 - Created. 
To comply with the provisions of Article 5 of Chapter 1 of Division I of the Streets and Highways Code, with particular reference to the amendments made thereto by Chapter 642, Statutes of 1935, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the special gas tax street improvement fund. 
(Ord. 641 § 1, 1935)  
4.12.020 - Resources. 
All moneys received by the city from the state under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein for, or the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways other than state highways shall be paid into said fund. 
(Ord. 641 § 2, 1935)  
4.12.030 - Expenditures. 
All moneys in said fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to all of the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division I of the Streets and Highways Code. 
(Ord. 641 § 3, 1935)  
Chapter 4.16 - HARBOR IMPROVEMENT FUND 
Sections: 
 
4.16.010 - Created. 
There is created and established a municipal fund designated as the harbor improvement fund of the city. 
(Ord. 644 § 1, 1936)  
4.16.020 - Use designated. 
All rentals and leases hereafter collected from tidelands leased by the city shall be paid in and credited to the harbor improvement fund. All funds credited to and impounded in the harbor fund shall be used exclusively for the purpose of construction, maintenance and repair of bulkheads, piers, docks and wharves constructed upon the tidelands within the corporate limits of the city, and for the dredging of channels and turning basins, and providing for anchorage of vessels within that portion of the San Diego Bay lying within the prolongation of the northern and southern boundary line of the city and for such other purposes of the city council as are from time to time deemed necessary for the improvement of the waterfront and harbor of the city. 
(Ord. 644 § 2, 1936)  
4.16.030 - Supplementary funds. 
The city council may, at its option, from time to time, by ordinance or resolution, add to the harbor improvement fund, by the transfer of unallocated and unused municipal funds from the general fund, or from any other municipal fund that may be used for the general expense of the city. 
(Ord. 644 § 3, 1936)  
Chapter 4.20 - PROPERTY TAX 
Sections: 
 
4.20.010 - Duties transferred to county officials. 
The duties of assessing property and collecting taxes provided by law to be performed by the assessor and tax collector of the city shall be performed by the county assessor and the county tax collector. Such assessing property and collecting taxes to be performed beginning with the fiscal year 1950-51, and each succeeding fiscal year thereafter until the city shall by ordinance elect not to have such duties performed by said assessor or tax collector for any longer time, all of which is in accordance with and permitted by Section 1 of Act 8464 of the General Laws of the state. 
(Ord. 767 § 1, 1949)  
4.20.020 - Compensation of county. 
The amount of compensation to be charged and paid to the county for the performance of the services of assessment and collection of taxes shall be fixed by agreement by the board of supervisors of San Diego County and the city council, provided not more than one percent be charged for collecting the first twenty-five thousand dollars so collected, and not more than one-quarter of one percent, for all sums over that amount. 
(Ord. 767 § 2, 1949)  
Chapter 4.24 - SALES AND USE TAX 
Sections: 
 
4.24.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "uniform local sales and use tax ordinance." 
(Ord. 1390 § 1, 1973)  
4.24.020 - Rate. 
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. 
(Ord. 1390 § 2, 1973)  
4.24.030 - Operative date. 
This chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1974. 
(Ord. 1390 § 3, 1973)  
4.24.040 - Purpose. 
The city council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
B.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
C.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes; 
D.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1390 § 4, 1973)  
4.24.050 - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax ordinance codified herein; provided, that if this city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified herein. 
(Ord. 1390 § 5, 1973)  
4.24.060 - Sales tax. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 4.24.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. 
(Ord. 1390 § 6, 1973)  
4.24.070 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. 1390 § 7, 1973)  
4.24.080 - Use tax. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in Section 4.24.020 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. 1390 § 8, 1973)  
4.24.090 - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. 1390 § 9, 1973)  
4.24.100 - Limitations on adoption of state law. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "State" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that Code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. 1390 § 10, 1973)  
4.24.110 - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 1390 § 11, 1973)  
4.24.120 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city, in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
D.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Ord. 1807 § 1, 1983: Ord. 1390 § 12, 1973)  
4.24.130 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes. 
D.  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax. 
E.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
F.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Ord. 1807 § 2, 1983: Ord. 1390 § 13, 1973)  
4.24.140 - Application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions. 
A.  Section 4.24.120 shall be operative January 1, 1984. 
B.  Section 4.24.130 shall be operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the State of California which amends Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code or which repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i) (7) and (i) (8) of Section 7202 as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983. 
(Ord. 1807 §§ 3, 4, 1983: Ord. 1390 § 14, 1973)  
4.24.150 - Amendments. 
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1390 § 15, 1973)  
4.24.160 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandamus or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. 1390 § 16, 1973)  
4.24.170 - Violation—Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as set forth in Section 1.20.010. 
(Ord. 1621, 1978; Ord. 1390 § 17, 1973)  
4.24.180 - Furnishing of Board of Equalization Schedule C (BOE 530) and Schedule F (BOE 531-F) by designated taxpayers. 
A.  In order to ensure proper allocation of sales tax revenue and avoidance of penalties and interest to affected businesses, the city council finds it is important to the viability of both the city and the business economy that sales tax revenues be tracked more efficiently. It is the intent of this section to develop a mechanism to allow timely comparison of sales tax activity with receipts from the State Board of Equalization. Accordingly, designated businesses within the city are required to furnish the city with current copies of Board of Equalization (BOE) Schedule C (BOE 530 DETAILED ALLOCATION BY SUBOUTLET OF UNIFORM LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX) and Schedule F (BOE 531-F DETAILED ALLOCATION BY CITY OF 1% UNIFORM LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX) when filing their quarterly sales and use tax returns with the BOE. The copy shall be provided to the finance director no later than fifteen days after the date the return is due at BOE. 
B.  The finance director is responsible for determining those businesses that rank within the top one hundred sales tax producers and notify those businesses of the requirement under this section to provide copies of the schedules to the city finance department. No business shall be informed of or be provided the identity of any other business on the list of designated businesses. 
C.  BOE Schedules C and F shall be used by the finance director solely for the purpose of ensuring that the city receives appropriate sales tax credit from the BOE, and for no other purpose. Such verification may include discussion with the concerned business providing the copy regarding sales tax allocation by that business. The copies of Schedules C and F are not public records and shall not be released to any person or entity outside the city finance office. The copies of schedules furnished to the finance director shall be treated as confidential documents pursuant to Revenue and Taxation Code Section 7056, and shall be destroyed upon verification by the city that proper sales tax allocation has occurred and city revenues have been credited accordingly. Any list of designated businesses shall also be treated as a confidential document and shall not be publicly released. Data from individual copies of Schedule C or F may be combined into a statistical or financial abstract, provided there is no identification of any individual business. 
D.  Violation of this section by any city official, officer or employee is subject to penalty as prescribed by law. 
(Ord. 2234 § 2, 2003)  
Chapter 4.28 - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX 
Sections: 
 
4.28.010 - Created. 
The city levies a tax on each deed, instrument, or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be or are granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars. 
(Ord. 1179 § 1, 1967)  
4.28.020 - Rate. 
The rate of tax shall be twenty-seven and one half cents for each five hundred dollars or fractional part thereof of the consideration or value given for the interest on property conveyed. 
(Ord. 1179 § 2, 1967)  
4.28.030 - Responsibility for payment. 
The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the person who makes, signs, or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. 
(Ord. 1179 § 3, 1967)  
4.28.040 - Exemptions. 
Exemptions from this tax shall be granted under those circumstances enumerated in Sections 11921, 11922, 11923, 11924, 2nd 11925 of the state Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(Ord. 1179 § 4, 1967)  
4.28.050 - Collection—Allocation. 
The county, its officers and employees are authorized, directed, and requested to collect the tax levied by this chapter and allocate the proceeds thereof pursuant to the provisions of Section 11932 of the state Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(Ord. 1179 § 5, 1967)  
Chapter 4.32 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
Sections: 
 
4.32.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the transient occupancy tax ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. 1100 § 1, 1964)  
4.32.020 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter: 
A.  "Hotel" means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for temporary occupancy by guests for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, any mobile home, house trailer or recreational vehicle located at a fixed location, or any other similar structure or portion thereof used for temporary occupancy. 
B.  "Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
C.  "Operator" means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character, other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purpose of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
D.  "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
E.  "Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
F.  "Tax administrator" means the city treasurer or finance director. 
G.  "Transient" means any person who exercises temporary occupancy or is entitled to temporary occupancy in a hotel, as defined, by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement that is subject to the provisions of Civil Code Section 1940(b). 
(Ord. 2195 § 1 (part); Ord. 1100 § 2, 1964)  
4.32.030 - Tax imposed. 
A.  For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of ten percent of the rent charged by the operator for each day of the first thirty days of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient subject to tax, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be considered. The tax is due for each full or partial consecutive period of occupancy by that transient. Said tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city, which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the tax administrator. 
B.  Any tax collected shall be refunded to a transient guest after his or her occupancy exceeds thirty continuous days. Refund of tax shall not alter the transient status of the guest under Civil Code Section 1940(b). 
(Ord. 2195 § 1 (part); Ord. 2032 § 1, 1992: Ord. 1656 § 1, 1978; Ord. 1629 § 4, 1978; Ord. 1212 § 1, 1968: Ord. 1100 § 3, 1964)  
4.32.040 - Exemptions. 
A.  No tax shall be imposed: 
1.  When hotel rents are directly paid by the United States government or its agencies or instrumentalities, or by a transient while he or she is on official business as an employee of the United States government or a federal agency or instrumentality. This exemption does not exempt a transient who is employed by a business entity that is under contract to a federal entity from payment of the tax for a room rented by that transient even though the payment is later to be reimbursed by the federal entity; 
2.  When hotel rents are directly paid by the state of California or a state agency. This exemption does not exempt a transient who is employed by the state from payment of the tax for a room rented by that transient even though the payment is later to be reimbursed to the transient by the state. 
3.  When the transient is by treaty or federal or state law exempt from payment of transient occupancy taxes. 
B.  No exemption shall be granted under subsections (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) except upon a claim therefore made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. Documentation in support of the claim for exemption, such as copies of government issued contracts, official travel orders, government credit card payment vouchers, purchase orders or checks, shall be presented with the exemption form. Completed exemption forms along with supporting documentation shall be returned to the tax administrator with the corresponding tax remittance. 
(Ord. 2195 § 1 (part); Ord. 2056 § 1, 1993: Ord. 1100 § 4, 1964)  
4.32.050 - Operator—Collection. 
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. 1100 § 5, 1964)  
4.32.060 - Operator—Registration. 
Within thirty days after the effective date of this chapter, or within thirty days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register the hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from him a "Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate" to beat all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. The certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
A.  The name of the operator; 
B.  The address of the hotel; 
C.  The date upon which the certificate was issued; 
D.  "This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department, or office of this City. This certificate does not constitute a permit." 
(Ord. 1100 § 6, 1964)  
4.32.070 - Operator—Returns. 
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar month, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by the tax administrator, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator, with any exemption forms and supporting documentation applying to the reporting period. The return is filed as of the date of the receipt issued by the tax administrator or if mailed as of the date of postmark, provided payment is actually received by the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder when deemed necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and the tax administrator may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. 
(Ord. 2195 § 1 (part); Ord. 2056 § 2, 1993: Ord. 1100 § 7, 1964)  
4.32.080 - Delinquency—Penalties—Interest. 
A.  Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
B.  Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed. 
C.  Fraud. If the tax administrator determines the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A. and B. of this section. 
D.  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
E.  Penalties Merged With Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax required to be paid. 
F.  Exemptions Disallowed. Any exemption deducted from total rents without proper documentation or submission of the exemption form shall be disallowed by the tax administrator. The operator shall have thirty days from notice by the tax administrator or his/her delegate to submit forms and documentation before the tax and a penalty assessed on the disallowed exemption amount is due. 
(Ord. 2234 § 3, 2003; Ord. 2056 § 3, 1993; Ord. 1100 § 8, 1964)  
4.32.090 - Operator refusal—Determination of tax. 
If any operator fails or refuses to collect said tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he deems best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address. Such operator may within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days' written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in said notice why said amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 4.32.100. 
(Ord. 1100 § 9, 1964)  
4.32.100 - Appeal. 
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of address. The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above, for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. 
(Ord. 1100 § 10, 1964)  
4.32.110 - Operator—Records. 
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three calendar years, excluding the then current year, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as the operator may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. 2195 § 1 (part); Ord. 1100 § 11, 1964)  
4.32.120 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter it may be refunded as provided in subsections B. and C. of this section provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator. 
B.  An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
C.  A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A. of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
D.  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Ord. 1100 § 12, 1964)  
4.32.130 - Responsibility for payment—Action. 
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter is liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. 
(Ord. 1100 § 13, 1964)  
4.32.140 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and punishable as prescribed in Section 1.20.010. 
B.  Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of an infraction and is punishable as aforesaid. 
C.  Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of an infraction and is punishable as aforesaid. 
(Ord. 1621, 1978; Ord. 1358 § 2 (part), 1973; Ord. 1100 § 14, 1964)  
Chapter 4.34 - SCHOOL FACILITIES DEDICATION AND FEES 
Sections: 
 
4.34.010 - Title for citation. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "School Facilities Dedication and Fee Ordinance." 
(Ord. 1622 Ch. 1 § 1, 1978)  
4.34.020 - Statutory authority. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 4.7 (commencing with Section 65970) of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 1622 Ch. 1 § 2, 1978)  
4.34.030 - Purpose and intent. 
This chapter is intended to implement the school facilities dedication and fees legislation of Chapter 4.7 of the California Government Code within the city and to provide authority whereby the city, affected school districts and applicants for land development approvals are aware of the requirements imposed. 
(Ord. 1622 Ch. 1 § 4, 1978)  
4.34.040 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
A.  "Conditions of overcrowding" means that the total enrollment of a school, including enrollment from proposed development, exceeds the capacity of such school as determined by the governing body of the district. 
B.  "Dwelling unit" is defined as all single-family residences, residential duplexes, apartment houses, condominiums, townhouses, and mobile homes, except that no school fee shall be levied upon residential condominiums limited to adults only, senior citizen housing projects, institutional residences, hotels, motels and hospitals. 
C.  "Reasonable methods for mitigating conditions of overcrowding" shall include, but are not limited to the following: 
1.  Agreements between a subdivider and the affected school district whereby temporary use buildings will be leased to the school district or temporary use buildings owned by the school district will be used. 
2.  The use of temporary portable classrooms, student bussing, classroom double sessions, year-round use of school facilities, school boundary realignments, and elimination of low priority school facility uses. 
3.  The use of available annual tax rate and bond revenues. 
4.  The use of funds which could be available from the sale of surplus school district real property and funds available from any other sources. 
D.  "Residential development" means a project containing residential dwellings of one or more units or a subdivision of land for the purpose of constructing one or more residential dwelling units, including a preliminary or final development plan, a subdivision tentative or final map, a parcel map, conditional use permit, or any other permit for residential use, any of which leads to the construction of a "dwelling unit" as defined in this section. 
(Ord. 1888 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1704 §§ 1, 2, 1980; Ord. 1622 Ch. 2 § 2, 1978)  
4.34.050 - City council authority. 
The city council may from time to time, by resolution, issue regulations to establish administration, procedures, interpretation and land policy direction for this chapter. 
(Ord. 1622 Ch. 1 § 5, 1978)  
4.34.060 - City council findings—Necessity for interim school facilities financing. 
The city council finds and declares as follows: 
A.  Adequate school facilities should be available for children residing in new residential developments; 
B.  Private residential developments may require the expansion of existing public schools or the construction of new school facilities; 
C.  In many areas of the city, the funds for the construction of new classroom facilities are not available when new development occurs, resulting in the overcrowding of existing schools; 
D.  New housing developments frequently cause conditions of overcrowding in existing school facilities which cannot be alleviated under existing law within a reasonable period of time; 
E.  That, for these reasons, new and improved methods of financing for interim school facilities necessitated by new development are needed in National City. 
(Ord. 1622 Ch. 1 § 6, 1978)  
4.34.070 - Compliance with general plan. 
The National City general plan provides for the location of public schools. Interim school facilities to be constructed from fees paid shall be consistent with the general plan. 
(Ord. 1622 Ch. 1 § 7, 1978)  
4.34.080 - Overcrowded attendance areas—School district findings—Notification of city council. 
If the governing body of a school district which operates an elementary or high school in the city makes a finding supported by clear and convincing evidence that: (1) conditions of overcrowding exist in one or more attendance areas within the district which will impair the normal functioning of educational programs including the reason for such conditions existing; and (2) that all reasonable methods of mitigating conditions of overcrowding have been evaluated and no feasible method for reducing such conditions exists, the governing body of the school district shall notify the city council. The notice of findings sent to the city shall specify the mitigation measures considered by the school district. After the receipt of any notice of findings complying with this section, the council shall determine whether it concurs in such school district findings. The council may schedule and hold a public hearing on the matter of its proposed concurrence prior to making its determination. If the city council concurs in such findings, the provisions of Section 4.34.110 shall be applicable to actions taken on residential development by such council. 
(Ord. 1622 Ch. 3 § 1, 1978)  
4.34.090 - Overcrowded attendance areas—School district findings—Contents. 
Any notice of findings sent by a school district to the city shall specify: 
A.  The findings listed in Section 4.34.080; 
B.  The mitigation measure and methods, including those listed in Section 4.34.040(C), considered by the school district and any determination made concerning them by the district; 
C.  The precise geographic boundaries of the overcrowded attendance area or areas; 
D.  Such other information as may be required by council regulation. 
(Ord. 1622 Ch. 3 § 2, 1978)  
4.34.100 - Overcrowded attendance areas—Residential development restrictions—Exceptions. 
Within the attendance area where it has been determined pursuant to Section 4.34.080 that conditions of overcrowding exist, the city shall not grant any permit for residential development or use, or approved a tentative subdivision map for residential purposes within such area, unless the city council makes one of the following findings: 
A.  That action will be taken pursuant to this chapter to provide dedications of land and/or fees to mitigate conditions of overcrowding; or 
B.  That there are specific overriding fiscal, economic, social or environmental factors which in the judgment of the city council would benefit the city, thereby justifying the approval of a residential development otherwise subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1888 § 2, 1986: Ord. 1622 Ch. 3 § 3, 1978)  
4.34.110 - Interim classroom facilities—Fee required when. 
For the purpose of establishing an interim method of providing classroom facilities where overcrowding exist as determined necessary pursuant to Section 4.34.060, the city may require the payment of fees as determined by the planning commission or the city council during the hearings for specific residential development projects as a condition to the approval of a residential development. Prior to imposition of the fees or dedications of land, it shall be necessary for the city council or the planning commission to make the following findings: 
A.  The general plan provides for the location of public schools; 
B.  The land or fees, or both, transferred to a school district shall be used only for the purpose of providing interim elementary or high school classroom and related facilities; 
C.  The amount of fees to be paid shall bear a reasonable relationship and will be limited to the needs of the community for interim elementary or high school facilities and shall be reasonably related and limited to the need for schools caused by the development; 
D.  The facilities to be constructed from such fees is consistent with the general plan. 
(Ord. 1622 Ch. 4 § 1, 1978)  
4.34.120 - Interim classroom facilities—Amount of fee. 
A.  General Standards. The amount of fees to be paid shall bear a reasonable relationship and will be limited to the needs of the community for interim elementary or high school facilities and shall be reasonably related and limited to the need for schools caused by the development. 
B.  The following schedule of fees shall be followed for payment of school fees to the National School District and the Sweetwater Union High School District: 
1 & 2 bedroom living unit 	$1,200.00 
3 bedroom living unit 	1,700.00 
4 bedroom living unit 	2,200.00 
5 or more bedroom living unit 	2,700.00 
Trailer parks, mobile home parks, etc. 	1,200.00 per trailer/ mobile home space 
 
The required fees shall be paid for each new residential dwelling unit to each school district. Fees shall not be required for construction of a new dwelling unit that is replacing an existing dwelling unit. 
(Ord. 1888 § 3, 1986: Ord. 1622 Ch. 4 § 2, 1978)  
4.34.130 - Interim classroom facilities—School district schedule of fee use. 
Following the decision by the city to require the payment of fees, and no later than thirty days thereafter, and prior to the levying thereof, the governing body of the school district shall submit a schedule specifying how it will use the land or fees, or both, to solve the conditions of overcrowding. The schedule shall include the school sites to be used, the classroom facilities to be made available, and the times when such facilities will be available. In the event the governing body of the school district cannot meet the schedule, it shall submit modifications to the city council and the reasons for the modifications. 
(Ord. 1622 Ch. 4 § 3, 1978)  
4.34.140 - Interim classroom facilities—Fee payment. 
A.  School fees, as stipulated in Section 4.34.120, shall be paid directly to the National School District and the Sweetwater Union High School District prior to issuance of building permits for any new dwelling unit in the city. Proof of payment in the form of a letter of availability and/or a school service availability letter from each of the respective school districts shall be submitted to the building department prior to issuance of a building permit, or as stipulated in Section 18.88.060. 
B.  Applicants for building permits for new dwelling units that are replacing existing dwelling units will not be required to pay school fees. 
(Ord. 1888 § 4, 1986: Ord. 1622 Ch. 4 §§ 4, 5, 1978)  
4.34.150 - Fees—Use. 
All fees, collected pursuant to this chapter and Section 18.88.060 shall be used only for the purpose of providing interim elementary or high school classroom and related facilities. 
(Ord. 1888 § 5, 1986: Ord. 1622 Ch. 5 § 1, 1978)  
4.34.160 - Fees—Distribution between overcrowded districts. 
Where two separate school districts operate schools in an attendance area where the city council concurs that overcrowding conditions exist for both school districts, the council will enter into an agreement with the governing body of each school district for the purpose of determining the distribution of revenues from the fees levied pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 1622 Ch. 5 § 2, 1978)  
4.34.170 - Fees—Reports and recordkeeping. 
As a condition of the collection of fees, any school district receiving funds pursuant to this chapter shall maintain a separate account for any fees paid and shall file an annual report with the city council on the balance in the account at the end of the previous fiscal year and the facilities leased, purchased or constructed during the previous fiscal year. In addition, the report shall specify which attendance areas will continue to be overcrowded when the fall term begins and where conditions of overcrowding will no longer exist. Such report shall be filed by August 1st of each year and shall be filed more frequently at the request of the city council. 
(Ord. 1622 Ch. 5 § 3, 1978)  
Chapter 4.40 - COLLECTION OF BAD CHECKS 
Sections: 
 
4.40.010 - Bad checks, drafts and other bank instruments—Expenses incurred by city to be collected—City treasurer authority. 
The city treasurer is authorized and directed to collect, from the makers thereof, all expenses incurred by the city in collecting on checks, drafts and other bank instruments which are returned to the city as drawee, having been dishonored by the maker's bank. 
(Ord. 1700 (part), 1979)  
4.40.020 - Collection fees—Established—Information signs. 
The city treasurer may establish minimum collection fees, based on actual cost of collection, and post the same for public information. 
(Ord. 1700 (part), 1979)  
4.40.030 - Liability for collection costs—Sign required. 
The city treasurer shall, from time to time, post for public view a sign announcing the liability of the makers of subject instruments for the cost of collecting thereof. 
(Ord. 1700 (part), 1979)  
Chapter 4.50 - BUILDING CONSTRUCTION FEES 
Sections: 
 
4.50.010 - Purpose. 
The continued increase in the development of dwelling units in the city, with the attendant increase in the population of the city, has created an urgency for the planning, acquisition, improvement and operation of public parks, playgrounds and recreational facilities to serve the increasing population of the city and an urgency for additional revenues with which to finance such public facilities. Thus, it is the intent of the city council that each builder of each dwelling unit to be constructed within the city shall, prior to construction, pay a fee as described in this chapter. The payment of such fee is required and assessed pursuant to the taxing power of the city and is solely for the purpose of producing revenue. Further it is the intent of the council that all revenue generated by the payment of such fee shall be used for the acquisition, improvement, development and operation of park or recreational facilities. 
(Ord. 2224 § 17 (part), 2003: Ord. 1288 § 1 (part), 1971: prior code § 2301)  
4.50.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the term: 
A.  "Dwelling unit" means each single-family dwelling, each pad for a mobilehome or trailer, and each unit of an apartment, duplex or multiple dwelling structure, designed as a separate habitation for one or more persons. 
B.  "Person" means every individual, partnership, firm or corporation that is to construct, or is to be responsible for the construction of a dwelling unit, or every individual, partnership, firm or corporation that is to construct, or is to be responsible for the construction of, a dwelling unit through the services of an employee, agent or independent contractor. 
(Ord. 2224 § 17 (part), 2003: Ord. 1288 § 1 (part), 1971: prior code § 2302)  
4.50.030 - Fee schedule. 
Every person constructing any dwelling unit in the city shall pay to the city the applicable fee as described in the following schedule: 
One hundred twenty-five dollars for each dwelling unit. For the purpose of establishing the applicable fee, each pad for a mobile home or trailer shall be considered as a potential dwelling unit and shall be assessed eighty-five dollars. 
(Ord. 2224 § 17 (part), 2003: Ord. 1629 § 3(h), 1978; Ord. 1288 § 1 (part), 1971: prior code § 2303)  
4.50.040 - Fee payment—Refund when. 
The applicable fee as described in this chapter shall be due and payable upon issuance by the city of the building permit for the construction of any dwelling unit. Any fee paid pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be paid one time only. Any fee paid pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be refunded by the city in the event that the building permit is not used for such construction. 
(Ord. 2224 § 17 (part), 2003: Ord. 1288 § 1 (part), 1971: prior code § 2304)  
4.50.050 - Use of fees. 
All fees collected pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be used solely for the acquisition, improvement and development of park or recreational facilities, which facilities shall be located and operated so as to reasonably meet the recreational needs of the increased population of the city and particularly the recreational needs of the occupants of those dwelling units, the construction of which was conditioned upon the payment of a fee or fees pursuant to the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2224 § 17 (part), 2003: Ord. 1288 § 1 (part), 1971: prior code § 2304)  
Chapter 4.52 - TRANSPORTATION DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE 
Sections: 
 
4.52.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the transportation development impact fee (TDIF) ordinance and may be cited as such. 
(Ord. 2310 § 1 (part), 2008)  
4.52.020 - Authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the Mitigation Fee Act, California Government Code Section 66000 et seq. 
(Ord. 2310 § 1 (part), 2008)  
4.52.030 - Intent and purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to make provision for assessing and collecting fees as a condition of approval of a subdivision map or prior to issuance of a development permit, including a building permit, to defray the actual or estimated costs of constructing planned transportation facilities necessary to accommodate increased traffic generated by future development consistent with Sections 66000 et seq., of the California Government Code (Mitigation Fee Act). Application of this fee will include, but is not limited to, development for residential, commercial and industrial land uses. 
This TDIF does not replace normal subdivision map exactions or other measures required to mitigate site specific impacts of a development project including, but not limited to, mitigation imposed pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act and imposed as conditions of approval upon a development project as part of the development review process; regulatory and processing fees; fees required pursuant to a development agreement; funds collected pursuant to a reimbursement agreement that exceed the developer's share of public improvement costs; or assessment district proceedings, benefit assessments, or taxes. 
The fees collected pursuant to this chapter are to fund identified transportation facilities, or portions thereof, that will provide increased road capacity necessitated by the cumulative impacts of future development. The transportation facilities for which these fees are collected are identified as "TDIF Facilities" in the adopted transportation impact fee program report. Further studies, including environmental review, may show superior alternative facilities that also provide the needed increased capacity. Once such studies are completed, fees collected under this division may be used to fund those superior alternative facilities. 
(Ord. 2310 § 1 (part), 2008)  
4.52.040 - Findings. 
The city council of the city of National City, consistent with California Government Code Sections 66000 et seq., of the Mitigation Fee Act, finds that: 
A.  The further development of property within the city, as detailed in the transportation impact fee program report, will require the construction of additional transportation facilities. In addition, San Diego Association of Governments (SANDAG) policy as expressed through the TransNet extension ordinance and expenditure plan is that new development shall contribute towards the regional arterial system through the regional transportation congestion improvement program (RTCIP). The RTCIP has an impact fee component to achieve its goals. Included in the regional arterial system are certain roadways in the city of National City, which are also part of the city's transportation impact fee program. The TDIF advances a legitimate public interest by enabling both SANDAG and the city of National City to fund improvements to transportation infrastructure required to accommodate new development. 
B.  The fees established herein are based upon estimated costs of identified transportation facilities, or portions thereof, the costs of which have been based on relative vehicular volumes attributable to future development. The TDIF will fund expanded facilities identified in the transportation impact fee program report, and would also include those facilities identified in the RTCIP located within the city of National City, all to serve new development. 
Costs for planned transportation facilities are identified in the transportation impact fee program report. Costs funded by the TDIF may include project administration and management, design and engineering, right-of-way acquisition, and construction. More detailed descriptions of planned facilities, including their location, to the extent known, are shown in the transportation impact fee program report and other documents, such as the city's general plan. The list of planned improvements contained in the transportation impact fee program report may change to meet changing circumstances and needs, as the city of National City deems necessary. The TDIF will not be used to correct existing deficiencies in the roadway system. 
C.  There is a reasonable relationship between construction of identified transportation facilities, or portions thereof, and the additional vehicular trips attributable to future development. The city of National City will restrict TDIF revenues to capital projects identified on the transportation impact fee program report to serve new development. In that report, certain improvements are also part of the regional arterial system identified in the SANDAG RTCIP. Improvements funded by the TDIF will expand certain arterials within the city of National City, making them accessible to the additional residents and workers associated with new development. The projects identified in the transportation impact fee program report will expand the capacity of the portions of the regional arterial system located within the city of National City to accommodate the increased trips generated by new development. Thus, there is a reasonable relationship between the use of fee revenues and the residential and nonresidential types of new development that will pay the TDIF. 
D.  There is a reasonable relationship between the need for identified transportation facilities, or portions thereof, and the future development. New dwelling units and building square footage are indicators of the demand for transportation improvements needed to accommodate growth. As additional dwelling units and building square footage are created, the occupants of these structures generate additional vehicle trips and place additional burdens on the transportation system. 
The need for the TDIF is based on the SANDAG transportation model projections of growth that show an increase in vehicle hours of delay on the regional arterial system primarily as a result of new development even with planned improvements to that system. The model estimated impacts from new development based on trip generation rates that varied by land use category, providing a reasonable relationship between the type of development and the need for improvements. 
E.  There is a reasonable relationship between the amount of the fee and the cost of transportation facilities, or portions thereof, attributable to future development. This reasonable relationship between the TDIF for a specific development project and the cost of the facilities attributable to that project is based on the estimated vehicle trips the project will add to the regional arterial system. The total fee for a specific residential development is based on the number and type of new dwelling units multiplied by the trip generation rate for the applicable residential land use category. The fee for a specific nonresidential development is based in a similar manner on the amount of building square footage by land use category. Larger projects generate more vehicle trips and pay a higher fee than smaller projects of the same land use category. Thus, the fee ensures a reasonable relationship between the TDIF for a specific development project and the cost of the improvements attributable to the project. 
F.  The imposition of TDIF on all new development associated with the generation of new traffic within the city of National City is necessary in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare and in order to assure effective implementation of National City's general plan. 
(Ord. 2310 § 1 (part), 2008)  
4.52.050 - Definitions. 
The definitions set forth in this section shall govern the application and interpretation of this chapter: 
"Applicant" means developer or person seeking a development permit. 
"Building permit" means a permit required and issued by the City of National City. 
"City" means the City of National City. 
"City of National City transportation impact fee program" is the fee study entitled "City of National City Transportation Impact Fee Program," dated March 2008, approved and adopted by the city council on April 1, 2008. The City of National City transportation impact fee program is maintained for public review in the engineering department of the City of National City. 
"Construction" means design, performance of estimates, environmental assessments and studies, determination of fees, acquisition of right-of-way, administration of construction contracts, and actual construction. 
"Developer" means the owner or developer of a development seeking a development permit. 
"Development permit" means any permit or approval from the City of National City including, but not limited to, a general plan amendment, zoning or rezoning of property, a conditional use permit, a design permit, a coastal development permit, a variance permit, a planned development permit, subdivision map, parcel map, building permit, or any another permit for construction, reconstruction, or development. 
"Development project" or "development" means any activity described in Section 66000 et seq., of the California Government Code. 
"Industrial" means any use of land specified as an industrial use in Title 18 of this Code. 
"Institutional units" mean a nursing home, home for the aged, assisted living facility, or similar institutional units. 
"Multifamily" means any use of land specified as a multifamily use in Title 18 of this Code. 
"New development" means any development requiring a development permit. 
"Residential" means any use of land specified as a residential use in Title 18 of this Code. 
"Single-family" means any use of land specified as a residential use in Title 18 of this Code. 
"TDIF" means transportation development impact fee. 
"TDIF facilities" means the transportation facilities, or portions thereof, identified in the City of National City Transportation Impact Fee Program, or future city approved alternatives that substantially fulfill the transportation needs identified and represented by a listed facility. 
"TDIF reports" means the City of National City Transportation Impact Fee Program report dated March 2008, and approved and adopted by the city council on April 1, 2008. This report shall be changed or periodically updated by action of the city council pursuant to Section 4.52.100 of this chapter. The current adopted reports are on file with the city clerk of the City of National City. 
"Transportation facility project" means that project or portion of project, which involves the specified improvements in the City of National City Transportation Impact Fee Program. 
(Ord. 2310 § 1 (part), 2008) 
(Ord. No. 2010-2340, 5-18-2010)  
4.52.060 - Application of chapter. 
This chapter establishes the requirements for the TDIF for all new development within the city of National City. This chapter shall apply to all new development except as exempted by state or federal law, or as specifically exempted in this chapter. In cases where a development is specifically exempt by law from this chapter, but that development has cumulative transportation impacts required to be mitigated by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), the city can accept TDIF payment to mitigate cumulative impacts. 
The TDIF is limited to providing funding in the amounts and for those improvements specified in the city of National City transportation impact fee program. Nothing in this chapter shall restrict the ability of the city to require dedication of land, payment of fees or construction of improvements for needs other than, or in addition to, the improvements specified in the city of National City transportation impact fee program. 
The requirement of this chapter shall apply to projects for which building permits are issued on or after July 1, 2008. 
(Ord. 2310 § 1 (part), 2008)  
4.52.070 - Transportation development impact fee requirement—Residential. 
A.  Commencing July 1, 2008, prior to the issuance of any building permit for residential development in the city of National City, a transportation development impact fee shall be paid in the following amount based upon the use of land: 
Residential Land Use 	Fee 
Single-family 	$ 2,000.00 per 
dwelling unit 
Multifamily 	2,000.00 per 
dwelling unit 
 
B.  The fee shall be paid before the issuance of building permits for each development project within the city of National City. No building permit shall be issued within the city of National City unless and until the TDIF has been paid in full. In the case of discretionary permits that will not involve a building permit, but which will involve new development, payment of the fee shall be recommended as a condition of permitting to the decision-making body that would approve such permit. 
(Ord. 2310 § 1 (part), 2008)  
4.52.080 - Transportation development impact fee requirement—Nonresidential. 
A.  Commencing July 1, 2008, prior to the issuance of any building permit for commercial, office/service, or industrial development in the city of National City, a transportation development impact fee shall be paid in the following amount based upon the use of land: 
Nonresidential Land Use 	Fee 
Commercial 	$ 2,704.00 per 1,000 square feet 
Office/services 	6,002.00 per 1,000 square feet 
Industrial 	2,519.00 per 1,000 square feet 
 
B.  The fee shall be paid before the issuance of building permits for each development project within the city of National City. No building permit shall be issued within the city of National City unless and until the TDIF has been paid in full. In the case of discretionary permits that will not involve a building permit, but which will involve new development, payment of the fee shall be recommended as a condition of permitting to the decision-making body that would approve such permit. 
(Ord. 2310 § 1 (part), 2008)  
4.52.090 - Transportation development impact fee requirement—Nonresidential—Suspension of imposition. 
The imposition of the TDIF upon nonresidential development, as set forth in Section 4.52.080, shall be suspended from being imposed until one of the following occurs: 
A.  SANDAG requires the city to collect a transportation development impact fee from nonresidential development, the city thereafter holds a public hearing to consider whether to release the suspension, and the city determines to release the suspension; or 
B.  The city council determines, after a public hearing, that the suspension should be released based upon the public health, safety, and welfare of the city of National City; or 
C.  The passage of at least two years from the date of the adoption of this chapter, a public hearing is held before the city council to consider whether the continuance of the suspension of the fee upon nonresidential should remain in place, and the city council determines the suspension should be released. 
(Ord. 2310 § 1 (part), 2008)  
4.52.100 - Annual adjustment of fees. 
The TDIF shall be adjusted annually starting July 1, 2009, and on each July 1st thereafter, based on the following factors: 
A.  The cost index used by SANDAG for the annual adjustment to the RTCIP impact fee. 
B.  Changes in the type, size, location or cost of the transportation facilities, if any, to be financed by the TDIF, changes in land use designations in the city's general plan, and upon other sound engineering, financing, and planning information. 
C.  Adjustments to the TDIF resulting from review of the factors above may be made by resolution amending the fee schedule and subject to compliance with the Mitigation Fee Act. 
(Ord. 2310 § 1 (part), 2008)  
4.52.110 - Use of fee. 
The revenue raised by payment of the TDIF shall be placed in a separate and special account or fund in a manner to avoid any commingling with other revenues and funds of the city of National City; and, such revenues, along with any interest earnings on the account or fund, shall be used solely to: 
A.  Pay for the city's future construction of facilities described in the city of National City transportation impact fee program, or to reimburse the city for those described or listed facilities constructed by the city with funds advanced by the city from other resources; or 
B.  Reimburse developers who have been required or permitted by Section 4.52.130 to install such listed facilities which are oversized with supplemental size, length, or capacity, relative to demand generated by the subject project; or 
C.  Pay costs required for the administration of this chapter, including, but not limited to costs incurred in conducting hearings required by state law. 
The TDIF fund, including accrued interest, shall be subject to the all of the applicable provisions of Government Code Section 66000 et seq., including but not limited to the requirements for accounting, reporting and expenditure of the fund for the improvements specified in the city of National City transportation impact fee program. 
(Ord. 2310 § 1 (part), 2008)  
4.52.120 - Transportation facilities to be financed by the fee. 
A.  The transportation facilities and programs to be financed by the fee established by this chapter are identified in the city of National City transportation impact fee program. 
B.  The city council may modify or amend the city of National City traffic impact fee program in order to maintain compliance with the circulation element of the city's general plan. 
(Ord. 2310 § 1 (part), 2008)  
4.52.130 - Developer construction of transportation facilities. 
Whenever a developer of a development project would be required, as a condition of approval of a development permit, to construct or finance the construction of a portion of a transportation facility identified in the city of National City traffic impact fee program, the city council may impose an additional requirement that the developer install the improvements with supplemental size, length or capacity in order to ensure efficient and timely construction of the transportation facilities network. If such a requirement is imposed, the city council shall, in its discretion, enter into a reimbursement agreement with the developer. The reimbursement agreement can be for either in the form of a cash payment or a credit against the fee otherwise levied by this chapter on the development project, or some combination thereof. The determination of the form is at the sole discretion of the city. 
The reimbursement amount shall not include the portion of the improvement needed to provide services or mitigate the need for the facility or the burdens created by the development. 
A developer shall not receive cash reimbursement from the appropriate TDIF fund until all developers who have previously executed reimbursement agreements payable from the same fund have been fully reimbursed or until such agreements have expired. The maximum term of any reimbursement agreement shall be twenty-five years. 
(Ord. 2310 § 1 (part), 2008)  
4.52.140 - Exemptions. 
The following new development shall be exempt for the application of the provisions of this chapter: 
A.  Public facilities, government buildings, public buildings, public schools. 
B.  Uses with the following characteristics or activities as a principal use of land, generally described as "community purpose facility:" 
1.  Social service activities, including such services as Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, Boys Club and Girls Club, YMCA and services for the homeless; 
2.  Public schools (elementary and secondary); 
3.  Private schools (elementary and secondary); 
4.  Day care (nonprofit only); 
5.  Senior care and recreation (nonprofit only); and 
6.  Worship, spiritual growth and development. 
C.  Condominium conversions. 
D.  Moderate, low, very low, and extremely low income residential units as defined by Health and Safety Code Sections 50079.5, 50093, 50105, 50106, and by reference in Government Code Section 65585.1. 
E.  Rehabilitation and/or reconstruction of any legal residential structure and/or the replacement of a previously existing residential unit. 
F.  Development projects subject to development agreements prior to May 28, 2004 that expressly prohibit the imposition of impact fees, however, if the terms of the development agreement are extended beyond July 1, 2008, then the requirements of this chapter shall apply, 
G.  Guest dwellings. 
H.  Additional residential units located on the same parcel regulated by the provisions of any agricultural zoning. 
I.  Kennels and catteries established in conjunction with an existing residential unit. 
J.  The sanctuary building of a church, mosque, synagogue, or other house of worship eligible for property tax exemption. 
K.  Institutional units if the following findings are made and documented prior to the issuance of a final occupancy permit: 
1.  The individual units will not have both a bathroom and permanent built-in kitchen facilities equipped with a cooking range, refrigerator, and sink; and 
2.  The principal reason a person will live in the unit is because the person needs medical and/or nursing care; and 
3.  The developer has agreed that the unit in substance will be used as a health care facility rather than as a residence. 
(Ord. 2310 § 1 (part), 2008) 
(Ord. No. 2340, 5-18-2010)  
4.52.150 - Fee waivers and reductions. 
A.  Temporary uses. A development which is designed and intended as a temporary use (three years or less) and which is conducted in facilities which are, by their nature, short-term interim facilities such as a portable or modular building (including mobile homes, trailers, etc.) may apply to the director of building and safety for a waiver, reduction, or deferral. The director of building and safety shall have the authority to grant such waivers, reductions, or deferrals. 
B.  Deferrals. A deferral of the payment of the TDIF may be granted on the basis of demonstrated economic hardship on the condition that: (1) the use offers a significant public benefit; (2) the amount deferred bears interest at a fair market rate so as to constitute an approximate value equivalent to a cash payment; and (3) the amount deferred is adequately secured by agreement with the applicant. 
C.  Fee Adjustments. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the applicant as defined in this chapter shall, as a part of the development permit process, have the right to present evidence to the director of engineering to demonstrate that the fee calculation and/or amount of fee established by the city council is incorrect or inequitable as applied in such case. The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating any inaccuracy or inequity by serving on the director of engineering, engineering studies and cost estimates necessary to support the applicant's contentions. 
If the applicant is processing an application for which the TDIF fee is a condition of approval, the studies and cost estimates must be served on the director of engineering no later than thirty days prior to approval of the project. The director of engineering shall then make a recommendation regarding fee adjustment to the city hearing body. Upon review of the director of engineering's recommendation, the hearing body shall have the authority to change the amount of fee when it finds the amount so established is incorrect or inequitable in the specific case. The decision of the city's hearing body shall be final, and any additional appeals shall be in accordance with the city subdivision ordinance or zoning ordinance, whichever applies to the application being processed. 
If the applicant is seeking a ministerial permit, the appeal, required engineering studies and cost estimates can be served on the director of engineering anytime prior to development permit issuance. The director of engineering shall review the requested fee adjustment and shall have the authority to change the amount of fee when it finds the amount so established is incorrect or inequitable in the specific case. The decision of the director of engineering shall be final. 
(Ord. 2310 § 1 (part), 2008)  
4.52.160 - Refund of fees. 
If a building permit or development permit expires, is cancelled, or is voided and if any fees paid pursuant to this chapter have not been expended and no construction has taken place pursuant to such building permit or development permit, the director of building and safety shall, upon written request, refund the fee and any interest earned on the fee, less any administrative costs, to the applicant of record. 
(Ord. 2310 § 1 (part), 2008)  
4.52.170 - Severability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any person, association, corporation or to any property as to whom or which it is beyond the power of the city of National City to impose the fee herein provided. If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter, or any fee imposed upon any person or entity is found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality, or invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section or part of this chapter, or person or entity; and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or other parts of this chapter, or its effect on other persons or entities. It is declared to be the intention of the city council that this chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter not been included herein; or had such person or entity been expressly exempted from the application of this chapter. To this end the provisions of this chapter are severable. 
(Ord. 2310 § 1 (part), 2008)  
4.52.180 - Effective date. 
This chapter shall take effect on July 1, 2008. 
(Ord. 2310 § 1 (part), 2008)  
Chapter 4.60 - TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX* 
Sections: 
 
4.60.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "City of National City Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance." This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city. 
(Ord. 2278 § 1 (part), 2006)  
4.60.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, "city" means the city of National City and "tax" means the transactions and use taxes, sometimes also referred to as "sales tax," imposed under the provisions of this chapter; "tax revenue" and "tax revenues" mean all proceeds of the tax received by the city from the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. 2278 § 1 (part), 2006)  
4.60.030 - Operative date. 
"Operative date" means the first day that the tax is imposed and collected. The operative date shall be October 1, 2006, unless a later operative date becomes effective under the provisions of Section 4.60.050 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2278 § 1 (part), 2006)  
4.60.040 - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the city to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if a majority vote of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose; 
B.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
C.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes; 
D.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2278 § 1 (part), 2006)  
4.60.050 - Contract with State Board of Equalization. 
Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. 
(Ord. 2278 § 1 (part), 2006)  
4.60.060 - Transactions tax rate. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in such territory on and after the operative date of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2278 § 1 (part), 2006)  
4.60.070 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer, unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. 2278 § 1 (part), 2006)  
4.60.080 - Use tax rate. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in such territory at the rate of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. 2278 § 1 (part), 2006)  
4.60.090 - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. 2278 § 1 (part), 2006)  
4.60.100 - Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code: 
A.  Wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when: 
1.  The word "state" is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; 
2.  The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; 
3.  In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to: 
a.  Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempted from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or 
b.  Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provision of that code; 
4.  In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
B.  The word "city" shall be substituted for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. 2278 § 1 (part), 2006)  
4.60.110 - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 2278 § 1 (part), 2006)  
4.60.120 - Exclusion; exemptions. 
A.  There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax. 
B.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from: 
1.  Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government; 
2.  Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this subsection, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied: 
a.  With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence, and 
b.  With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address; 
3.  The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter; 
4.  A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of this chapter; 
5.  For the purposes of subsections (B)(3) and (B)(4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
C.  There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property: 
1.  The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance; 
2.  Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California; 
3.  If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter; 
4.  If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of this chapter; 
5.  For the purposes of subsections (C)(3) and (C)(4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised; 
6.  Except as provided in subsection (C)(7) of this section, a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer; 
7.  "A retailer engaged in business in the city" shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city. 
D.  Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. 
(Ord. 2278 § 1 (part), 2006)  
4.60.130 - Permissible uses. 
The revenues of the tax shall be deposited in the city's general fund and may be used for any legal municipal purpose. 
(Ord. 2278 § 1 (part), 2006)  
4.60.140 - Amendments. 
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. 2278 § 1 (part), 2006)  
4.60.150 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. 2278 § 1 (part), 2006)  
4.60.160 - Severability. 
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. 2278 § 1 (part), 2006)  
4.60.170 - Expiration. 
The authority to levy the tax imposed by this chapter shall be extended twenty years from the initial expiration date of ten years from the operative date and shall expire at the conclusion of the twenty-year extension, unless the city council prior to the extended expiration date determines that the levy and collection of the tax is no longer necessary, in which case the city council has the authority to reduce the rate of tax, or to terminate the imposition of the tax. The city shall immediately notify the State Board of Equalization in writing in the event that the tax is reduced or terminated. The operative date of such rate reduction or termination shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than one hundred ten days after the State Board of Equalization receives such notice of termination. 
(Ord. 2278 § 1 (part), 2006) 
(Ord. No. 2014-2397, § 1, 8-5-2014)  
4.60.180 - Independent committee. 
Every five years, the mayor, with approval of the city council, shall appoint an independent committee comprised of three experts in financial matters, who will report their recommendations to the mayor and city council as to whether the transaction and use tax should remain in effect at the rate of one percent, or whether the city council should reduce the rate of tax or terminate the imposition of the tax pursuant to Section 4.60.170 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2278 § 1 (part), 2006)  
Chapter 4.70 - EMERGENCY RESPONSE COST RECOVERY FEE 
Sections: 
 
4.70.010 - Findings. 
A.  The City of National City is authorized to provide any service relating to the protection of lives and property including, but not limited to, fire protections services, rescue services, emergency medical services, hazardous material emergency response services, and other emergency response services. 
B.  The City of National City finds that the quantity and scope of services provided by the National City Fire Department are an increasing burden on the City of National City. 
C.  The City of National City may charge a fee to recover the reasonable costs of services necessary to protect the public health and safety associated with motor vehicle incidents, hazardous materials spills or discharges, motor vehicle fires, motor vehicle extrications, pipeline or power line incidents, and fire cause and origin investigations. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2341, 6-1-2010)  
4.70.020 - Fees for recovery of emergency response costs. 
The City of National City shall charge fees for the cost of services that the National City Fire Department provides related to motor vehicle incidents, motor vehicle fires, motor vehicle extrications, hazardous materials spills or discharges, pipeline or power line incidents, and fire cause and origin investigations. The fees shall not exceed the reasonable cost to provide such services and shall be charged according to the usual, customary, and reasonable fees as set by a schedule of fees. A motor vehicle incident, for the purposes of this chapter, means any matter involving an emergency response to a motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, collisions, accidents, fire, and extrication. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2341, 6-1-2010)  
4.70.030 - Adoption of fee schedule for recovery of emergency response costs. 
The City of National City adopts the fee schedule set forth in Exhibit A, and incorporates them herein as the usual, customary, and reasonable costs of the services identified in Exhibit A. The city council may amend, as needed, the schedule of fees in Exhibit A by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2341, 6-1-2010)  
4.70.040 - Persons subject to fee. 
The fees shall be billed, as determined by the director of emergency services, his or her designee or third party billing service, to any person or persons whose negligent or willful act is a cause of any motor vehicle incident or a technical rescue, and to any person or persons who is the owner of, or has custody and control over any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle incident. Fees for motor vehicle incidents shall not be billed to residents of the City of National City. Fees not related to motor vehicle incidents, such as those for hazardous material discharges or releases, or cause or origin investigations, shall be billed to the responsible party regardless of fault or residency, as determined by the director of emergency services, his designee or third party billing service. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2341, 6-1-2010)  
4.70.050 - Severability. 
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter, or any fee imposed upon any person or entity is found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality, or invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section, or part of this chapter, or person or entity; and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections, or other parts of this chapter, or its effect on other persons or entities. It is declared to be the intention of the city council that this chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid sentence, clause, section, or part of this Chapter not been included herein; or had such person or entity been expressly exempted from the application of this chapter. To this end the provisions of this chapter are severable. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2341, 6-1-2010) 
EXHIBIT A 
COST RECOVERY FEES 
BASED ON PER HOUR 
MOTOR VEHICLE INCIDENTS 
Level 1 - $435.00 
Provide hazardous materials assessment and scene stabilization. This will be the most common "billing level." This occurs almost every time a fire department responds to an accident/incident. 
Level 2 - $495.00 
Includes Level 1 services as well as clean up and material used (sorbents) for hazardous fluid clean up and disposal. We will bill at this level if the fire department has to clean up any gasoline or other automotive fluids that are spilled as a result of the accident/incident. 
Level 3 - CAR FIRE - $605.00 
Provide scene safety, fire suppression, breathing air, rescue tools, hand tools, hose, tip use, foam, structure protection, and clean up gasoline or other automotive fluids that are spilled as a result of the accident/incident. 
Level 4 - $1,800.00 
Includes Level 1 & 2 services as well as extrication (heavy rescue tools, ropes, airbags, cribbing etc.). We will bill at this level if the fire department has to free/remove anyone from the vehicle(s) using any equipment. We will not bill at this level if the patient is simply unconscious and fire department is able to open the door to access the patient. This level is to be billed only if equipment is deployed. 
Level 5 - $2,200.00 
Includes Levels 1, 2, & 4 services as well as Air Care (multi-engine company response, mutual aid, helicopter). We will bill at this level any time a helicopter is utilized to transport the patient(s). 
Level 6 
Itemized Response: You have the option to bill each incident as an independent event with custom mitigation rates, for each incident using, itemized rates deemed usual, customary and reasonable (UCR). These incidents will be billed, itemized per apparatus, per personnel, plus products and equipment used. 
HAZMAT 
Level 1 - $700.00 
Basic Response: Claim will include engine response, first responder assignment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, set-up and command. 
Level 2 - $2,500.00 
Intermediate Response: Claim will include engine response, first responder assignment, hazmat certified team and appropriate equipment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, set-up and command, Level A or B suit donning, breathing air and detection equipment. Set-up and removal of decontamination center. 
Level 3 - $5,900.00 
Advanced Response: Claim will include engine response, first responder assignment, hazmat certified team and appropriate equipment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, first responder set-up and command, Level A or B suit donning, breathing air and detection equipment and robot deployment. Set-up and removal of decontamination center, detection equipment, recovery and identification of material. Disposal and environment clean up. Includes above in addition to any disposal fees of material and contaminated equipment and material used at scene. Includes 3 hours of on scene time—Each additional hour @ $300.00 per HAZMAT team. 
PIPELINE INCIDENTS/POWER LINE INCIDENTS 
(Includes, but not limited to: Gas, Sewer, Septic to Sewer, and Water Pipelines) 
Level 1 - $400.00 
Basic Response: Claim will include engine response and first responder assignment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, first responder set-up and command. Includes inspection without damage or breakage. 
Level 2 - $1,000.00 
Intermediate Response: Claim will include engine response, first responder assignment, and appropriate equipment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, first responder set-up and command. May include HAZMAT team, Level A or B suit donning, breathing air and detection equipment. Supervise and/or assist pipeline repair. 
Level 3 - Itemized Claim Charges 
Advanced Response: Claim will include engine response, first responder assignment, and appropriate equipment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, first responder set-up and command. May include HAZMAT team, Level A or B suit donning, breathing air and detection equipment. Supervise and/or assist pipeline repair of intermediate to major pipeline damage. May include set-up and removal of decontamination center, detection, recovery and identification of material. Disposal and environment clean up. 
FIRE INVESTIGATION 
Fire Investigation Team - $275.00 per hour 
Includes: 
• Scene Safety 
• Investigation 
• Source Identification 
• K-9/Arson Dog Unit 
• Identification Equipment 
• Mobile Detection Unit 
• Fire Report 
The claim begins when the Fire Investigator responds to the incident and is billed for logged time only. 
FIRES 
Assignment - $400.00 per hour, per engine / $500.00 per hour, per truck 
Includes: 
• Scene Safety 
• Investigation 
• Fire/Hazard Control 
This will be the most common "billing level." This occurs almost every time a fire department responds to an incident. 
OPTIONAL: A fire department has the option to bill each fire as an independent event with custom mitigation rates. 
Itemized, per person, at various pay levels and for itemized products use. 
WATER INCIDENTS 
Level 1 
Basic Response: Claim will include engine response, first responder assignment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, first responder set-up and command, scene safety and investigation (including possible patient contact, hazard control). This will be the most common "billing level." This occurs almost every time a Fire Department responds to a water incident. 
Billed at $400.00 plus $50.00 per hour, per rescue person. 
Level 2 
Intermediate Response: Includes Level 1 services as well as clean up and material used (sorbents), minor hazardous clean up and disposal. We will bill at this level if the fire department has to clean up small amounts of gasoline or other fluids that are spilled as a result of the incident. 
Billed at $800.00 plus $50.00 per hour, per rescue person. 
Level 3 
Advanced Response: Includes Level 1 and Level 2 services as well as D.A.R.T. activation, donning breathing apparatus and detection equipment. Set up and removal of decontamination center, detection equipment, recovery and identification of material. Disposal and environment clean up. Includes above in addition to any disposal fees of material and contaminated equipment and material used at scene. 
Billed at $2,000.00 plus $50.00 per hour per rescue person, plus $100.00 per hour per HAZMAT team member. 
Level 4 
Itemized Response: You have the option to bill each incident as an independent event with custom mitigation rates, for each incident using, itemized rates deemed usual, customary, and reasonable (UCR). These incidents will be billed, itemized, per trained rescue person, plus rescue products used. 
BACK COUNTRY OR SPECIAL RESCUE 
Itemized Response: Each incident will be billed with custom mitigation rates deemed usual, customary and reasonable (UCR). These incidents will be billed, itemized per apparatus per hour, per trained rescue person per hour, plus rescue products used. Minimum billed $400.00 for the first response vehicle plus $50.00 per rescue person. Additional rates of $400.00 per hour per response vehicle and $50.00 per hour per rescue person. 
CHIEF RESPONSE 
This includes the set-up of Command, and providing direction of the incident. This could include operations, safety, and administration of the incident. 
Billed at $250.00 per hour. 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Engine billed at $400.00 per hour. 
Truck billed at $500.00 per hour. 
Miscellaneous equipment billed at $300.00 
MITIGATION RATE NOTES 
The mitigation rates above are average "billing levels," and are typical for the incident responses listed, however, when a claim is submitted, it will be itemized and based on the actual services provided. 
These average mitigation rates were determined by itemizing costs for a typical run (from the time a fire apparatus leaves the station until it returns to the station) and are based on the actual costs, using amortized schedules for apparatus (including useful life, equipment, repairs, and maintenance) and labor rates (an average department's "actual personnel expense" and not just a firefighter's basic wage). The actual personnel expense includes costs such as wages, retirement, benefits, workers comp, insurance, etc.  
Title 6 - BUSINESS AND FRANCHISE TAXES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 6.04 - BUSINESS TAX LICENSE 
Sections: 
Prior ordinance history: Ords. 708, 1073, 1101, 1606, 1615, 1621, 1627, 1652, 1657, 2018 and 2037.  
Article I. - General 
 
6.04.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
A.  This chapter is enacted to raise revenue for municipal purposes. The business tax is revenue to the general fund for the privilege of conducting business within the city of National City and receiving the benefits of various city services. The provisions of this chapter are principally revenue in nature but shall also have regulatory provisions for business compliance. 
B.  This chapter is a recodification of prior regulations governing business taxes. It applies to all persons conducting business within National City. It establishes requirements for payment and procedures for licensing, administration and enforcement of the business tax. 
(Ord. 2247 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.020 - Effect of other ordinances. 
A.  Except as provided in Section 6.04.020(B), persons required to pay a business tax for the privilege of conducting business under the provisions of this chapter shall not be relieved from the payment of any tax or permit fee required under any other ordinance of the city, and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of all other ordinances. Payment of the business tax and issuance of a business tax license does not authorize the conduct of any business or act in violation of any law or regulation applicable to that business or its location. It shall not be a defense to any act performed in violation of this code that a business tax license was issued. 
B.  The residential rental tax that is imposed on owners and operators of residential rental units pursuant to Chapter 6.20 is in lieu of the tax imposed by this chapter. Except as noted, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the administration and enforcement of Chapter 6.20 regarding payment, administration and enforcement of the residential rental tax. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.030 - Recodification. 
A.  The amendments made to this chapter by Ordinance 2224, 2003, constitute a recodification of previously existing provisions and a republication of the schedules and appendices of or applicable to this chapter, together with clarifying amendments regarding business taxes, and shall not be construed as imposing any new or higher tax applicable to businesses in the city. 
B.  Appendix A to Ordinance 1606 adopted on November 15, 1977, established a tax schedule by industry classification. It is referred to in this chapter as the "business tax rate classification schedule." It maintains existing tax classification schedules based on business classification. A copy is on file in both the office of the collector and the city clerk. 
C.  Appendix A to Ordinance 2037 adopted September 1, 1992, established the annual business tax payable based on classification and gross receipts, and is republished and recodified as Appendix A to this chapter. It is titled "Gross Receipts Tax Table." 
D.  Appendix B is added to this chapter to list the various specific flat rate taxes that were previously adopted by Ordinances 1012, 1337, 1788, 1606 and 2037, for particular types of businesses, thereby republishing and recodifying those taxes. Appendix B is titled "Flat Tax Rate for Specific Businesses." 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.040 - Severability. 
The city council declares that the invalidity of any section or portion of this chapter as recodified by Ordinance 2224, 2003, shall not affect the validity of any other remaining section or portion; that the council would have adopted each of those remaining portions, notwithstanding any later declared invalidity. If any provision is determined by a court to be invalid, it shall be severed, or if it can be judicially interpreted in a way that would harmonize it with the remaining provisions, then it may be applied as interpreted, so as to give full purpose, meaning and effect to the remaining provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
Article II. - Definitions 
 
6.04.050 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
"Adult book store" is as defined in Section 18.69.020. 
"Adult cabaret" is as defined in Section 18.69.020. 
"Adult movies" is as defined in Section 18.69.020. 
"Amusement arcade" means any premises defined in Section 18.04.033 in which any greater number of coin-operated amusement devices than those specified in Section 18.16.191 as constituting an incidental use are installed. 
"Auctions" or "auctioneer" is as defined by Civil Code Section 1812.601. 
"Bingo" is as defined in Section 10.27.010. 
"Bowling alleys" means premises where one or more bowling alleys are installed for the purpose of allowing patrons to participate in the sport of bowling. 
"Business" means any and all activity engaged in or caused to be engaged in within the city as a principal or as an independent contractor for the purpose of commerce, including, without limitation, any commercial or industrial enterprise, trade, profession, occupation, vocation, calling, or livelihood, the leasing or rental of real estate, and every other kind of activity carried on whether for gain or profit or as a nonprofit organization, excluding only the services rendered by an employee to his or her employer. "Business" also includes a home-based occupation or entity described under "person" that markets, sells, designs or creates documents, goods, merchandise, handicrafts or works of art or literature intended for sale. 
"Business by vehicle" means the driving or operating of any vehicle defined by Vehicle Code Section 670 or any wagon for the purpose of transportation, sale, collection, or delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, or other personal property of any kind from that vehicle or wagon, either as a principal business or in connection with any other business, or in soliciting for work, labor, or services to be performed upon the public streets or private property on or from that vehicle or wagon, or to be performed on goods, wares, merchandise, clothes, or other personal property to be taken for such purpose to a plant or establishment either inside or outside the city through the use of that vehicle or wagon. This definition shall not apply to the delivery of goods by vehicle operating in conjunction with a fixed place of business within the city for which a business tax has been paid pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. This definition shall not be construed as imposing a tax upon vehicles, but rather as a method of classification of businesses in which vehicles are used. 
"Business tax license," "business license" and "tax license" have the same meaning and effect as the terms "business license tax," "license tax" and "business license," which were in effect prior to the adoption of Ordinance 2224, 2003. These terms are adopted as a redefinition and recodification of an existing tax revenue collection procedure. 
"Coin-operated equipment" or "coin-operated amusement device" means a machine, device or equipment through which products, entertainment or services are vended or provided to a customer upon payment by the insertion of a coin, currency or token into a receptacle on the machine, or for which an electronic or mechanical authorization or credit is generated by payment at a central station or to an attendant. The term includes, without limitation, amusement devices, pay telephones, video machines, peep show devices, food and beverage dispensers and laundry equipment. 
"Collector" means the city official charged by the city manager, or the city treasurer when applicable, with the administration and enforcement of this chapter, and his or her authorized deputies or assistants. 
"Conduct," when used as a verb or in a verb form, means and includes transacting, maintaining, prosecuting, practicing, operating or carrying on. When used as a noun, it means and includes the act by which a transaction, practice or operation is effected. 
"Conducting business" or "doing business" means a process by which a "person" as defined in this section attempts, manages, transacts, begins or carries on a "business" within the city or from an address or location in the city to another city or jurisdiction. It can also include business transactions from an address in another jurisdiction to a location or address within the city. "Address" or "location" includes an office, warehouse, manufacturing facility, store, any facility or structure by or through which business is conducted or facilitated, as well as a "home business" or "home office" at a residence at that location. Prima facie evidence of conducting business includes, but is not limited to, the use by a person of signs, circulars, cards, telephone book or directory listings, newspapers, advertising, personal solicitation or other representation which lists an address in the city. Any person who owns and rents out commercial real estate in the city, or who holds an active license or permit issued by a governmental agency and practices that trade or profession in National City is also considered to be conducting business in the city. 
"Contractor" is a person defined by Business and Professions Code Section 7026. (The term "subcontractor" is used to define a person licensed as a contractor who performs work for or under the direction of a general contractor.) It includes "A", "B", "C" and "D" categories of licensed individuals. 
"Cost of doing business" means an amount which is equivalent to the volume of business performed by or at any local office, facility, agent, broker or employee performing only administrative or management related services in connection with sales or services rendered in another jurisdiction. The amount shall be computed by determining the total cost of maintaining that local office, facility, agent, broker or employee, and shall include, but not be limited to, the wages, salaries, commissions, bonuses, rent and/or depreciation, telephone, postage, utilities, janitorial and all other expenses allocated for the maintenance and operation of that office, facility, agent, broker or employee. 
"Dance halls" are premises, other than an adult cabaret, where patrons are allowed to dance as singles, couples or in a group to the accompaniment of live or recorded music. 
"Day" or "days," when used to define a period of time for commencement or completion of action, shall refer to calendar days, except when otherwise specified. 
"Disabled veteran" means any honorably discharged member of the armed forces who is physically unable to earn a livelihood by manual labor. 
"Employee" is as defined by Labor Code Sections 3351 and 3352. The indicia of "employee" status includes the principal's control or definition of the hours or terms of labor, the means and manner by which the work is performed or the results accomplished, and the right of discharge. Any person rendering service for another, other than as an independent contractor, is presumed by Labor Code Section 3357 to be an "employee." An employee is a person for whom an employer or principal is required to withhold federal or state tax from compensation for services rendered. (An employee is not required to obtain a business tax license.) See also "independent contractor." 
"Garage sale" is as defined in Section 7.21.120. 
"Gross receipts" includes the total amounts actually receive or receivable during a calendar year for the performance of any act or service, of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of or in connection with the sale or delivery of materials, services, goods, wares or merchandise within the city, or outside the city when the business is located within the city and the proceeds are credited to or for the account of the business located within the city. Included in "gross receipts" shall be all commissions, fees, receipts, receipts from coin-operated equipment, cash, credits and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever. Excluded from "gross receipts" shall be the following: 
1.  Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales; 
2.  Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and which property may later be sold; 
3.  Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser; 
4.  Such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers upon rescission of the contract of sale refunded either in cash or by credit; 
5.  Amounts collected or held in trust for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee, to the extent that such amounts are paid to or for the benefit of those for whom collected (the collector may require proof of payment or disbursement); 
6.  That portion of the receipts of a general contractor which represents payments to subcontractors, provided that such subcontractors are licensed under this chapter, and the general contractor furnishes the collector with the names and addresses of the subcontractors and the amount paid each subcontractor; 
7.  Receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable deposits forfeited and taken into the income of the business shall not be excluded; 
8.  As to a real estate agent or broker, the sales price of real estate sold for the account of others, except for that portion which represents commission or other income to the agent or broker; 
9.  As to a retail gasoline dealer, that portion of his or her receipts from the sale of motor vehicle fuels equal to the motor vehicle fuel license tax imposed by and previously paid under the provisions of Part 2 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state; 
10.  As to a retail gasoline dealer, the special motor fuel tax imposed by Section 4041 of Title 26 of the United States Code, if paid by the dealer or collected by him from the consumer or purchaser; 
11.  As to alcoholic beverage sales, that portion of receipts excluded under Article XX, Section 22 of the California Constitution. 
"Home business" or "home office" refers to a business, trade or occupation that is conducted from a residential dwelling unit located in National City and which requires a home occupation permit issued by the planning director under the provisions of Title 18 of this code. 
"Independent contractor," as defined by Labor Code Section 3353, means any person who renders service for a specified compensation for a specific result, and who is under the control of a principal as to the result of work only and not as to the means by which that result is accomplished. An independent contractor may also be defined as a person for whom the principal is required to issue a Form 1099 for compensation for services rendered. 
"Live entertainment" and "adult cabaret" is as defined by Section 18.69.020 and Section 10.73.020. 
"Mobile amusement vehicle" means a mobile platform upon which is installed one or more amusement devices. 
"Mobile searchlight advertising" means a vehicle upon which is installed one or more floodlights or high-powered searchlights for the purpose of advertising or promoting an event. 
"Peep show" and "peep show device" is as defined in Section 18.69.020 or Chapter 15.36. 
"Person" as used in this chapter means and includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, limited liability companies, partnerships of every kind, clubs, business or common law trusts, societies, and natural individuals conducting any business in the city as sole proprietor, or any combination of such entities, other than as an employee. 
"Residential rental unit" is as defined in Section 6.20.010. 
"Specialty contractor" is as defined by Business and Professions Code Section 7058. 
"Sticker" refers to a decal issued for display in a window to evidence the issuance of a business tax license. 
"Swap meet" is as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 21661. 
"Taxis—Paratransit" is as defined by Chapter 11.70. 
"Video machine" means an electronic or mechanical coin-operated amusement device, other than a peep show device, which projects upon a screen electronic or computer-generated images capable of manipulation by a player for the purpose of amusement of the player or some other person in the vicinity of the device. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
Article III. - Administration 
 
6.04.060 - Rulemaking authority. 
The collector is authorized to make all rules, determinations and regulations consistent with the provisions and intent of this chapter as may be necessary and proper to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Copies of those rules shall be maintained in the Office of the Collector, available for public inspection. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.070 - Statutory exemptions or apportionment. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply a tax to a savings and loan association, any nonprofit corporation or association exempt from income taxation pursuant to Revenue and Taxation Code Section 23701 or Section 501(C)3 of the Internal Revenue Code, or to any person conducting any business exempt from the payment of business or income taxes by virtue of the Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or the state. The collector shall administer the provisions of this chapter in a manner consistent with state and federal law regarding avoidance of burdens on interstate or interjurisdictional commerce applicable to a taxpayer or class of taxpayers. The collector may require proof of the payment of taxes to other jurisdictions when necessary to a determination regarding apportionment of taxes applicable to businesses conducting business in more than one jurisdiction. 
B.  Any person claiming exemption from or an apportionment of tax pursuant to this section shall file a sworn statement with the collector stating the facts upon which the exemption or apportionment is claimed, and shall provide a copy of all documents supporting the claim of exemption. In the absence of sufficient evidence substantiating the claim, that person shall be liable for the payment of the taxes imposed by this chapter. 
C.  The collector, upon a proper showing, shall issue a fee-exempt license to any person exempt from tax under the provisions of this section without requiring payment of the tax required by this chapter. The exempt license shall expire December 31 of each year and shall be renewed annually prior to the last day of February of the following year in the manner prescribed for all businesses. 
D.  After giving notice and providing a reasonable opportunity to the person for a hearing, the collector may revoke or disallow any exemption or apportionment granted pursuant to the provisions of this section upon evidence that the business is not entitled to the exemption or apportionment as provided herein. Appeals from that determination may be made in accordance with Section 6.04.160. 
E.  In addition to those businesses exempted under Section 6.04.070(A), the following are also exempted from the payment of a business tax under this chapter: 
1.  Any natural person of the age of sixteen years and under whose annual gross receipts from all businesses in the city are five hundred dollars or less. 
2.  Any public utility or utility service provider making franchise payments to the city, except to the extent of the value of retail sales or services provided and not covered or excluded within the terms of the franchise agreement. 
3.  Any person or organization conducting no more than two garage sales per calendar year, each sale not exceeding four consecutive days, provided a garage sale permit pursuant to Section 7.20.120 is first obtained. 
4.  Any business licensed in another jurisdiction which, incidental to its business activity within that other jurisdiction, only delivers goods or merchandise free of any delivery charge and performs no other service within this jurisdiction. 
5.  Any occasional vendor selling used merchandise at a licensed swap meet within the city who rents a stall or booth for not more than two periods of not more than four consecutive days each per calendar year is exempt from payment of business taxes. A business license is required for all other vendors. 
6.  Any disabled veteran who sells only goods and merchandise owned by him or her as a sole proprietor, and not as an employee of another. 
7.  Any occasional vendor selling goods designed and made by that vendor as a principal, and not as an employee, at an arts and crafts fair or show for not more than two periods of not more than four consecutive days each, per calendar year, when such vendor is exempted from possessing a resale license issued by the State Board of Equalization. A vendor selling through an employee is not exempt. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.080 - Statements and record keeping. 
A.  Statements made by an applicant or taxpayer shall not be conclusive as to the truth of the matters set forth therein, nor shall filing the same preclude the collector from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable under this chapter. The statement shall be subject to audit and verification. The collector is authorized to examine, audit, and inspect books and records of any business as may be necessary to verify or determine the amount of tax due. 
B.  All persons subject to the provisions of this chapter shall keep complete and accurate records of business transactions, sufficient to establish the business's "gross receipts" or "costs of doing business," as applicable, as defined in Section 6.04.050. The collector may require the business to produce all financial records for examination by the collector. The business shall promptly provide such copies upon request, and, when applicable, may authorize the collector to obtain official copies of the federal or state income tax forms filed for all applicable tax years for comparison, when necessary. Records shall be maintained for a period of at least three calendar years. 
C.  Licensees shall provide the collector with a change of address or phone number, or both, within ten days for any principal whose name and address is required to be filed pursuant to Section 6.04.180(A)(9). 
D.  It is unlawful for any person required to keep financial records under this chapter to fail to keep such records, or to refuse to produce or allow the collector to examine those records at a reasonable time and manner, upon request of the collector. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.090 - Information confidential. 
With the exception of information regarding the business name and address, phone number(s), and names of principals of the business, all other information collected by or disclosed to the collector in the administration of this chapter shall be kept confidential and used for official purposes only. Confidential information shall not be disclosed to any person without an official need and purpose without a subpoena or court order. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.100 - Business tax license—Nontransferable—Change of name, location or ownership. 
A.  Business tax licenses are not transferable. The business tax license issued to a business under a particular name or at a particular location may be amended to change the name or location upon application and payment of the fee established in the National City Fee Schedule. 
B.  In the case of change of ownership, a change in the federal identification number or, when applicable, the social security number of a principal, an application for a new business tax license and payment of tax is required in accordance with Section 6.04.270. The applicant will not be required to deposit the clearance fee if the location remains the same. Prior payments of tax will not be transferred or credited to the account of the new business. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.110 - Replacement business tax license or decal. 
A.  A replacement business tax license or decal may be issued by the collector upon payment of a duplicate issuance fee to replace any business tax license which has been lost or destroyed. 
B.  A replacement vehicle decal may be issued to replace any decal which has been lost, stolen or destroyed upon the licensee filing a statement of such fact and paying a replacement fee. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.120 - Effect of dishonored check. 
Any business tax license, regulatory permit, development permit or other license issued by the city is rendered void and invalid if any check tendered in payment is dishonored, and no lawful authority to act under that permit or license is conferred until payment is satisfied in full. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.130 - Cancellation of business tax license and termination of future tax liability. 
A.  The tax collector may cancel a business tax license at the request of the business owner provided: 
1.  The business owner surrenders the business tax license and any applicable stickers or decals; and 
2.  All business activity at the licensed premises has stopped. 
Liability for any further business taxes will cease if the owner's account is current and cleared once the collector has been notified within the thirty days following the cessation of business that all business activity has ceased. 
B.  Failure to notify the collector within the thirty days creates a presumption that the business has not terminated its operations and therefore remains liable for future business taxes and penalties in accordance with this chapter. The collector is authorized to waive this presumption in the case of an itinerant vendor when the collector has determined that the business terminated for bona fide reasons. Liability for taxes will otherwise continue until a taxpayer executes a declaration under penalty of perjury that it has ceased doing business and has not conducted business since the date stated. 
C.  There will be no refund for any portion of the tax paid for the unexpired tax year. 
D.  Unpaid business taxes remain the personal liability of the former principals of the business upon dissolution, each of whom is and shall remain jointly and severally liable for payment. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.140 - Transition and administrative provisions. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter will be fully applicable to all businesses on and after its effective date; provided, however, that any business which has already applied for or paid business taxes for the current calendar year will not be subject to any additional processing requirements. The collector may use existing stocks of forms until depleted in the administration of this chapter. 
B.  Pursuant to Section 6.04.050, the term "business license" or "license tax," or any similar language appearing on such forms shall be construed to refer to the terms "business tax license" or "business tax" adopted by this ordinance as the context may require. 
C.  The collector shall collect all regulatory permit and license processing fees on behalf of an administering city department at the time an applicant presents an application for payment of business tax. Regulatory reviews shall be conducted by the authorized city official(s) as required by the Fire Code, California Building Code, or other law. Processing fees are listed in the National City Fee Schedule. The collector will issue a receipt for the deposit of taxes and fees. A business tax license will not be issued until completion of regulatory processing by administering departments, payment by the taxpayer of any delinquent accounts owed to the city, and determination that the operation of the business would not be in violation of law or the requirements of this code. The collector is authorized to coordinate regulatory processing with the payment of business taxes and fees for the issuance of regulatory permits. The applicant remains responsible for completion of forms and delivery to any department or agency for review. 
D.  The collector will refund the business tax deposited upon written request if the business cannot be lawfully conducted at the proposed location following regulatory compliance review, except that no refund will be made if the business opening date was prior to the application date. Regulatory permit processing fees are not refundable. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003) 
(Ord. No. 2011-2368, § 1, 9-27-2011)  
6.04.150 - Audit. 
The collector has the authority to examine by audit and any other accepted accounting process the records and practices of any place of business in the city to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter have been complied with. A business that misstates its gross receipts or basis for tax liability may be liable for the city's actual costs of audit when the understatement is greater than five percent of the actual gross receipts or basis for tax liability, irrespective of whether the understatement results in any change in the tax due. Penalties and interest under Section 6.04.370(C) shall be collected on the balance of any tax due. 
(Ord. 2234 § 4, 2003: Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.160 - Appeals and dispute resolution. 
A.  Any person aggrieved by any decision of the collector with respect to the determination of tax due or the issuance of or refusal to issue a tax license, exemption certificate or apportionment may file a notice of appeal or request for dispute resolution with the collector no later than ninety days from the date of notification, and shall pay at the time of filing the appeal processing fee prescribed in the National City Fee Schedule. The collector shall notify the person at the time of adverse decision of the right to appeal within the ninety-day period or be barred. Failure to timely appeal renders the determination final and no further administrative review shall be required or allowed. The failure to exhaust administrative remedy shall bar judicial review of the final action. 
B.  The appeal shall be forwarded to the city treasurer who shall then fix a time and place for hearing any appeal. The hearing shall be held no later than thirty days from the date the appeal is received, unless mutually agreed otherwise. The city treasurer shall give notice of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office, postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant's last reported address for business tax purposes. 
C.  The city treasurer may conduct the examination personally or appoint an examiner to determine all questions raised on appeal. The examiner may be a city employee or any other person who is neutral and unbiased in the matter. The collector and applicant shall each be allowed an opportunity to present relevant evidence. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply to the appeal, and the examiner may consider any evidence that is relevant and of the sort that responsible persons are accustomed to rely upon in the conduct of serious affairs. Hearsay may be used to supplement or explain the evidence. The examiner's determination may not conflict with any substantive provision of this chapter. 
D.  The decision of the city treasurer shall be based upon the administrative record on appeal and shall constitute the exhaustion of administrative remedy. The city treasurer shall mail or deliver a written decision to the appellant within fifteen days from receipt of the examiner's report. 
E.  The appeal fee shall be refunded only if the appeal is decided wholly in the appellant's favor. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.170 - Business tax license revocation. 
A.  The collector is authorized to revoke a business tax license for good cause. Good cause exists where the business is operated in violation of state, federal or local law which reasonably and rationally relates to consumer fraud and protection; fraudulent or unfair business or trade practice; sale of adulterated product or contraband; release of hazardous materials or environmental pollution; or zoning or public health violations which relate to the nature of the business conducted. The order of revocation becomes final thirty days after the issuance of the order, unless appealed. 
B.  Appeals shall be processed in accordance with Section 6.04.160. The time limit for submitting an appeal shall be thirty days from the date a written order of revocation is mailed to the licensee by the collector by both certified mail, return receipt requested, and first class mail. Receipt of either by the licensee shall constitute receipt of notice. Appeal fees shall not be required for an appeal under this section. 
C.  Conviction of an offense shall not be a prerequisite to revocation of a business tax license under this section. Revocation may be exercised upon the existence of facts demonstrating the occurrence of the violation. 
D.  It is a misdemeanor to continue to operate a business after the business tax license has been revoked and either the appeal period has lapsed or the appeal was denied. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
Article IV. - Application, Issuance and Display of License 
 
6.04.180 - Contents of application. 
A.  Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this chapter shall submit a sworn application under penalty of perjury on a form provided by the collector. The application must be complete and accurate and shall be accompanied with payment of application and clearance fees before the collector is required to process it. 
B.  The following information is required: 
1.  The name of the business. 
2.  If there is a fixed place of business within the city, the place where such business is to be conducted. 
3.  The mailing address for business mail. 
4.  The complete business phone number. 
5.  A description of the business activity, including the principal product or service. 
6.  Any state licenses and license number required to conduct a particular type of business, including a contractor's license. 
7.  A state resale number, if applicable. 
8.  A federal employer identification number or social security number. 
9.  The type of ownership and a list of all owners or officers with corresponding home addresses, home phone numbers, and driver's license number. A photocopy of the applicant's driver's license shall be provided. 
10.  The names, titles and home phone numbers of persons to contact in case of emergency for businesses with a fixed location in the city. 
11.  For existing or transferred businesses whose business tax is levied based on gross receipts by business classification, the exact gross receipt figure from the previous calendar year. A taxpayer may elect to report gross receipts by gross receipts tax bracket, in which case, the gross receipts shall be considered by the collector to be the highest amount in that category. For new businesses, only the business opening date need be supplied. 
12.  Such other information as may be necessary and required by the collector for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, and as may be required by the franchise tax board. 
13.  Information regarding any claim of exemption from or apportionment of business taxes. 
14.  A copy of any fictitious business name certificate, when issued, shall be provided to the collector. Note: This is not a precondition to the initial business license. 
C.  The collector is not required to process an incomplete application or issue a license if the applicant refuses to provide necessary information or lacks a permit or state license that is a prerequisite to the conduct of that business. 
D.  Application and clearance fees are those fees established in the National City Fee Schedule. The application fee is a fee charged by the collector for the initial processing of the license application. The clearance fee is a fee charged for the costs of processing and reviewing applications for zoning, fire, and regulatory clearance by other departments. The application fee, but not the clearance fee, is refundable if the business cannot be licensed after regulatory clearance review. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.190 - Contents of business tax license. 
Except upon finding fraud or error or as provided in Section 6.04.140(C), upon the payment of the prescribed tax or a determination of exemption the collector shall then issue a business tax license that shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name of the business for which the certificate is issued which evidences payment of the prescribed taxes or of exemption; 
B.  The address where the business is to be conducted, whether mobile or at a fixed location within the city; 
C.  The date of expiration of the license or exemption; and 
D.  Such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.200 - Posting of business tax license and sticker or decal. 
A.  Any person conducting business at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the business tax license posted in a conspicuous place visible to the public upon the premises where such business is conducted. A sticker to be issued by the collector shall also be displayed in the front window along the primary street frontage, visible for observation by the collector from the sidewalk. 
B.  Any person not operating at or from a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the business tax license or copy upon his or her person at all times while conducting the business for which it is issued, and shall display the certificate upon request. 
C.  Any person conducting business by vehicle shall keep the business tax license or a copy within each vehicle, and shall affix an identifying decal issued by the collector to each vehicle used in that business. 
D.  The collector will issue identifying decals for vehicles and for coin-operated equipment. Each decal is nontransferable and shall be affixed to the vehicle or to the coin-operated equipment for which issued. 
E.  It is unlawful to sell or transfer a tax license sticker or decal or to permit its use by another person. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.210 - Free Resource and Energy Business Evaluation (FREBE Program). 
A.  Every business not exempt pursuant to subsection C below, shall receive a free resource and energy evaluation for facilities under its operational control. 
B.  Upon notice from the city, the business principal or designee shall: 
1.  Set a date for the evaluation within forty-five days of the notice; 
2.  Allow city staff or its designated program partner access to the facilities under his or her operational control during regular business hours; and 
3.  Authorize city staff or its designated program partner to review the historical energy and water usage for the business. 
C.  The following businesses are exempt from the requirements of this section: 
1.  Any business that does not have a commercial utility gas or electric meter. 
2.  Any business occupying facilities that were constructed or remodeled within three years of business license application or renewal. 
D.  The ordinance from which this section is derived shall remain in effect through December 31, 2020, and as of that date is repealed unless a later enacted ordinance deletes that date or extends that date. 
(Ord. No. 2015-2404, § 1, 6-16-2015; Ord. No. 2016-2408, § 1, 1-19-2016)  
Article V. - Classification of Business 
 
6.04.220 - Determination of business classification. 
A.  The classification of a particular business shall be that classification set forth in the business tax rate classification schedule designated in Section 6.04.030(B). When a particular type of business cannot be located on that schedule, the collector shall assign to it the tax rate classification most closely corresponding to the business's standard industrial classification number ("SIC" number) from the most current Standard Industrial Classification Manual published by the U.S. government, a copy of which shall be kept on file in the collector's office. 
B.  Any business classifiable under two or more classification schedules shall be classified on the basis of the business classification with the highest dollar volume of business; if the business dollar volume is equal, however, it shall be classified on the basis of the business classification which will result in the highest tax. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.230 - Special classification and administration rules for multiple business activities or locations, or both, and warehouses, headquarters and distribution facilities. 
A.  Rule for Multiple Locations or Business Names. Except as provided in Section 6.04.330, business taxes are to be calculated on the basis of the tax rate schedule and the gross receipts attributable to the principal classification of the business conducted at each location in the city. If a person conducts business at more than one location, or at a single location but under two or more different names, the business tax will be separately calculated for each business location and for each business name at the same location on the basis of the tax rate schedule and the gross receipts attributable to the principal classification of each business operating at that location under a business name. Separate business tax licenses will be issued for each location and for each separate business name at the same location. 
B.  Rules for Multiple Business Activities at a Single Location. 
1.  When a person operates two or more businesses or business activities which are similar for tax rate schedule classification purposes (e.g., retail and wholesale auto parts) at the same location under a single business name, the tax will be calculated and administered on the basis of the total gross receipts from all the businesses operated at that single location, using the tax rate classification schedule applicable to that business classification which records the highest of the gross receipts of the respective businesses. 
2.  If two or more businesses at the same location (address) are not similar within the tax rate classification schedules (e.g., retail auto parts and automobile repair, or restaurant and amusement arcade), each will be classified separately and the tax rate classification schedule applicable to each separate business classification will be applied to the respective gross receipts from each business to calculate the combined taxes due, irrespective of the bookkeeping system used by the owner, The business license may list both business classifications. 
C.  Rules for Warehouses and Distribution Facilities. 
1.  Except as provided in Section 6.04.230(C)(3), a warehouse or distribution facility that is an integral part of, but not co-located with, a business located in the city is not a separate place of business, and a separate fee exempt business tax license will be issued for that location. 
2.  A warehouse or distribution facility located in the city which is incidental to a business located in another jurisdiction, from which no sales are made and any delivery of merchandise is restricted solely to deliveries to the business to which it is incidental, shall pay a business tax calculated from the tax rate schedule that would apply to the principal business classification of the parent business, using the costs of doing business attributable to the warehouse or distribution facility as the measure of gross receipts upon which the tax is computed. 
3.  Any warehouse or distribution facility located in the city, whether incidental to another business or not, that sells merchandise to any person or delivers any merchandise stored on its premises to any person other than the business to which it is incidental, is conducting business in the city and shall pay a business tax computed on the basis of: (A) the gross receipts attributable to that facility from all its sales and delivery activities in the city, or (B) its costs of doing business when gross receipts cannot be determined by the collector. 
D.  Rule for Headquarter Facilities. A business with a principal office in the city that operates manufacturing, sales, warehouse or distribution facilities located in other jurisdictions is considered to conduct business within this city, even though no goods or services are sold, produced or delivered within this city, and it shall be taxed on the basis of its cost of doing business at its principal office within this city as the measure of its gross receipts earned within the city. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.240 - Independent contractors. 
An independent contractor providing services for another business entity in National City shall designate a business address. An independent contractor from outside National City may list its business address or the business address of the principal for whom professional services are rendered. If the independent contractor's business address is located in a residential zone in National City, then the zoning laws (Title 18) regarding home occupation permits must be satisfied. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.250 - (Reserved)  
Article VI. - Computation and Payment of Taxes 
 
6.04.260 - Business tax payment—Required. 
A.  Except as provided in Section 6.04.260(B), there are imposed upon all persons conducting business in the city business taxes in the amounts hereinafter prescribed. It is unlawful for any person to conduct business in the city without a valid business tax license. A business tax license is valid when it is issued in compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter and, except when exempt from tax, paying the applicable tax. 
B.  Any person who is considered to be conducting business by virtue of the prima facie evidence definition in Section 6.04.050 is subject to tax until the collector determines otherwise. The collector may require the submission of proof under affidavit executed under penalty of perjury that the person is not conducting a business within the city. 
C.  Licensed Professionals. Each professional licensed by the state, including without limitation any lawyer, doctor, dentist, health care professional, investment advisor, real estate agent, real estate broker, or insurance broker, who maintains a fixed place of business in the city must pay a business tax as set forth in the tax schedules established under the authority of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2247 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.270 - Initial business tax. 
Unless exempted or taxed on a flat rate basis pursuant to Section 6.04.310, 6.04.320, or 6.04.330, a person making application for the initial business tax license for a newly established business is required to pay a first year's tax of twenty dollars, the minimum annual tax, prorated by quarter. Upon making application in the following (second) year, that second year's tax due will be based upon the actual gross receipts for the first year. For all future years thereafter, the person will pay the tax based upon the gross receipts for the preceding year. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003) 
(Ord. No. 2017-2439, § 1, 10-3-2017)  
6.04.280 - Computation of total business tax based on gross receipts. 
A.  The total business tax levied by this section shall be determined by the business tax rate classification schedule by business class (see Section 6.04.030(B) and Appendix A) and the corresponding tax on the gross receipts of that business as set forth in Appendix B ("Gross Receipts Tax Table"). 
B.  Businesses for which an alternative flat tax is prescribed by sections 6.04.310, 6.04.320 or 6.04.330 may elect to pay a tax based on gross receipts prescribed by this section and shall thereafter be taxed on the basis of the gross receipts schedule applicable to the business classification determined by the collector. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003) 
(Ord. No. 2017-2439, § 2, 10-3-2017)  
6.04.290 - Business tax—How and when payable. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided, annual business taxes under the provisions of this chapter are due and payable on the first day of January of each year and are delinquent on the first day of March. The date of payment is the date the completed application together with payment is received by the collector, provided there is no dishonor of any check tendered in payment. It is the taxpayer's obligation to renew the business tax license when due. Payment by mail is effective only on the date of receipt at the collector's office, and not the date of postmark. 
B.  A courtesy renewal application may be sent by the collector to all businesses holding a prior valid business tax license as of December 31 of each year. The failure of the collector to provide a courtesy renewal notice or the business's failure to receive the courtesy renewal application shall not relieve the business of its obligation to pay its tax or any penalties that may apply for the failure to pay the tax when due. 
C.  The collector shall issue a business tax license to the business upon full payment of the required tax and all penalties due, without dishonor, thereby verifying that the tax has been paid. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.300 - Computation of tax upon failure to file an initial application or a renewal application. 
If any person required to file an initial application or a renewal application fails or refuses to do so within the time period prescribed, the collector shall compute a tax on the estimated annual gross receipts based on all relevant information the collector is able to obtain. If the collector is unable to compute a gross receipt basis because of a lack of cooperation or financial records, then the tax will be estimated on the basis of the highest tax on gross receipts applicable to that category of business on the appropriate schedule. 
The tax bill shall be sent by mail to the last known business address and shall include the estimated gross base tax due plus any delinquency penalties assessed. The total amount on the billing shall be payable to the city within fifteen calendar days from the date of the deposit of notice in the U.S. Postal Service. 
Within those fifteen calendar days, the person may submit proof to the collector of the actual gross receipts and pay the tax or the adjustment authorized by the collector. The proposed tax will be due and final if not challenged or appealed pursuant to Section 6.04.160 within the prescribed time. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.310 - Business by vehicle—Optional rate. 
A.  Except as provided in Section 6.04.070(E)(4), every person not having a fixed place of business within the city and not otherwise designated, who on a regular basis conducts business by vehicle and charges a fee for service, shall pay an annual business tax of twenty-five dollars per vehicle operated within the city, or may make a binding election to pay a business tax measured by business classification and the gross receipts derived from business within the city as set out in Section 6.04.280. 
B.  Any person conducting business by vehicle in the city vending food products or beverages shall pay an annual business tax of seventy-five dollars per year per vehicle operated within the city, or may make a binding election to pay a business tax measured by business classification and gross receipts derived from business within the city pursuant to Section 6.04.280. 
C.  Upon payment, identifying vehicle decals will be issued by the collector in a quantity equal to the number of vehicles through which business is conducted. 
D.  Any business by vehicle that operates additional vehicles within the city after payment of annual taxes has been made shall make an additional application to the collector to account for the additional vehicles. After the appropriate tax has been paid for the additional vehicle(s), additional vehicle decals will be issued. 
E.  Taxes for the first year of operation shall not be prorated, unless the annual gross receipt method is elected by the taxpayer. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003) 
(Ord. No. 2017-2439, § 3, 10-3-2017)  
6.04.320 - Businesses located outside city limits—Optional rate. 
A.  Out-of-city Contractors. Except as provided in Section 6.04.320(C), and in lieu of a tax based on gross receipts, every state-licensed contractor licensed as an A or B contractor conducting business in the city who does not have a fixed place of business in the city shall pay annually a flat tax of seventy-five dollars. Every contractor conducting business in this city as a subcontractor or state-licensed C or D contractor who does not have a fixed place of business in the city shall pay annually a flat tax of fifty dollars. Any contractor may make a binding election to pay a business tax measured by classification and gross receipts derived from business within the city pursuant to Section 6.04.280. Penalties shall accrue at the rate set forth in Section 6.04.370(D). A contractor who commences business during the last quarter of a calendar year shall pay only twenty-five percent of the initial installment at the time of application if a flat tax is elected, and will be subject to normal tax the years following. 
B.  Every other person not having a fixed place of business in the city who conducts business in the city and is not otherwise subject to a tax by any of the other sections of this chapter shall pay a business tax calculated at the same rate prescribed herein for the same type of business having a fixed place of business within National City based on the gross receipts earned within National City or twelve percent of gross receipts from all sources within California where the amount of gross receipts earned within National City cannot readily be calculated or otherwise be determined by the collector. 
C.  In order to promote public safety, the city council will allow any out-of-city contractor installing a work of improvement that does not exceed five hundred dollars in materials and labor, inclusive, to pay a tax of ten dollars for a one-day tax certificate, in addition to any applicable building or engineering permit fees. This certificate shall not be available during any calendar year when the contractor performs any single job exceeding five hundred dollars, or has performed two jobs each not exceeding five hundred dollars. The applicant shall make his or her declaration under penalty of perjury on a form provided by the collector to the building and safety director or city engineer in conjunction with the permit application for the work of improvement. A receipt showing proof of payment shall qualify as the business license. 
D.  First year's taxes will not be prorated, except as provided in Section 6.04.320(A). 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003) 
(Ord. No. 2017-2439, § 4, 10-3-2017)  
6.04.330 - Specific taxes applicable to specific categories of businesses. 
A.  Taxes applicable to specific categories of businesses previously established in Title 6 by Ordinances 708, 1048, 1231, 1699, 1788 or 2037 are recodified and summarized in Appendix B to this chapter. Recodification in Appendix B is not intended to constitute enactment of a new tax and shall be construed in light of that intent. 
B.  Video Machines. A business which also operates video machines on its premises shall pay in addition to any tax based on gross receipts for its principal business an additional tax of fifty-five dollars per machine, not to exceed a total of four thousand five hundred dollars annually for all video machines. An identifying decal shall be affixed to each machine, unless the business tax license specifies the number of machines for which tax has been paid and the number of machines installed does not exceed the number specified on the business tax license (thereby allowing for replacement and maintenance). 
C.  Amusement Arcades. Amusement arcades shall be taxed on a flat tax basis of one hundred dollars per year. 
D.  Any business listed in this section or Appendix B may make a binding election to pay its tax on the basis of total gross receipts and the classification schedule determined by the collector, including revenues from coin-operated equipment or amusement devices, instead of this section, and such election shall be thereafter binding upon that business. 
E.  A swap meet shall be taxed at the rate of four thousand five hundred dollars per year instead of gross receipts, unless it makes a binding election to pay its tax on the basis of total gross receipts and the classification schedule determined by the collector. 
F.  A pawnshop shall be taxed at the rate of one hundred fifty dollars per year instead of gross receipts, unless it makes a binding election to pay its tax on the basis of total gross receipts and the classification schedule determined by the collector. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003) 
(Ord. No. 2017-2439, § 5, 10-3-2017)  
6.04.340 - (Reserved)  
Article VII. - Refunds 
 
6.04.350 - Refunds of overpayments. 
Claims for refund must be filed on forms in the manner prescribed by the collector. No refund of an overpayment of taxes imposed by this chapter shall be allowed in whole or in part unless a written claim for refund is filed with the collector within one year from the last day of the calendar month following the period for which the overpayment was made. The burden of proof shall be upon the taxpayer to establish the overpayment. If the collector determines that an overpayment was made, the collector shall refund the amount overpaid. Application and processing fees are not refundable. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.360 - Refund for termination by governmental action. 
Upon written application, the collector is authorized to refund any business tax collected when the business is terminated through condemnation or eminent domain by any agency of local, county, state or national governments. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
Article VIII. - Collection, Enforcement and Penalties 
 
6.04.370 - Delinquent taxes and charges—Penalties—Installment payment. 
A.  Except as provided in Section 6.04.370(D) or (E), the collector, upon failure to pay a tax when due, shall add a penalty of twenty percent of the tax due on the first day of March and each first day of each month thereafter, provided that the amount of penalty added shall not exceed one hundred percent of the tax due for each year or portion thereof that the tax was unpaid. 
B.  1.  No business tax license shall be issued or reissued to any person who, at the time of application, is indebted to the city for delinquent business taxes, fees or sewer charges, unless that person enters into a written agreement with the collector to pay all delinquent taxes or charges, and interest and penalties due in monthly installments, or more often, over a period not to exceed one year. 
2.  The agreement shall acknowledge the obligation is a debt owed to the city. Upon failure to make timely payment of any installment, the entire amount unpaid, including penalties and interest, shall become immediately due and payable. If legal action is brought by the city to enforce collection of any amount included in the agreement, that person shall pay all costs of suit incurred by the city or its assignee, including reasonable attorney's fees. The execution of an agreement shall not exonerate previously accrued penalties, but no further penalties or interest shall accrue on amounts included in the agreement during such time as the person is not in breach of the agreement. If, however, a default in payment occurs, then additional penalties and interest shall reattach back to the date of execution of the agreement and become due and payable. 
C.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, any person who misstates or falsifies gross receipts for taxation purposes or the nature of the business for classification purposes shall pay a penalty of one hundred percent of the balance of tax due for each year of misstatement, in addition to the balance of the actual taxes due. Payment of the penalty shall not discharge the taxpayer from liability from civil or criminal proceedings, if applicable. 
D.  Any person who fails to apply to the collector for the issuance of an initial business tax license and pay the prescribed tax within thirty calendar days from first beginning business is subject to a penalty of fifty percent plus twenty percent per month after the first thirty days has elapsed, not to exceed one hundred percent of the total tax due for the first year. The total tax will be computed on the basis of the gross receipts for the calendar year. Until payment is made in full, that person remains subject to the provisions of Section 6.04.380 regarding the involuntary cessation of business. Nothing contained herein shall constitute authorization to conduct business without a valid business tax license or before regulatory compliance approval. 
E.  Neither a penalty nor the provisions of Section 6.04.300 will be applicable to: (1) any licensed professional, such as an architect, engineer, consultant, or attorney who does not maintain an office in National City but is called upon to provide a single project service within National City, or to (2) any swap meet vendor or occasional contractor or vendor who is no longer exempted by Section 6.04.070(E)(5) or (7) or by Section 6.04.320(C), provided that that person pays the business tax within the first thirty days following the commencement of business in the city for that calendar year. If the tax is not paid within thirty days, a penalty will accrue from the date of commencement of business pursuant to Section 6.04.370(D). After payment of taxes due for the applicable calendar year, should the project continue into the next calendar year and be completed within the first two months of that following year, the collector is authorized to waive collection of tax for that following year. 
(Ord. 2247 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.380 - Tax deemed debt—Collections. 
A.  The amount of any tax and any fees, charges or penalty imposed by the provisions of this chapter is a debt owed to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount due. The collector, with the concurrence of the city attorney, is authorized to compromise or adjust claims for back taxes that extend beyond the current year plus three prior years when it is in the best interests of the city; provided, however, that such authority shall not include compromising claims for any taxes due for continuing in business following the failure to renew a previously issued business tax license. 
B.  The collector shall set off any refunds, payments or credits owing to the taxpayer by the city against unpaid taxes and charges, and may require a business to cease business or remove equipment through which the business is conducted if the tax is not fully paid. Payments shall be applied first to satisfy the payment of the oldest tax and any penalties outstanding before being applied to satisfaction of later or current taxes. Upon notification by the collector, city departments shall withhold progress payments or payments for goods or services when the vendor or supplier has failed to pay taxes or penalties, or both, required under this chapter until the debt is satisfied. 
C.  Upon notification by the collector, other departments shall withhold development and building permits, except those permits necessary to correct code violations, until all delinquent taxes are paid. Administering departments will withhold related permits until notified otherwise by the collector. 
D.  The collector may request the city attorney to obtain a civil injunction or issue a criminal complaint if the business refuses to comply with this chapter or pay taxes. The collector is authorized to issue a stop order pursuant to Section 1.12.030 to require a noncompliant business to cease and desist from conducting business until compliance is obtained. 
E.  The conviction of a person for conducting any business without first paying the tax due does not exonerate that person from the payment of any tax due or still unpaid at the time of conviction. Late payment shall not prevent a criminal prosecution of any violation of the provisions of this chapter. All civil, administrative and criminal remedies prescribed are cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
F.  Neither the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter nor the superseding of any portion of any other ordinance of the city or the code shall in any manner be construed to affect prosecution for violations committed prior to the date of adoption, nor be construed as a waiver of any license required for or any penal provisions applicable to any such violation, nor shall it affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required by any prior ordinance to be posted, filed, or deposited, and all rights and obligations thereby conferred shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 2247 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.390 - Effect of mistakes. 
Any mistake by the collector in computing or collecting any tax prescribed in this chapter shall not preclude collection by the city of the amount actually due, together with costs of collection, including reasonable attorney's fees fixed by the court, nor shall mistake preclude the prosecution of any person for violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.400 - Enforcement. 
A.  The collector and each code compliance officer, public officer or police officer shall have the power and authority to enter any place of business free of charge at any reasonable time to demand production of its business tax license. It shall be the duty of any code compliance officer or building inspector conducting an inspection of any business premises to also require the owner or proprietor of an inspected property to produce proof of business license and to report violations to the collector. The collector will be responsible for any follow-up investigation and enforcement and shall notify the appropriate enforcement officer of any apparent code violation observed during inspections by the collector. 
B.  The collector may require the production of any records of the taxpayer necessary to verify the accuracy of any business tax license issued or business tax paid, upon at least twenty-four hours' prior notice. Records shall be made available at the taxpayer's place of business, or be delivered to the collector's office upon mutual agreement. In addition to any other remedies, the collector is authorized to assess a five-hundred-dollar administrative penalty against any taxpayer who refuses to produce such records following reasonable request by the collector. Procedures for appeal are as set forth in Section 6.04.160. 
C.  Each department of the city issuing development or building permits, public contracts or purchases shall require the production of a valid business tax license prior to the issuance of any contract to a vendor or a development permit to a licensed contractor, and upon notification by the collector shall not issue any development permit or building permit—except those reasonably necessary to correct code violations—until all outstanding tax delinquencies are satisfied. 
D.  As an aid in enforcement of the provisions of this chapter with respect to construction contractors and subcontractors, any person applying for any building or engineering permit or requesting final inspection of any construction project shall furnish the collector with a written list of the names and addresses of all contractors, subcontractors and material supply people engaged in working on the project. 
E.  The collector is authorized to require the owner or operator of a commercial or industrial property (other than a residential rental property) in National City to provide a current tenant list or mailbox rental list and information regarding the commencement of each tenancy or mailbox rental. It is unlawful for an owner or operator to refuse or fail to provide this information upon the reasonable request of the collector. 
F.  As a condition of a temporary use permit issued under Chapter 15.60, an itinerant business operating in National City shall provide information and records to the collector on sales transactions for which sales taxes are collected, and shall verify its gross receipts upon which the business tax is based. 
G.  The collector and designees with the duty to enforce this chapter are authorized to arrest persons without a warrant pursuant to Penal Code Section 836.5 whenever the person to be arrested has committed a violation of the provisions of this chapter in the collector's or designee's presence. When the person arrested does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, a written notice to appear shall be prepared and the person released on his or her promise to appear as prescribed by the Penal Code of the State of California (commencing with Section 853.6). 
H.  The collector is authorized to issue administrative citations pursuant to Chapter 1.44 of this code without prior notification in the enforcement of this chapter, and to impose administrative penalties for violations of this chapter. When appropriate, stop orders pursuant to Section 1.12.030 may be issued ordering a business in violation of this chapter to cease and desist from conducting business until the violation is corrected. 
(Ord. 2247 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.410 - (Reserved)  
Article IX. - Violations 
 
6.04.420 - Misuse of business tax license or indicia. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person holding a business tax license required by this chapter to permit any other person to use the business tax license, sticker or decal, or the licensed premises or the licensed person's name for the purpose of evading payment of any business tax or any other requirement of this chapter. Violation will also result in cancellation of the business tax license. 
B.  It is unlawful to reproduce, duplicate, copy or alter any original business tax license, decal or sticker to falsely represent that an original business tax license is valid or that the appropriate tax has been paid. 
C.  Every person conducting business by vehicle shall keep the tax license or a photocopy within each vehicle, and shall affix an identifying decal to each vehicle used in that business. 
D.  It is unlawful for any person subject to this chapter to drive, operate or use, or cause to be driven, operated, or used, any vehicle in the conduct of a business by vehicle without a decal being attached to the vehicle as required in this chapter, or to remove, deface or cover up the decal, or place the decal upon any vehicle other than a vehicle used in its business. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003)  
6.04.430 - Penalty for violations. 
A.  It is unlawful to violate any of the mandatory provisions or prohibitions of this chapter or to knowingly or intentionally misrepresent to any officer or employee of this city any material fact in connection with the administration or collection of taxes pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  Each violation of any of the mandatory provisions or prohibitions of this chapter is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars or imprisonment for six months, or both. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation for which the violator may be separately charged. 
(Ord. 2224 § 2 (part), 2003) 
Appendix A
NATIONAL INDICES OF ABILITY TO PAY AND
TAX CLASSIFICATION BY INDUSTRY 
SIC
No. 	Description 	Net Profit to
Net Sales (%) 	Tax Class 
01 	Agricultural Production—Crops 	5.90 	3 
02 	Agricultural Production—Livestock 	5.90 	3 
07 	Agricultural Services 	7.16 	3 
08 	Forestry 	7.16 	3 
09 	Fishing, Hunting, and Trapping 	7.16 	3 
10 	Metal Mining 	7.71 	4 
11 	Anthracite Mining 	7.71 	4 
12 	Bituminous Coal and Lignite Mining 	7.71 	4 
13 	Oil and Gas Extraction 	7.71 	4 
14 	Mining and Quarrying of Nonmetallic Minerals, Except Fuels 	7.71 	4 
15 	Building Construction—General Contractors 	2.69 	1 
16 	Construction Other Than Building—General Contractors 	2.84 	1 
17 	Construction—Special Trade Contractors 	7.01 	3 
20 	Manufacturing—Food and Kindred Products 	3.53 	2 
22 	Manufacturing—Textile Mill Products 	3.47 	1 
23 	Manufacturing—Apparel and Other Finished Textile Products 	2.89 	1 
24 	Manufacturing—Lumber and Wood Products Except Furniture 	2.98 	1 
25 	Manufacturing—Furniture and Fixtures 	4.03 	2 
26 	Manufacturing—Paper and Allied Products 	4.88 	2 
27 	Manufacturing—Printing, Publishing, and Allied Industries 	6.30 	3 
28 	Manufacturing—Chemicals and Allied Products 	8.26 	4 
29 	Manufacturing—Petroleum and Related Products 	5.69 	3 
30 	Manufacturing—Rubber and Miscellaneous Plastic Products 	3.00 	1 
31 	Manufacturing—Leather and Leather Products 	3.35 	1 
32 	Manufacturing—Stone, Clay, Glass, and Concrete Products 	4.72 	2 
33 	Manufacturing—Primary Metal Industries 	1.75 	1 
34 	Manufacturing—Fabricated Metal Products Except Machinery and Transportation Equipment 	4.00 	2 
35 	Manufacturing—Machinery, except Electrical 	6.78 	3 
36 	Manufacturing—Electrical and Electrical Machinery, Equipment, and Supplies 	3.03 	1 
37 	Manufacturing—Transportation Equipment 	2.41 	1 
38 	Manufacturing—Measuring, Analyzing, and Controlling Instruments; Photographic Medical, and Optical Goods; Watches and Clocks 	10.18 	4 
39 	Manufacturing—Miscellaneous Manufacturing Equipment 	3.49 	1 
40 	Railroad Transportation 	0.00 	1 
41 	Local and Suburban Transit and Interurban Highway Passenger Transportation 	4.28 	2 
42 	Motor Freight Transportation and Warehousing 	4.75 	2 
45 	Transportation by Air 	0.00 	1 
46 	Pipe Lines, Except Natural Gas 	10.54 	4 
47 	Services Incidental to Transportation 	2.15 	1 
48 	Communication 	12.04 	5 
49 	Electrical, Gas, and Sanitary Services (Utilities) 	8.66 	4 
50 	Wholesale Trade—Durable Goods 	2.51 	1 
51 	Wholesale Trade—Nondurable Goods 	2.51 	1 
52 	Retail Trade—Building Materials, Hardware Garden Supply, and Mobile Home Dealers 	3.26 	1 
53 	Retail Trade—General Merchandise Stores 	3.73 	2 
54 	Retail Trade—Food Stores 	2.28 	1 
55 	Retail Trade—Automotive Dealers and Gasoline Services Stations 	2.10 	1 
56 	Retail Trade—Apparel and Accessory Stores 	4.43 	2 
57 	Retail Trade—Furniture, Home Furnishings, and Equipment Stores 	4.04 	2 
58 	Retail Trade—Eating and Drinking Places 	4.66 	2 
59 	Retail Trade—Other 	4.54 	2 
60 	Banking 	8.24 	4 
61 	Credit Agencies other than Banks 	4.33 	2 
62 	Security and Commodity Brokers, Dealers, Exchanges, and Services 	3.59 	2 
63 	Insurance Carriers (Underwriters) 	4.14 	2 
64 	Insurance Agents, Brokers, and Services 	21.25 	6 
65 	Real Estate 	3.93 	2 
66 	Combinations of Real Estate, Insurance, Loans, or Law Offices 	30.41 	6 
67 	Holding and Other Investment Offices 	48.37 	6 
70 	Service—Hotels, Rooming Houses; Camps and Other Lodging Places 	2.41 	1 
72 	Services—Personal 	14.02 	5 
73 	Services—Business 	4.85 	2 
75 	Automotive Repair, Automotive Services, and Garages 	9.45 	4 
76 	Miscellaneous Repair Services 	9.45 	4 
78 	Services—Motion Pictures 	3.69 	2 
79 	Services—Amusement and Recreation, except Motion Pictures 	4.87 	2 
80 	Health Services 	38.41 	6 
81 	Legal Services 	50.50 	6 
82 	Educational Services 	5.91 	3 
83 	Social Services 	6.57 	3 
84 	Museums, Art Galleries, Botanical and Zoological Gardens 	6.57 	3 
86 	Membership Organizations 	6.57 	3 
891 	Engineering, Architectural, and Surveying Services 	25.35 	6 
893 	Accounting, Auditing, and Bookkeeping Services 	33.14 	6 
899 	Services—not Elsewhere Classified 	6.57 	3 
 
ALPHABETICAL BUSINESS CLASSIFICATION INDEX 
SIC
No. 	Business Description 	Tax
Class 
A 
65 	Abstract Land Title or Warranty Companies 	2 
61 	Acceptance Corporations and Dealers 	2 
63 	Accident Insurance Carrier 	2 
893 	Accountants All Types 	6 
893 	Accounting and Bookkeeping Services 	6 
	Accounting and Bookkeeping Machines and Supplies (See Office Machines) 	
17 	Acoustical Contractors 	3 
73 	Advertising Agencies, including Outdoor Services 	2 
73 	Advertising, novelties, signs, placards, etc. 	2 
61 	Agricultural Credit Institutions 	2 
55 	Aircraft, Dealers, Retail 	1 
17 	Air Conditioning Contractor 	3 
76 	Air Conditioning Service and Repair 	4 
73 	Airplane Rental 	2 
72 	Alterations, Clothing 	5 
41 	Ambulance Service 	2 
79 	Amusement and Recreation Services 	2 
79 	Amusement Machines, Coin-Operated 	2 
79 	Amusement Parks 	2 
07 	Animal Hospital 	3 
73 	Answering Service 	2 
59 	Antiques, Dealers, Retail 	2 
76 	Antiques, Repair and Restoration 	4 
65 	Apartment Buildings or Complexes, Rental 	2 
57 	Appliances, Household, Dealers 	2 
76 	Appliances, Household, Repair of 	4 
891 	Architects 	6 
76 	Armature Rewinding Shops 	4 
73 	Armored Car Service 	2 
59 	Art, Dealers, Retail 	2 
73 	Artists, Commercial 	2 
899 	Artists' Studios or Portrait Artists, Non-Commercial 	3 
59 	Artists' Supply and Materials Stores, Retail 	2 
79 	Athletic Arena or Clubs, Where Admission is Charged 	2 
73 	Auctioneers, Commission or Fee Basis 	2 
59 	Auction Houses (General Merchandise), Retail 	2 
50 	Automatic Sprinklers, Wholesale 	1 
55 	Automobile Accessories, Dealers 	1 
75 	Automobile, Automatic Car Wash 	4 
75 	Automobile, Body and Paint Shop 	4 
55 	Automobile, Dealers, Retail, New or Used 	1 
61 	Automobile Loan Finance Companies 	2 
75 	Automobile, Rental or Leasing, not including Driver 	4 
55 	Automobile Parts, Retail 	1 
50 	Automobile Parts, Wholesale 	1 
75 	Automobile Repairs, Overhaul and General Servicing 	4 
75 	Automobile Tires, Recapping 	4 
55 	Automobile Tires, Retail 	1 
75 	Automobile Towing Service 	4 
41 	Automobile Transportation Service, including Driver 	2 
59 	Automobile Wreckers, Buying Used Cars and Selling the Parts, Retail 	2 
17 	Awning Installation Contractors 	3 
B 
54 	Bakery, Retail 	1 
20 	Bakery Products, Manufacturer Only 	2 
51 	Bakery Products, Wholesale Only 	1 
79 	Ballroom, Lease or Rented for Dancing or Parties 	2 
79 	Bands, Dance 	2 
60 	Banks 	4 
72 	Barber Schools 	5 
72 	Barber Shops 	5 
50 	Barber Supplies, Wholesale 	1 
55 	Batteries, Auto, Retail 	1 
50 	Bearings, Dealers, Wholesale 	1 
72 	Beauty Schools 	5 
72 	Beauty Shops 	5 
50 	Beauty Supplies, Wholesale 	1 
50 	Belting, Wholesale 	1 
20 	Beverage Manufacture, All Types 	2 
59 	Bicycle Dealers, Retail 	2 
79 	Bicycle Rental 	2 
76 	Bicycle Repair 	4 
50 	Bicycle Supplies, Wholesale 	1 
73 	Billboard, Firms Engaged in the Erection and Lease of Space 	2 
79 	Billiard or Pool Hall 	2 
51 	Billiard or Pool Supplies, Wholesale 	1 
12 	Bituminous Coal and Lignite Mining 	4 
76 	Blacksmith 	4 
80 	Blood Banks 	6 
35 	Blowers and Blower Systems, Manufacturing 	3 
73 	Blueprinting Services 	2 
70 	Boarding House, including Fraternity and Sorority 	1 
55 	Boat Supplies and Accessories, Retail 	1 
55 	Boat, Dealers, Retail 	1 
76 	Boilermaker Shops, Repair of Boilers 	4 
50 	Boilers, Wholesale 	1 
17 	Boiler, Setting of 	3 
50 	Bolts, Nuts, and Screws, Dealers, Wholesale 	1 
73 	Bondsmen 	2 
27 	Book Publishers 	3 
59 	Book Store, Retail 	2 
79 	Booking Agent, except Motion Pictures 	2 
893 	Bookkeeping Services 	6 
72 	Bootblacks, Bootblack Stands 	5 
20 	Bottlers of Soft Drinks 	2 
50 	Bottlers Suppliers, Wholesale 	1 
79 	Bowling Alleys 	2 
59 	Bowling Equipment and Supplies, Retail 	2 
51 	Bowling Equipment and Supplies, Wholesale 	1 
26 	Box, Manufacturing 	2 
79 	Boxing or Wrestling Matches 	2 
50 	Brake Linings Wholesale Dealers 	3 
56 	Bridal Shops, Retail 	2 
	Brokers (See Heading under Type of Broker, for Example: Real Estate Broker, Food Broker, etc.) 	
	Building Contractors (See Contractors) 	
52 	Building Materials and Supplies, Retail 	1 
50 	Building Materials, Wholesale 	1 
17 	Burglar Alarm, Installation Only 	3 
73 	Burglar Alarm, Maintenance and Monitoring Only 	2 
41 	Bus and Motor Coach Company 	2 
41 	Bus Terminals 	2 
73 	Business Agents or Brokers, Selling Business Concerns 	2 
73 	Business Consultant, except Finance—Investment 	2 
61 	Business Credit Institutions 	2 
27 	Business Forms, Manufacturing 	3 
59 	Business Forms, Retail 	2 
	Business Machines (See Office Machines) 	
82 	Business Schools 	3 
C 
25 	Cabinet Shops, Manufacturers, not Custom 	2 
57 	Cabinet Shop, for Individual Order 	2 
58 	Cafeterias 	2 
59 	Camera and Photographic Supplies, Retail 	2 
50 	Camera and Supplies, Wholesale 	1 
76 	Camera Repair Shop 	4 
59 	Cameras, Retail 	2 
70 	Campgrounds 	1 
59 	Camping Equipment, other than Trailers, Retail 	2 
55 	Campers and Other Recreational Vehicles, Retail 	1 
54 	Candy, Retail 	1 
51 	Candy, Wholesale 	1 
59 	Canvassers 	2 
75 	Car Wash 	4 
79 	Carnivals 	2 
17 	Carpenters 	3 
72 	Carpet and Rug Cleaning 	5 
57 	Carpet and Rug, Dealers, Retail 	2 
17 	Carpet Layers, Contractors 	3 
50 	Carpets, Wholesale 	1 
	Cash Registers and Supplies (See Office Machines) 	
63 	Casualty Insurance Carrier 	2 
58 	Caterers 	2 
17 	Ceiling Contractors 	3 
32 	Cement Manufacture 	2 
50 	Cement Products, Wholesale Dealers 	1 
65 	Cemetery Companies, Agents, or Dealers in Cemetery Lots 	2 
07 	Cemetery Lots, Caretakers of 	3 
893 	Certified Public Accountants 	6 
82 	Charm, Fashion, Finishing, and/or Modeling Schools 	3 
20 	Cheese, Manufacturers or Processors 	2 
28 	Chemical and Allied Products, Manufacturing 	4 
80 	Chiropractors 	6 
52 	Christmas Trees, Retail 	1 
51 	Cigarettes or Tobacco, Wholesale 	1 
59 	Cigar and Cigarette Stores and Stands, Retail 	2 
64 	Claim Adjustment Agencies 	6 
32 	Clay, Stone, and Glass Products, Manufacturing 	2 
72 	Cleaning of Garments 	5 
59 	Clothing, Dealers in Second-Hand Clothing 	2 
23 	Clothing Manufacturers 	1 
56 	Clothing, Retail 	2 
72 	Clothing, Rental 	5 
51 	Clothing, Wholesale 	1 
50 	Coal, Dealers, Wholesale 	1 
62 	Coal, Wood, or Coke Agents or Brokers 	2 
59 	Coal, Wood, or Coke, Dealers, Retail 	2 
51 	Coffee, Dealers, Wholesale 	1 
42 	Cold Storage Warehouse 	2 
73 	Collection and Claim Agency, except for Real Estate 	2 
66 	Combinations of Real Estate, Insurance, Loans, Law Offices 	6 
62 	Commodity Brokers and Dealers (Contracts) 	2 
48 	Communication 	5 
73 	Computer Programming and Other Software Services 	2 
50 	Concrete Products, Dealers, Wholesale 	1 
32 	Concrete, Manufacturer, Block, Brick, and Other Products 	2 
32 	Concrete, Manufacturer, Ready Mixed and Transit-Mixed 	2 
16 	Concrete Work Contractors (Roads, Highways, and Streets) 	1 
17 	Concrete Work Contractors (Driveways, Sidewalks, and Floors Only) 	3 
62 	Consultants, Finance—Investments 	2 
73 	Consulting Services, except Investment and Family 	2 
15 	Contractors, Building 	1 
16 	Contractors, Heavy Construction, other than Building 	1 
17 	Contractors, Special Trade 	3 
80 	Convalescent Home 	6 
73 	Copying Service 	2 
28 	Cosmetics, Manufacturer 	4 
59 	Cosmetics, Dealers, Retail 	2 
51 	Cosmetics, Wholesale 	1 
62 	Cotton Brokers, Agents or Warehousemen 	2 
42 	Cotton Compresses and Warehouses 	2 
22 	Cotton Fabrics, Manufacture 	1 
07 	Cotton Ginning 	3 
83 	Counseling Services 	3 
20 	Cracker Manufacturer 	2 
73 	Credit Reporting Agencies 	2 
61 	Credit Unions 	2 
D 
20 	Dairy Products, Processing 	2 
54 	Dairy Products, Retail 	1 
51 	Dairy Supplies, Wholesale 	1 
79 	Dancing Academies or Schools 	2 
79 	Dance Halls 	2 
73 	Data Processing Services 	2 
73 	Data Processing Systems, Supplies, and Equipment, including Keypunching 	2 
83 	Day Care Centers 	3 
73 	Decorators, Interior 	2 
54 	Delicatessen 	1 
42 	Delivery Service (Messenger/Courier), Vehicular 	2 
50 	Dental Equipment and Supplies, Wholesale 	1 
80 	Dental Laboratories and/or Dentists 	6 
53 	Department Stores 	2 
73 	Detectives, Agencies 	2 
72 	Diaper Service 	5 
07 	Dog Kennels and/or Grooming 	3 
70 	Dormitories, Commercially Operated 	1 
57 	Drapery Stores, Retail 	2 
56 	Dressmakers for Retail Trade 	2 
82 	Driver Training School 	3 
59 	Drug Store, Retail 	2 
51 	Drugs, Wholesale 	1 
72 	Dry Cleaning, Coin-Operated 	5 
72 	Dry Cleaning, Retail 	5 
50 	Dry Cleaning, Wholesale 	1 
51 	Dry Goods, Wholesale 	1 
17 	Drywall Contractors 	3 
72 	Dyeing and Cleaning Plants, except Rug Cleaning 	5 
E 
17 	Earthmoving for Building Construction 	3 
16 	Earthmoving, not Connected with Building Construction 	1 
82 	Educational Services and Schools 	3 
54 	Eggs, Retail 	1 
51 	Eggs, Wholesale 	1 
49 	Electric, Gas, and Sanitary Services (Utilities) 	4 
50 	Electric Light Bulbs, Wholesale 	1 
49 	Electric Power Company (Utility) 	4 
57 	Electrical Appliances and Supplies, Retail 	2 
50 	Electrical Appliances and Supplies, Wholesale 	1 
76 	Electrical Appliances, Repair 	4 
17 	Electrical Contractors 	3 
36 	Electrical Machinery, Equipment, and Supplies Manufacturing 	1 
50 	Elevators, including Repair, Wholesale 	1 
73 	Employment Agencies 	2 
891 	Engineering, Architectural, and/or Surveying Services 	6 
27 	Engraving 	3 
79 	Entertainment, except Motion Pictures 	2 
73 	Equipment Rental and Leasing 	2 
72 	Escort Services 	5 
51 	Explosives, Sales and Distributors, Wholesale 	1 
17 	Excavating and Foundation Contractors, Building Construction Only 	3 
16 	Excavating Contractors, other than Building 	1 
73 	Exterminators 	2 
F 
59 	Fabric Shops, Retail 	2 
61 	Factors 	2 
50 	Farm Equipment and Machinery 	1 
51 	Farm Supplies 	1 
20 	Feeds, for Pets and Other Animals, Manufacture of 	2 
17 	Fencing Contractors 	3 
28 	Fertilizer, Manufacture 	4 
51 	Fertilizer, Wholesale 	1 
73 	Field Warehousing 	2 
73 	Film Developers, for General Public 	2 
78 	Film Distributor 	2 
61 	Finance Companies 	2 
50 	Fire Extinguishers, Sale of 	1 
73 	Fire Extinguishers, Service of 	2 
63 	Fire Insurance Carriers 	2 
59 	Fish Aquariums, Retail 	2 
54 	Fish and Seafood Stores, Retail 	1 
51 	Fish or Other Seafood, Wholesale 	1 
59 	Fish, Tropical Fish, Retail 	2 
59 	Fish Bait, Retail 	2 
09 	Fisheries 	3 
25 	Fixtures and Furniture, Manufacturing 	2 
57 	Floor Covering, Retail 	2 
50 	Floor Covering, Wholesale 	1 
17 	Flooring Contractors 	3 
59 	Florists, Retail 	2 
51 	Florists, Wholesale 	1 
54 	Food, Retail, Dealer, not Consumed on Premises 	1 
51 	Food Broker 	1 
17 	Foundation Contractors, Building Construction Only 	3 
33 	Foundries 	1 
47 	Freight Forwarders 	1 
54 	Fruit and Produce, Retail 	1 
51 	Fruit and Produce, Wholesale 	1 
59 	Fuel Dealers, Retail 	2 
72 	Funeral Homes, Funeral Directors, and/or Undertakers 	5 
56 	Fur, Retail 	2 
17 	Furnace or Heating Contractors 	3 
57 	Furniture, Dealers, Retail 	2 
59 	Furniture Dealers, Second-Hand, Retail 	2 
25 	Furniture and Fixtures, Manufacturing 	2 
76 	Furniture Repairing, Refinishing, and Reupholstering 	4 
50 	Furniture, Wholesale 	1 
G 
75 	Garages, Automotive Repair 	4 
49 	Garbage Collection Agencies 	4 
72 	Garment Pressing and Alteration 	5 
49 	Gas, Dealers in Liquefied Petroleum Gas and Natural Gas 	4 
59 	Gas, Dealers in Liquefied Petroleum Gas, Delivered to Customers' Premises, Retail 	2 
49 	Gas, Natural Gas Company 	4 
55 	Gasoline Service Stations 	1 
51 	Gasoline, Wholesale 	1 
53 	General Merchandise Stores 	2 
59 	Gift Shops 	2 
17 	Glass Installation Contractors 	3 
75 	Glass, Replacement and Repair, Automotive 	4 
52 	Glass, Retail 	2 
32 	Glass, Stone and Clay Products, Manufacturing 	2 
79 	Golf Courses, including Miniature 	2 
16 	Grading, General Construction 	1 
62 	Grain Broker (Commodity) 	2 
42 	Grain Elevators, Stores Only 	2 
51 	Grain, Dealers, Wholesale 	1 
73 	Graphic Arts 	2 
59 	Gravestones, Finished, Retail 	2 
59 	Greeting Cards, Retail 	2 
54 	Grocers, Retail 	1 
51 	Grocers, Wholesale 	1 
59 	Guns, Retail 	2 
50 	Guns, Wholesale 	1 
76 	Gunsmiths, Repair of Guns 	4 
H 
72 	Hairdressers and/or Stylists 	5 
52 	Hardware, Retail 	1 
50 	Hardware, Wholesale 	1 
72 	Hat Cleaning and Blocking, Retail 	5 
09 	Hatchery, Poultry 	3 
56 	Hats, Retail 	2 
72 	Health Clubs 	5 
80 	Health Services, General 	6 
59 	Hearing Aids, Retail 	2 
17 	Heating Contractor 	3 
16 	Heavy Construction 	1 
63 	Health Insurance Carrier 	2 
16 	Highway and Street Construction 	1 
59 	Hobby Shops, Retail 	2 
67 	Holding Companies 	6 
57 	Home Furnishing Stores, Retail 	2 
07 	Horticulturists 	3 
56 	Hosiery, Retail 	2 
51 	Hosiery, Wholesale 	1 
22 	Hosiery Mills 	1 
63 	Hospital Insurance Carrier 	2 
50 	Hospital Supplies 	1 
80 	Hospitals, Sanitariums, and Like Institutions 	6 
07 	Hospitals, Animal 	3 
70 	Hotels, except Residential 	1 
65 	Hotels, Residential 	2 
50 	Hotel Supplies, Wholesale 	1 
17 	House Mover and Wrecker 	3 
59 	House-To-House, Retail 	2 
I 
59 	Ice, Dealers, Retail 	2 
51 	Ice, Dealers, Wholesale 	1 
20 	Ice, Manufacturers 	2 
50 	Ice-Making, Machinery and Equipment, Wholesale 	1 
54 	Ice Cream Dealers, Retail, not Consumed on Premises 	1 
58 	Ice Cream Dealers, Retail, Consumed on Premises 	2 
20 	Ice Cream, Manufacture 	2 
51 	Industrial Chemicals, Wholesale 	1 
72 	Industrial Laundries 	5 
61 	Installment Sales Finance, other than Banks 	2 
07 	Insemination, Artificial 	3 
17 	Insulation Contractor 	3 
66 	Insurance, Loans, Law, Real Estate Offices, Combinations of 	6 
64 	Insurance Agents, Brokers, and Other Insurance Services 	6 
64 	Insurance Adjustor 	6 
63 	Insurance Carriers, All Types 	2 
64 	Insurance Solicitors 	6 
17 	Intercommunication Equipment Installation Contractor 	3 
73 	Interior Decorator 	2 
62 	Investment Counselors 	2 
62 	Investment Firm, General Brokerage 	2 
67 	Investment Offices (Management) 	6 
62 	Iron Brokers 	2 
07 	Irrigation Systems, Landscape Services 	3 
J 
73 	Janitor or Housekeeping Service 	2 
50 	Janitor or Housekeeping Supplies, Wholesale 	1 
76 	Jewelry, Repair, including Watch Repair 	4 
59 	Jewelry, Retail 	2 
50 	Jewelry, Wholesale 	1 
K 
79 	Karate Instruction 	2 
07 	Kennels 	3 
17 	Kitchen Designers and Contractors 	3 
22 	Knitting Mills 	1 
L 
50 	Laboratory Equipment and Supplies, Wholesale 	1 
57 	Lamp Dealers, Retail 	2 
50 	Lamp Dealers, Wholesale 	1 
36 	Lamps, Manufacturers 	1 
65 	Land Title or Warranty Company 	2 
07 	Landscape Services and Landscape Architects 	3 
66 	Law, Real Estate, Insurance, Loan Offices, Combinations of 	6 
72 	Laundries, including Automatic Machines, Coin-Operated and Industrial 	5 
07 	Lawn Care 	3 
50 	Lawnmower, Dealers, Wholesale 	1 
52 	Lawn and Garden Supplies, Retail 	1 
76 	Lawnmowers, Repairs 	4 
81 	Lawyers 	6 
82 	Learning Centers 	3 
73 	Leased Equipment 	2 
75 	Leasing Companies, Vehicles without Drivers 	4 
59 	Leather Goods, Retail 	2 
50 	Leather Goods, Wholesale 	1 
31 	Leather and Leather Products, Manufacturing 	1 
81 	Legal Services 	6 
63 	Life Insurance Carrier 	2 
57 	Linen Shop, Retail 	2 
72 	Linen Supply Service 	5 
59 	Liquefied Petroleum Gas, Delivered to Customers' Premises, Retail 	2 
61 	Loan (Small) Lenders, Licensed 	2 
66 	Loans, Real Estate, Insurance, Law Offices, Combinations of 	6 
76 	Locksmiths 	4 
70 	Lodging and Rooming Houses 	1 
59 	Luggage, Retail 	2 
24 	Lumber, Manufacture 	1 
52 	Lumber Merchants, Operating Lumber Yards, Retail 	2 
50 	Lumber Merchants, Operating Lumber Yards, Wholesale 	1 
M 
35 	Machine Shops 	3 
59 	Magazine Stores and Stands, Retail 	2 
59 	Mail Order Business 	2 
73 	Management Consultants 	2 
67 	Management Investment Companies 	6 
72 	Manicurists 	5 
17 	Mantel Work, Contractors 	3 
	MANUFACTURING 	
20 	 Bakery Products 	2 
28 	 Chemical and Other Allied Products 	4 
32 	 Concrete, Clay, Stone, and Glass Products 	2 
36 	 Electrical Machinery, Equipment and Supplies 	1 
34 	 Fabricated Metal Products 	2 
25 	 Furniture and Fixtures 	2 
31 	 Leather and Leather Products 	1 
35 	 Machinery, except Electrical 	3 
33 	 Metal Products, Primary 	1 
26 	 Paper and Allied Products 	2 
20 	 Pet and Other Animal Food 	2 
29 	 Petroleum Refining and Related Industries 	3 
30 	 Rubber and Miscellaneous Products 	1 
22 	 Textile Mill Products 	1 
37 	 Transportation Equipment 	1 
24 	 Wood Products, except Furniture 	1 
39 	Manufacturing, not Otherwise Classified 	1 
17 	Masonry and Stonework Contractors 	3 
72 	Massage 	5 
25 	Mattress and Bedsprings Manufacture 	2 
76 	Mattress Renovating 	4 
57 	Mattresses, Retail 	2 
54 	Meat, Retail 	1 
51 	Meat, Wholesale 	1 
20 	Meat Slaughtering and/or Packing Plants 	2 
17 	Mechanical Contractors 	3 
63 	Medical Insurance Carriers 	2 
80 	Medical and Other Health Services, including Laboratories 	6 
56 	Men's Furnishings, Retail 	2 
73 	Messenger Service 	2 
33 	Metal Products, Manufacturing 	1 
54 	Milk, Retail 	1 
51 	Milk Depots, with or without Truck Delivery 	1 
51 	Millinery, including All Lines of Millinery, Wholesale 	1 
56 	Millinery Shops or Stores, Retail 	2 
51 	Mills, Flour, Wholesale 	1 
20 	Mills, Flour and Other Grain Products 	2 
10-14 	Mining, All Types 	4 
73 	Miscellaneous Business Services, not Otherwise Classified 	2 
65 	Mobile Home Sites, Rental 	2 
52 	Mobile Homes, Retail 	1 
42 	Mobile Homes, Transportation of 	2 
59 	Monuments, Retail 	2 
61 	Mortgage Brokers 	2 
70 	Motels, except Residential 	1 
65 	Motels, Residential 	2 
78 	Motion Picture Films, Distributors, Producers, or Agents for 	2 
78 	Motion Picture Operators 	2 
78 	Motion Picture Theatre or Drive-In 	2 
42 	Motor Freight Lines 	2 
82 	Motor Vehicle Drivers Training School 	3 
79 	Motorcycle Rental 	2 
55 	Motorcycles, Dealers, Retail 	1 
55 	Motors, Outboard, Dealers, Retail 	1 
42 	Movers, Trucking with or without Storage 	2 
42 	Movers, Storage Only 	2 
57 	Music, Sheet, or Musical Instruments, Retail 	2 
79 	Music Distribution Systems, Coin-Operated 	2 
73 	Music Distribution Systems, except Coin-Operated 	2 
76 	Musical Instrument Repair Shops 	4 
62 	Mutual Funds, Selling By Independent Salesman 	2 
N 
49 	Natural Gas and/or Liquefied Petroleum Gas 	4 
27 	Newspapers, Publishing of 	3 
59 	Newspapers, Retail 	2 
51 	Newspapers, Wholesale 	1 
59 	Newsstands 	2 
65 	Nonresidential Building Operators 	2 
62 	Notes, Endorsers and Buyers 	2 
59 	Notions and Novelties 	2 
83 	Nurseries, Day 	3 
07 	Nursery or Horticulturists 	3 
80 	Nurses, All Types 	6 
80 	Nursing Homes, Convalescent 	6 
83 	Nursing Homes, Residential Type 	3 
82 	Nurses Schools 	3 
O 
65 	Office Buildings, Rental 	2 
50 	Office Furniture and/or Supplies, Wholesale 	1 
57 	Office Furniture, Retail 	2 
76 	Office Machines, Service and Repair 	4 
73 	Office Machines, Rental 	2 
59 	Office Machines, Equipment and/or Supplies, Retail 	2 
73 	Office Secretarial Service 	2 
51 	Oil, Fuel, Wholesale 	1 
50 	Ophthalmic Goods, Wholesale 	1 
38 	Optical Goods, Manufacture 	4 
50 	Optical Goods or Supplies, Wholesale 	1 
59 	Optical Goods Stores, Retail 	2 
38 	Opticians 	4 
80 	Optometrists 	6 
59 	Orthopedic and Artificial Limb Stores, Retail 	2 
65 	Operators of Nonresidential, Residential, and/or Apartment Buildings 	2 
65 	Operators of Mobile Home Sites 	2 
80 	Osteopathic Physicians 	6 
P 
47 	Packing Goods, for Shipping 	1 
42 	Packing House, Cold Storage 	2 
28 	Paint Manufacturers 	4 
52 	Paint, Retail 	1 
51 	Paint, Wholesale 	1 
17 	Painting and Paper Hanging Contractors 	3 
26 	Paper and Allied Products, Manufacturing 	2 
42 	Parcel Delivery Companies 	2 
75 	Parking Lots and Garages 	4 
70 	Parking Spaces (Trailer Park) 	1 
16 	Paving and Asphalt Contractors 	1 
59 	Pawn Brokers, All Types and Classifications 	2 
59 	Peddlers, All Types and Classifications 	2 
61 	Personal Loan Companies 	2 
67 	Personal Holding Companies 	6 
72 	Personal Services 	5 
73 	Pest Control 	2 
20 	Pet and Other Animal Food Manufacture 	2 
59 	Pet Shops 	2 
29 	Petroleum Refining and Related Industries 	3 
59 	Pharmacies 	2 
50 	Phonograph Record Businesses, Wholesale 	1 
57 	Phonograph and Record Stores, Retail 	2 
73 	Photocopying Service 	2 
73 	Photograph Developing and Retouching 	2 
72 	Photographers, Portrait for the General Public 	5 
73 	Photographers, Commercial 	2 
72 	Photographic School 	5 
59 	Photographic Supply Stores, Retail 	2 
80 	Physical Therapist 	6 
80 	Physicians 	6 
57 	Pianos and Organs, Retail 	2 
57 	Picture and/or Picture Frames, Dealers, Retail 	2 
16 	Pipe Laying Contractors 	1 
58 	Pizzerias 	2 
17 	Plastering and Dry Wall Contractors 	3 
52 	Plumbing Supplies, Retail 	1 
50 	Plumbing Supplies, Wholesale 	1 
17 	Plumbing, Heating, and Air Conditioning Contractors 	3 
50 	Poultry Equipment, Wholesale 	1 
02 	Poultry and Egg Production 	3 
20 	Poultry Slaughtering, Dressing, and/or Packing 	2 
02 	Poultry Hatcheries 	3 
27 	Printing, All Types 	3 
80 	Psychologists 	6 
73 	Public Relations Services 	2 
27 	Publishers 	3 
50 	Pumps, Wholesale 	1 
Q 
14 	Quarrying 	4 
R 
75 	Radiator, Repairs, Automotive 	4 
57 	Radio and Television, Retail 	2 
50 	Radio, Phonographs, and Television, Dealers in Supplies, Wholesale 	1 
73 	Radio and Television, for Rent or Lease 	2 
76 	Radio and Television Repairs 	4 
48 	Radio and Television Stations, including CATV 	5 
40 	Railroad Companies 	1 
66 	Real Estate, Insurance, Loans, Law Offices, Combinations of 	6 
65 	Real Estate Dealers in or Agents for, including Renting, Contracting, or Charging for Repairs on Houses; Dealers without Offices; Brokers for Real Estate Loans 	2 
65 	Real Estate, Leasing and/or Renting 	2 
57 	Record Stores, Retail 	2 
79 	Recreation Center 	2 
55 	Recreation Vehicles, Retail 	1 
72 	Reducing Salons 	5 
57 	Refrigerators and Freezers, Retail 	2 
50 	Refrigerators, Wholesale or Distributors 	1 
80 	Rehabilitation House, Outpatient 	6 
59 	Religious Goods Stores, Retail 	2 
73 	Rental Service, Miscellaneous Rental Services not Otherwise Listed 	2 
76 	Repair Services, except Automotive 	4 
73 	Research and Development Laboratories 	2 
65 	Residential Building Operators 	2 
58 	Restaurants, Shall Include not Only Places Where Meals are Served and the Public Invited, but Also Any Place Where Meals are Served to Limited or Restricted Classes of Persons for Pay 	2 
50 	Restaurants, Supplies and Equipment, Wholesale 	1 
	RETAIL TRADE 	
56 	 Apparel and Accessories 	2 
52 	 Building Materials, Hardware, Garden Supply, and Mobile Home Dealers 	1 
54 	 Food Markets of Grocery Stores 	1 
57 	 Furniture, Home Furnishing and Equipment 	2 
53 	 General Merchandise 	2 
59 	 Miscellaneous Retail Stores not Otherwise Listed 	2 
79 	 Riding Schools, including Academies, Renting Horses to Ride 	2 
17 	Roofing Contractors 	3 
50 	Roofing, Wholesale 	1 
52 	Roofing, Retail 	1 
70 	Rooming House, including Fraternity and Sorority 	1 
30 	Rubber and Miscellaneous Plastic Products, Manufacturing 	1 
59 	Rubber Stamps, Retail 	2 
72 	Rug Cleaning, not Connected with Laundries 	5 
57 	Rugs, including Carpets, Retail 	2 
S 
73 	Salvage 	2 
50 	Sand, Dealers, Wholesale 	1 
52 	Sand, Dealers, Retail 	1 
58 	Sandwiches, Retail, Consumed on Premises 	2 
20 	Sandwiches, Manufacture for Sale off Premises 	2 
80 	Sanitariums 	6 
61 	Savings and Loan Associations 	2 
50 	Saws, Wholesale 	1 
76 	Saws, Sharpening and Repair 	4 
50 	Scales, Wholesale 	1 
72 	Scales, Coin-Operated: Operation of 	5 
59 	School Supplies, including Books, Dealers, Retail 	2 
50 	School Supplies, Wholesale 	1 
50 	Scrap Yard 	1 
24 	Screens, Doors and Windows Wood Manufacturing 	1 
50 	Screens, Doors and Windows, Wholesale 	1 
34 	Screens, Windows and Doors, Metal, Manufacturers 	2 
72 	Seamstresses 	5 
59 	Second-Hand Goods of Any Description 	2 
73 	Secretarial Service 	3 
52 	Seeds, Bulbs, and/or Nursery Stock, Retail 	1 
55 	Service Stations 	1 
76 	Sewer, Septic Tank, and Cesspool Service 	4 
36 	Sewing Machines, Manufacture 	1 
57 	Sewing Machines, Retail 	2 
50 	Sewing Machines, Wholesale 	1 
17 	Sheet Metal Contractors 	3 
23 	Shirts, Manufacturers 	1 
56 	Shoe, Dealers, Retail 	2 
72 	Shoe Repair Shops 	5 
50 	Shoes, Wholesale 	1 
73 	Sign Painting and Lettering Service 	2 
73 	Sign Service, Outdoor Advertising 	2 
59 	Skiing Equipment, Retail 	2 
86 	Social Club 	3 
50 	Soda Fountain Supplies, Wholesale 	1 
58 	Soda Fountains 	2 
51 	Soft Drinks, Distributors 	1 
20 	Soft Drink Bottlers. 	2 
53 	Soft Drink Stands, Retail 	2 
61 	Small Loan Lenders 	2 
59 	Sporting Goods, Retail 	2 
50 	Sporting Goods, Wholesale 	1 
79 	Stables, Riding 	2 
59 	Stationery, including Books 	2 
17 	Steam, Hot Air, Vapor, and Hot Water Contractors 	3 
73 	Stenographer and Stenographic Services 	2 
62 	Stock Brokers and Dealers 	2 
32 	Stone, Clay, and Glass Products, Manufacturing 	2 
57 	Stoves, Dealers, Retail 	2 
50 	Stoves, Wholesale 	1 
76 	Stove Repairs 	4 
17 	Structural Steel Erection Contractors 	3 
65 	Subdividers and Developers 	2 
50 	Surgical Instruments, Wholesale 	1 
891 	Surveying Services 	6 
17 	Swimming Pools, Contractors 	3 
79 	Swimming Pools 	2 
59 	Swimming Pool Supplies, Retail 	2 
T 
56 	Tailor, Custom, Retail 	2 
72 	Tailor, Shops, Repair 	5 
57 	Tape Recorders, Retail 	2 
72 	Tax Service 	5 
41 	Taxicabs 	2 
76 	Taxidermists 	4 
48 	Telegraph, Service or Signal Companies or Agents 	5 
73 	Telephone Answering Service 	2 
48 	Telephone Companies 	5 
48 	Television Broadcasting Stations, including CATV 	5 
73 	Television, Rent or Lease, including Radios, other than Licensed Radio and Television Dealers 	2 
57 	Television and Radio, Retail 	2 
76 	Television and Radio Repair Shops 	4 
73 	Temporary Employment Agencies 	2 
23 	Textile Mill Products, Manufacturing, Apparel Only 	1 
22 	Textile Mill Products, Manufacturing, Fabric Only 	1 
79 	Theatrical Booking Agencies, except Motion Pictures 	2 
79 	Ticket Bureau, Selling Theatrical, Football, Baseball Tickets, and for Like Performances 	2 
17 	Tile and Marble Contractors 	3 
52 	Tile, Retail 	1 
50 	Tile, Wholesale 	1 
76 	Tin and Metal Shops, Repair Only 	4 
75 	Tires, Recapping 	4 
63 	Title Insurance 	2 
59 	Tombstones, Retail 	2 
76 	Tool Sharpening and Repair 	4 
72 	Towels and Uniform Rental 	5 
59 	Toys, Retail 	2 
50 	Toys, Wholesale 	1 
50 	Tractors, Wholesale 	1 
82 	Trade Schools 	3 
73 	Trading Stamps, Redemption, Promotion, and/or Sale to Stores 	2 
65 	Trailer Parks, including Mobile Home Rental for Residential Purposes 	2 
70 	Trailer Parks and Campsites, for Transients 	1 
55 	Trailers, Recreational and Utility, Retail 	1 
75 	Trailers, (U-Haul-It Type), Rental 	4 
37 	Transportation Equipment, Manufacturing 	1 
47 	Travel Bureau 	3 
07 	Tree Surgery 	1 
75 	Truck and Automobile Rental or Leasing, not including Driver 	4 
42 	Trucking, except Rental or Leasing, including Driver 	2 
67 	Trusts, Management of 	6 
27 	Typesetting, for Printing Trade 	3 
59 	Typewriters and Other Office Machines, retail 	2 
50 	Typewriters, Wholesale 	1 
U 
72 	Uniform Supply Service 	5 
72 	Uniform Rental 	5 
76 	Upholsterer, Furniture 	4 
75 	Upholstery Repair, Automotive 	4 
59 	Used Merchandise, Retail 	2 
V 
57 	Vacuum Cleaners, Retail 	2 
50 	Vacuum Cleaners, Wholesale 	1 
53 	Variety Store 	2 
54 	Vegetable Markets, Retail 	1 
59 	Vending Machines, Sale of Products 	2 
50 	Vending Machines, Wholesale 	1 
25 	Venetian Blind, Manufacturing 	2 
07 	Veterinarian 	3 
82 	Vocational Schools 	3 
W 
52 	Wallpaper, Retail 	1 
51 	Wallpaper, Wholesale 	1 
42 	Warehouse Storage Rooms, General 	2 
73 	Warehousing, Field, not Public 	2 
75 	Washing Cars 	4 
57 	Washing Machines, Retail 	2 
50 	Waste Paper and Rags, Wholesale 	1 
76 	Watchmaker, including Repairs 	4 
30 	Water Hose and/or Steam Hose, Manufacturers 	1 
17 	Water Well Drilling Contractors 	3 
17 	Waterproofing Contractors 	3 
52 	Weather Stripping, Dealers, Retail 	1 
47 	Weighing Services, connected with transportation 	1 
17 	Welding Contractor, Operating at Site of Construction 	3 
50 	Welding Machinery and Equipment, Wholesale 	1 
76 	Welding Repair Services, including Automotive 	4 
50 	Wholesalers, Durable Goods 	1 
51 	Wholesalers, Nondurable Goods 	1 
56 	Wigs, Retail 	2 
51 	Wigs, Wholesale 	1 
73 	Window Cleaning Service 	2 
69 	Wood Dealer, Retail 	2 
17 	Wrecker, Buildings 	3 
75 	Wrecker, Towing Service 	4 
Y 
59 	Yarn Shops, Retail 	2 
 
(Ord. No. 2017-2439, § 6, 10-3-2017) 
Appendix B
GROSS RECEIPTS TAX TABLE 
Taxable Gross
Receipts Bracket 	Business Classification 
	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 
0 	4,999 	20 	20 	20 	20 	20 	20 
5,000 	99,999 	20 	26 	32 	39 	45 	52 
100,000 	199,999 	35 	46 	58 	70 	81 	93 
200,000 	299,999 	48 	64 	80 	96 	112 	128 
300,000 	399,999 	60 	81 	101 	121 	141 	161 
400,000 	499,999 	73 	93 	121 	145 	169 	194 
500,000 	599,999 	84 	113 	141 	169 	197 	225 
600,000 	699,999 	96 	128 	160 	192 	224 	256 
700,000 	799,999 	107 	143 	179 	214 	250 	286 
800,000 	899,999 	118 	157 	197 	236 	275 	315 
900,000 	999,999 	129 	172 	215 	257 	300 	343 
1,000,000 	1,099,999 	139 	185 	232 	278 	324 	371 
1,100,000 	1,199,999 	149 	199 	248 	298 	348 	398 
1,200,000 	1,299,999 	159 	212 	265 	318 	371 	423 
1,300,000 	1,399,999 	168 	224 	280 	336 	392 	449 
1,400,000 	1,499,999 	177 	236 	296 	355 	414 	473 
1,500,000 	1,999,999 	222 	296 	370 	444 	518 	592 
2,000,000 	2,499,999 	266 	355 	444 	533 	621 	710 
2,500,000 	2,999,999 	310 	413 	516 	619 	723 	826 
3,000,000 	3,499,999 	352 	469 	586 	703 	820 	938 
3,500,000 	3,999,999 	392 	523 	653 	784 	915 	1,045 
4,000,000 	4,999,999 	470 	627 	783 	940 	1,096 	1,253 
5,000,000 	5,999,999 	545 	727 	908 	1,090 	1,271 	1353 
6,000,000 	7,999,999 	688 	918 	1,147 	1,376 	1,606 	1,735 
8,000,000 	10,999,999 	894 	1,192 	1,490 	1,788 	2,086 	2,284 
11,000,000 	13,999,999 	1,091 	1,455 	1,819 	2,183 	2,546 	2,810 
14,000,000 	15,999,999 	1,217 	1,623 	2,029 	2,434 	2,839 	3,145 
16,000,000 	17,999,999 	1,343 	1,791 	2,238 	2,686 	3,132 	3,480 
18,000,000 	19,999,999 	1,469 	1,958 	2,448 	2,937 	3,425 	3,815 
20,000,000 	21,999,999 	1,594 	2,126 	2,657 	3,189 	3,718 	4,150 
22,000,000 	and above 	1,720 	2,294 	2,867 	3,440 	4,011 	4,485 
 
(Ord. No. 2017-2439, § 7, 10-3-2017) 
Appendix C
FLAT TAX RATES FOR SPECIFIC BUSINESSES 
Type of
Business 	Annual
Tax Rate 	Other
Tax Rate 	Adopted by
Ordinance 	Section
Number 
Amusement Arcade 	$100 		1048 	41 
Auctioneer 	$50 
(Class A & C) 	$10/day 
(Class B) 	811 	17 
Bingo 	$50 			
Bowling Alleys 
(Standard Sized) 	$100 	$5/quarter/alley 	1012 	1 
Bowling Alleys 
(Substandard Sized) 	$25 	$5/quarter/alley 	1012 	2 
Dance Hall 	$300 		963 	1 
Food Vending Vehicle 	$75 		1657 	
Mobile Amusement Vehicle 	$25 		986 	181 
Mobile Searchlight Advertising 	$50 		937 	— 
Out of Town Vendor 
(per Vehicle) 	$25 		1606 	20 
Outside Contractors 
(A & B Licensed) 	$75 		1652 	21 
Outside Contractors 
(C Licensed) 	$50 		1652 	21 
Pawnbroker 	$150 		708 	40 
Shooting Galleries 	$100 		— 	41 
Swap Meet 	$4,500 		1231 	12 
Taxis—Paratransit 	$50 		1125 	2 
Video Machines 	$55 per machine 		82-1788 	— 
Second Location 	$10 			
 
(Ord. No. 2017-2439, § 7, 10-3-2017)  
Chapter 6.10 - CABLE TELEVISION 
Sections: 
 
6.10.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meaning given in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
A.  "Basic subscriber services" means and includes the delivery by the grantee for one monthly fee to all subscribers within the confines of its franchise area of: 
1.  All signals of over-the-air-television broadcast required to be carried by FCC rules and/or all those over-the-air-signals which are received and transmitted in the community without the aid of a cable television system or similar apparatus with the exception of lowpower (Grade B) signals which are not required to be carried by FCC license; 
2.  All satellite signals received and transmitted in the community by the grantee; with the exception pay or premium or tiered services for which an individual per-channel, per-program or per program package charge to subscribers is made; 
3.  All public, local education, local government, local origination, public access and institutional channels and signals; 
4.  Other channels, signals (including microwave) programs and services, provided by the grantee as part of the basic subscriber service package. 
B.  "Cable television system" or "CATV system" means a system franchised pursuant to this chapter which employs microwave, wires, waveguides, coaxial cables or other conductors, equipment or facilities designed, constructed or used for any or all of the following purposes: 
1.  Collecting or amplifying local and distant broadcast television, satellite, microwave or radio signals and distributing and transmitting them; 
2.  Transmitting original cablecast programming not received through television broadcast signals; 
3.  Transmitting television pictures, film and video tape programs not received through broadcast television signals, whether or not encoded or processed to permit reception by only selected receivers; 
4.  Transmitting or receiving two-way signals or transmissions as ancillary services; 
5.  Providing ancillary services such as burglar and fire alarm service, facsimile service or home shopping or banking services; 
6.  Providing data transfer capability in any shape or form, including that of a security system; 
7.  Transmitting or receiving all other signals whether digital, voice or audiovisual. 
C.  "City" means the city of National City in its present incorporated form or in any later recognized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. 
D.  "Council" means the present governing body of the city, or any future board constituting the legislative body of the city. 
E.  "Federal Communications Commission" means the existing federal agency of that name as constituted by the Communications Act of 1934 or any successor agency created by the United States Congress. 
F.  "Franchise area" means the territory within the city throughout which the grantee shall be authorized in its franchise ordinance, to construct, maintain and operate its CATV system and includes any enlargements thereof and additions thereto. 
G.  "Grantee" means the person, firm or corporation to whom or which a franchise under this chapter is granted by the council, and the lawful successor or assignee of such person, firm or corporation. 
H.  "Gross annual receipts" means any and all compensation and other consideration, in any form whatsoever, and any contributing grant or subsidy received directly or indirectly by the grantee from: 
1.  Subscribers or users in payment for any and all CATV system signals, reception and services whether the signals, reception or services are included within the terms "basic subscriber services" or "nonbasic services" as those terms are defined in this section, as well as any installation or line extension charges therefor; 
2.  Any fees or income received by the grantee for the lease or rental, and compensation for any service in connection therewith, of any channel permitted or designated by the Federal Communications Commission to be so leased or rented; 
3.  Any other compensation for utilization of or connection to the property of the grantee used within the city, including the sale, rental or provision to the subscriber of any equipment, parts or add-ons to be used in connection with the CATV system; 
4.  Notwithstanding the above, gross annual receipts shall not include any bad debt or taxes on services furnished by the grantee and imposed directly on any subscribers or users by any city, state or other governmental unit and collected by the grantee for such governmental unit. 
I.  "Nonbasic services" means and includes channels, signals, programs and services not provided as part of the "basic subscriber services" package, as defined in subsection A of this section. Nonbasic services shall include: 
1.  Pay premium or tiered services for which an individual per-channel per-program or per program package charge to subscribers is made; 
2.  Ancillary services such as burglar and fire alarm service, facsimile service or home shopping or banking service for which an individual per-subscriber charge is made; 
3.  Equipment and appurtenances representing technological developments and enhancements in the field which the grantee may, from time to time, make available to subscribers, provided that subscribers have the option of not acquiring the additional equipment or appurtenances and further, provided that the exercise of the option not to purchase shall, in no way, affect a subscriber's existing service or preclude him from receiving "basic subscriber services" as defined in subsection A of this section; 
4.  Other services not provided under basic subscriber services as defined in subsection A of this section. 
J.  "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
K.  "Subscribers" or "users" means any person(s) or entity(ies) lawfully receiving, for any purpose, any service of the grantee's cable television system including, but not limited to, the conventional cable television system service of retransmission of television broadcast, satellite, microwave or radio signals, grantee's original cablecasting, local government, education and public access channel cablecasting and other services such as leasing of channels, data and facsimile transmissions and police, fire and similar public service communications. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.020 - Nonexclusive franchise to operate. 
A.  A franchise to construct, operate and maintain a cable television system within all or any portion of the incorporated area of the city may be granted by the council to any person, firm or corporation, offering to furnish and provide such system pursuant to the terms and provisions of this chapter. Any such franchises shall be nonexclusive, and the city reserves the right to grant a similar franchise to any other person or firm at any time. No provision of this chapter may be construed as to require the granting of a franchise when in the opinion of the council it is not in the public interest to do so. 
B.  Neither the granting of a competitive franchise or facilities to a franchisee or action by the city, which duplicates or parallels facilities and/or grants thereunder, shall be deemed to be an act of condemnation or inverse condemnation by the city. 
C.  This franchise being nonexclusive, the city remains free to grant any and all duplicate or competitive rights, or exercise the same itself, that city in its wisdom decides are in the public interest. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.030 - Uses permitted. 
A.  Any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall authorize and permit the grantee subject to prior receipt of all applicable city permits and approvals to engage in the business of operating and providing a CATV system in the city and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, operate, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along any public highways, street, alley, public way or public place, such poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the CATV system; and in addition, so to use, operate and provide similar facilities on properties rented or leased from other persons, firms or corporations including, but not limited to, a public utility or other grantee franchised or permitted to do business in the city. 
B.  The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable it to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under the franchise, and to insure an uninterrupted service to each and all of its customers; provided, however, that such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions hereof or of the grantee's franchise ordinance, the laws of the city or the laws of the state, or of the United States of America. 
C.  The grantee shall have authority to trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables or interfering with microwave transmissions of the grantee, all trimming to be done under the supervision and direction of the city and at the expense of the grantee. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.040 - Regulation of service and rates. 
A.  The city council, subject to applicable federal and state laws, shall at all times, and from time-to-time during the term of any franchise granted under this chapter, have the power to adopt and enforce and the grantee shall conform to reasonable rules, regulations and standards of performance pertaining to the system of the grantee. 
B.  The city council shall have the authority to establish or approve all subscriber, installation and other incidental rates and charges for basic subscriber services as defined in Section 6.10.010 pursuant to the following procedures: 
1.  When the grantee proposes to fix or increase its rates for basic subscriber services, it shall notify the city manager in writing, a minimum of ninety days before the proposed fixing or increase is scheduled to take effect. 
2.  The grantee's proposal for rates or a rate adjustment shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following information: 
a.  Balance sheet; 
b.  Income statement; 
c.  Statement of sources and application of funds; 
d.  Statement of current and projected subscribers and subscriber penetration ratio; 
e.  Statement of any proposed system service enhancements which a rate adjustment would directly facilitate; 
f.  Survey of rates for similar services throughout the grantee's other franchise areas in San Diego County; 
g.  Any other related items of information which the city manager may require or the grantee may wish to include in support of its request. 
3.  Upon receipt of the grantee's written request, the city manager shall evaluate the proposal and determine whether to recommend to the city council that it exercise its rate regulation authority. The city manager may appoint a hearing officer to act in his place under this chapter. The city manager's or hearing officer's report and recommendations along with any supporting staff or consultants' recommendations shall be submitted to the city council within sixty days of receipt of the grantee's original request. If the city manager determines not to recommend to the city council that it exercise its authority under this chapter, the city manager shall within sixty days of receipt of the grantee's original request file with the city council notification of intent to approve the increase and thereafter, unless the council directs otherwise, shall notify the grantee in writing of approval of the increase. 
4.  The city council, upon receipt of the city manager's findings and conclusions, shall determine whether to exercise its rate regulation authority. 
5.  Should the city council decide to exercise its rate regulation authority, it shall first pass its resolution of intention to do so, describing and stating any rates or charges to be changed, the reasons of the council therefor, fixing a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein may appear before the council and be heard and directing the city clerk to publish the resolution at least once, within fifteen days of the passage thereof. The city clerk shall cause such resolution to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, and the same shall be published and a copy thereof shall be mailed to any grantee under this chapter at least ten days prior to the date specified for hearing thereon. At the time set for such hearing, or at any adjournment thereof, the council shall proceed to hear and pass on all presentations made before it, and the decision of the council thereon shall be final and conclusive. If the council finds that the changing of any rates or charges of the grantee to subscribers will not be detrimental or injurious to the best interests and welfare of the subscribers and of the city, then the council shall, by resolution, authorize the change of any rates or charges of the grantee to subscribers as shall be deemed reasonable by the council in the premises; and such resolution shall thereupon become and shall be a part of any franchise granted under this chapter and affected thereby. 
C.  In considering the grantee's request for an adjustment in rates, the city shall take the following factors into consideration: 
1.  Any staff or consultants' reports and recommendations; 
2.  The ability of the grantee to render system services and to derive a reasonable profit therefrom under the existing rate schedule and the proposed rate schedule; 
3.  The efficiency and effectiveness of the grantee's operations; 
4.  The quantity and quality of services offered by the grantee; 
5.  The effect of denial or reduction in the requested amount of increase upon the grantee's ability to provide necessary or desirable system enhancements; 
6.  The capital cost of the system less depreciation; 
7.  The extent of which the grantee has adhered to the terms of its franchise agreement; 
8.  Time elapsed since the last rate increase; 
9.  Level of subscriber complaints; 
10.  Comparison with rates charged in other jurisdictions; 
11.  Statement of depreciated value of plant in service (original cost after straight line depreciation); 
12.  Other factors which the city may deem relevant or necessary to the rendering of a decision. 
D.  If the city fails to render a formal decision either accepting, rejecting, modifying or deferring the grantee's request for a rate adjustment within ninety days after the city manager's receipt of the grantee's original request, the grantee shall immediately thereafter subject to the provisions of subsection E of this section, be entitled to put its proposed new rates, as specified in its original request into effect. 
E.  The grantee shall notify all subscribers within its franchise area of any approved rate increase a minimum of thirty days prior to the date the approved new rates are scheduled to go into effect. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.050 - Duration of franchise. 
Any franchise, granted by the city council pursuant to this chapter, shall be for a specified term as set forth in the ordinance granting the franchise. Any such franchise may be terminated prior to its date of expiration by the city council as specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.060 - Franchise fees. 
A.  Acceptance Fee. The grantee of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter may be required to pay to the city upon acceptance of such franchise a fee certain in an amount to be determined or approved by the city council. Any such amount shall be contained in the grantee's franchise ordinance. 
B.  Annual Franchise Fee. The grantee of any franchise under this chapter shall pay annually to the city during the life of such franchise a fixed percentage of the gross annual receipts of the grantee as defined herein. Such percentage and the annual payment date shall be as set forth in the ordinance granting the franchise. 
It shall be the duty of the grantee to pay to the city, within ten days after the time for filing its annual statement, any unpaid balance for the calendar year covered by such statement. 
In the event that the above payment is not received by the city within the specified time, the grantee shall pay to the city a penalty of one percent per month on the unpaid balance in addition thereto. 
The right is reserved to the city of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid as franchise fees under this chapter, and no acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for further or additional sums payable under this chapter or for the performance of any obligation thereunder. If the audit discovers an underpayment of required fees in an amount totaling more than five percent, the grantee shall pay the cost of the audit. 
In the event of any holding over after expiration or other termination of the franchise, without the consent of the city, the grantee shall continue to pay to the city franchise fees in the percentage amount specified in the franchise ordinance based upon its gross monthly revenues during such period, such period to be determined by the city council. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.070 - Limitations of franchise. 
A.  No privilege or exemption shall be granted or conferred by a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter except those specifically prescribed herein. 
B.  The grantee is subject to all requirements of the applicable ordinances, rules, regulations, fees and specifications of the city heretofore or hereafter enacted or established, including, but not limited to, those concerning street work, street excavation, use, removal, and relocation of property within a street, and other street work. 
C.  All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment of the grantee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the streets, alleys or other public ways and places. 
D.  In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, by the grantee, the grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the engineering department of the city, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway or surface of any street or alley disturbed, in as good condition as before the work was commenced. 
E.  The grantee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove from any public street, alley or other public way, any property of the grantee when required by the city engineer and/or by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signals, lines, and tracks or any other type of structures or improvements by governmental agencies when acting in a governmental capacity, or any other structures or public improvements; provided, however, the grantee shall in all cases have the privileges and be subject to the obligations to abandon any property of the grantee in place, as provided in Section 6.10.110. 
F.  Whenever it is necessary to shut off or interrupt service for the purpose of making repairs, adjustments, alterations or installations, the grantee shall do so at such time as will cause the least amount of inconvenience to its customers and unless such interruption is unforeseen and immediately necessary, it shall, where reasonably possible, give reasonable notice thereof to its customers. 
G.  Any such franchise shall be a privilege to be held in trust by the original grantee. It cannot in any event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, merger, consolidation, stock sale or otherwise, without prior consent of the council expressed by resolution, and then only under such conditions as may be reasonably prescribed. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. Additionally, the grantee shall file with the council, within thirty days after any sale, transfer, assignment, or lease of the franchise or any part thereof, or any of the rights or privileges granted thereby, written evidence of the transaction certified to by the grantee or its duly authorized officers. The proposed assignee must show financial responsibility and must agree to comply with all provisions of this chapter. No such consent shall be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage or other hypothecation as a whole, to secure an indebtedness. Any such transfer, lease assignment or disposition which is implemented without prior approval of the city council shall result in forfeiture of the grantee's franchise. 
H.  Time shall be of the essence in any such franchise granted. The grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply promptly with any of the provisions of this chapter by failure of the city to enforce prompt compliance. 
I.  Any right or power in, or duty impressed upon any officer, employer, department or board of the city shall be subject to transfer by the city to any other officer, employee or department of the city. 
J.  Any such franchise granted shall not relieve the grantee of any obligation involved in obtaining pole space from any department of the city, utility company, or from others maintaining poles in streets. 
K.  Any grantee under this chapter agrees, through its acceptance of a franchise under this chapter, to construct, operate and maintain its CATV system in strict accordance with its franchise and this chapter and furthermore agrees that any franchise granted under this chapter shall operate as a contractual obligation between the grantee and the city by which both parties agree to abide in good faith. 
L.  The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost, expense or damage, arising out of any provision at this chapter or its enforcement. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.080 - Rights reserved to the city. 
A.  No franchise granted under this chapter in any way impairs or affects any legal rights of the city. 
B.  No franchise granted under this chapter shall ever be given any value before any court or other public authority in any proceeding of any character other than fair market value. 
C.  There is reserved to the city every right and power which is required to be herein reserved or provided by any ordinance or resolution of the city, or by the laws or constitutions of the state or federal government, and the grantee, by its acceptance of any franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any lawful action or requirements of the city in its exercise of such rights or power, heretofore or hereafter enacted or established. 
D.  Neither the granting of a franchise under this chapter nor any of the provisions contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the city from granting any identical, or similar, franchise to any other person, firm or corporation, either within or outside the designated area of any franchise. 
E.  The city council may do all things which are necessary and lawful in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this chapter. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.085 - Resolution of disputes. 
The city manager is authorized and empowered to act to adjust, settle or compromise any controversy arising from the operations of any grantee under this chapter or relating to the construction or application of any of the terms of this chapter, either on behalf of the city, or any subscriber, in the best interest of the public. The city manager shall provide the grantee and all interested parties with notice and an opportunity to be heard prior to rendering a decision under this chapter. No formal proceedings or rules of evidence are required by this section. The city manager may appoint a hearing officer to act in his place and to exercise his authority under this chapter. Either the grantee, or any member of the public who may be dissatisfied with the decision of the city manager, may appeal the matter to the city council. The council may accept, reject or modify the decision of the city manager, and the council may adjust, settle or compromise any controversy arising from the operations of any grantee or from the application of any provisions of this chapter. The grantee shall be notified in writing of the decision of the city council within ten days of the decision. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.086 - Penalties for violations. 
The city may, at its sole option and in addition to any other remedies legally available, subject to the provisions of subsection D of this section, apply any or all of the following penalties for a material breach of the provisions of this chapter or any franchise ordinance under this chapter: 
A.  Penalties for Delays in Required System Construction or Rebuild Activity. 
1.  Reduction in the duration of the franchise on a month-to-month basis for each month of delay exceeding six months; 
2.  Forfeiture of performance bonds; 
3.  Revocation of the franchise pursuant to the provisions of Section 6.10.260. 
B.  Penalties for Material Breaches other than Construction Delays. 
1.  Imposition of a financial penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars per day for grantee's individual wilful and/or repeated violation or failure to take corrective action with respect to a violation; 
2.  Imposition of a requirement that the grantee make rebates or payment to subscribers or classes of subscribers in such amount as the city may deem reasonable; 
3.  Imposition of a requirement that the grantee correct or otherwise remedy the violation prior to any pending rate increase becoming effective; 
4.  Revocation of the franchise pursuant to the provisions of Section 6.10.260. 
C.  Determination of Appropriate Penalty. In determining which remedy or remedies are appropriate for the grantee's violation, the city shall take into account the nature of the violation, the person or persons bearing the impact of the violation, the nature of the remedy required in order to prevent further such violations, the actual cost of damage associated with the violation and other such matters as the city may deem appropriate. The city, in determining any penalty, shall make written findings of fact which address the considerations listed in this section. 
D.  Hearing and Appeal Procedure. In making determinations relative to violations under this chapter, the city shall afford the grantee due process of law in accordance with the hearing and appeal procedures established in Section 6.10.085. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.090 - Permits, installation and service. 
A.  Within thirty days after acceptance of any franchise under this chapter, the grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business including, but not limited to, any utility joint use attachment agreements, carrier licenses, and any other permits, licenses, and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of CATV systems or their associated transmission facilities. 
B.  Within ninety days after obtaining all necessary permits, licenses and authorizations, the grantee shall commence construction and installation of the CATV system in accordance with an installation schedule approved by the city council. 
C.  Within one hundred eighty days after the commencement of construction and installation of the system, the grantee shall proceed to render service to subscribers, and the completion of the construction and installation shall be pursued with reasonable diligence to the end that service shall be made available to all potential subscribers throughout the entire franchise area within such time and upon such conditions as shall be determined by the city council. 
D.  Failure to perform in accordance with the foregoing shall be grounds for termination of the franchise. 
E.  The city manager may extend the time for obtaining necessary permits and authorizations and for beginning construction and installation for additional periods in the event the grantee, acting in good faith, experiences delays by reason of circumstances beyond its control. In such event the city manager shall so advise the council. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.100 - Location of grantee's properties. 
A.  Any poles, wires, cable lines, conduits, or other properties of the grantee to be constructed or installed in streets, alleys or other public places shall be so constructed or installed only at such locations and in such manner as shall be approved by the city engineer acting in the exercise of his professional capacities and exercising reasonable discretion. Prior to proceeding with any such installations, the grantee shall first apply for and be granted a permit on forms and in a manner prescribed by the city engineer. 
B.  The grantee shall not install or erect any facilities or apparatus on public property or rights-of-way within the city, except those installed or erected upon public utility facilities now existing, without written approval of the city engineer. 
C.  In those areas and portions of the city where both the transmission and distribution facilities of the public utility providing telephone service and those of the utility providing electric service are underground or hereafter may be placed underground, then the grantee shall likewise construct, operate, and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground. Amplifiers in the grantee's transmission and distribution lines may be housed in appropriate facilities upon the surface of the ground subject to approval by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.110 - Removal or abandonment of property of grantee. 
A.  In the event that the use of any part of the CATV system is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of three months, or in the event such system or property has been installed in any street, alley or public place without complying with the requirements of its franchise or ordinance, or the franchise has been terminated, cancelled or has expired, the grantee shall promptly remove from the streets, alleys or public places all such property and poles of such system other than any which the city engineer may permit or require to be abandoned in place. In the event of any such removal, the grantee shall promptly restore the street, alley or other area from which such property has been removed to a condition satisfactory to the city engineer. 
B.  Any property of the grantee remaining in place ninety days after the termination of the franchise shall be considered permanently abandoned. The city manager may extend such time by an amount not to exceed an additional thirty days. 
C.  Any property of the grantee to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such manner as the city engineer shall prescribe. Upon permanent abandonment of the property of the grantee in place, the property shall become that of the city, and the grantee shall submit to the city council an instrument, to be approved by the city attorney, transferring to the city the ownership of such property. 
D.  The city may remove abandoned property at the grantee's expense. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.120 - Failure to perform street work. 
Upon failure of the grantee to commence, diligently pursue, or complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this chapter or by its franchise to be done in any street, alley or other public place within the time prescribed, and to the satisfaction of the city engineer, the city manager may at his option, and through whatever means deemed necessary, cause such work to be done, and the grantee shall pay to the city the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the city manager to the grantee, provided, however, that before such action is taken by the city, the grantee shall, if possible, be given thirty days' written notice to correct the work. The payment shall be made by the grantee within thirty days after receipt of the referenced itemized report. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.130 - Faithful performance bond. 
A.  The grantee shall, concurrently with the filing of an acceptance of award of any franchise granted under this chapter, file with the city clerk and at all times during original system construction or required system rebuild activity maintain in full force and effect for the term of such franchise or renewal thereof or until completion of removal obligations at termination, at the grantee's sole expense, a corporate surety bond in an amount and form to be approved in advance by the city attorney, such bond to be in the minimum amount of one hundred thousand dollars, renewable annually, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of the grantee, and upon the further condition that in the event the grantee fails to comply with any one or more of the provisions of this chapter or of the franchise issued to the grantee under this chapter there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety of such bond any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result thereof, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the grantee as prescribed hereby which may be in default, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney's fees and costs, up to the full amount of the bond, such condition to be a continuing obligation for the duration of such franchise or any renewal thereof, and thereafter until the grantee has liquidated all of its obligations with the city that may have arisen from the acceptance of the franchise by the grantee or from its exercise of any privilege therein granted including any removal obligations. The bond shall provide that thirty days' prior written notice of intention not to renew, cancellation, or material change be given to the city. 
B.  Neither the provisions of this section, nor any bond accepted by the city pursuant thereto, nor any damage recovered by the city thereunder, shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the grantee or limit the liability of the grantee under any franchise issued under this chapter or for damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.140 - Protection of city against liability. 
A.  Indemnification. The grantee shall concurrently with the filing of an acceptance of award of any franchise granted under this chapter agree to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, committees, agents and employees against and from any and all claims, demands, actions, suits, liabilities, and judgments of any and every kind and nature and regardless of the merit of same, except those claims which are determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to have resulted from the negligence or other acts of the city and such agents, employees and officers, arising out of or related to the exercise or enjoyment of any franchise granted to the grantee pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, including claims, demands, actions, suits, liabilities and judgments based upon any infringement or violation or alleged violation of any copyright; and the grantee shall reimburse the city for any costs and expenses incurred by the city in defending against any such claim or demand or action, including any attorney fees, accountant fees, expert witness or consultant fees, court costs, per diem expenses, travel and living expenses; and the grantee shall upon demand of the city appear in and defend any and all suits, actions or other legal proceedings whether judicial, quasi-judicial, administrative or otherwise, brought by third persons or duly constituted authorities against or affecting the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees and arising out of or related to the exercise or enjoyment of such franchise, or the granting thereof by the city; the foregoing obligation shall exist and continue without reference to or limitation by the amount of any bond, policy of insurance, deposit, undertaking or other security required under this chapter; provided that neither the grantee nor the city shall make or enter into any compromise or settlement of any claim, demand, action or suit without first giving the other ten days' prior written notice of its intention to do so. 
B.  Comprehensive Liability Insurance. Upon acceptance of a franchise granted under this chapter, the grantee shall file with the city clerk a certificate of insurance and shall thereafter during the entire term of such franchise maintain in full force and effect, at its own expense, a general comprehensive liability insurance policy or policies which shall insure the grantee and provide primary coverage for the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, against liability for loss or liability for personal injury, death, property damage, and copyright infringement occasioned by any activity or operation of the grantee under such franchise. Such policy or policies shall be issued in a form and amount approved by the city attorney, with minimum combined single limits of liability coverage in the amount of one million dollars. The policy or policies shall name the city, its officers, boards, commissions, committees, agents and employees as additional insureds and shall contain a provision that a written notice of any cancellation, modification or reduction in coverage of the policy shall be delivered to the city clerk thirty days in advance of the effective date thereof. No franchise granted under this chapter shall be effective unless and until each of the foregoing certificates of insurance as required in this subsection have been delivered to the city clerk. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.150 - Inspection of property and records. 
A.  At all reasonable times, the grantee shall permit any duly authorized representative of the city to examine all property of the grantee in the public right-of-way, together with any appurtenant property of the grantee in the public right-of-way situated within or outside the city, and to examine and transcribe any and all maps and other necessary records kept or maintained by the grantee or under its control which deal with the operations, affairs, transactions or property of the grantee within the franchise area with respect thereto. If any of such maps or records are not kept in the city, or upon reasonable request made available to the city, and if the city, manager determines that an examination thereof is necessary or appropriate, then all travel and maintenance expense necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be paid by the grantee. 
B.  The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the city manager at the times and in the form prescribed such reports with respect to its operations, affairs, transactions or property, as may be reasonably necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of the rights, functions or duties of the city or any of its officers in connection with the franchise. 
C.  The grantee shall, at all times, make and keep in the Civic Center full and complete plans and records showing the exact location of all CATV system equipment installed or in use in streets, alleys and public places in the city. The grantee shall file with the city engineer, without charge, a current set of maps drawn to scale showing all CATV system equipment installed and in place in streets, alleys and other public places of the city. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.160 - Minimum operational standards and related testing procedures. 
A.  Any CATV system constructed under this chapter shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the best accepted standards of the industry to the effect that subscribers shall receive the best possible service. Specifically, the system must, in all respects, meet or exceed technical standards of operation as developed by the Federal Communications Commission or any successor agency. Specific technical standards of operation associated with any particular grantee shall be contained in the ordinance granting the subject franchise. 
B.  The grantee shall submit, within sixty days after the effective date of the franchise agreement, a detailed test plan describing the methods and schedules for testing the CATV system on an ongoing basis to determine compliance with the provisions of the franchise agreement. The test for basic subscriber services shall be performed periodically, at intervals no greater than every six months, throughout the service area. At least eight of the selected locations shall be at the far end of the distribution trunk cables. Written test results shall be submitted in a report to the city manager. If more than ten percent of the locations tested fail to meet the FCC performance standards, the grantee shall be required to indicate what corrective measures have been taken, and the entire test may be repeated at the discretion of the city manager. 
C.  At any time after commencement of service to subscribers the city may require additional tests, full or partial repeat tests, different test procedures, or tests involving a specific subscriber's terminal. Requests for such additional tests shall be made on the basis of complaints received or other evidence indicating an unresolved controversy or significant noncompliance, and such tests will be limited to the particular matter in controversy. The city will endeavor to so arrange its requests for such special tests so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to the grantee or to the subscriber. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.170 - Technological developments. 
A.  It is the desire of the city that all CATV systems franchised to operate within the city shall maintain, operate and where feasible, modify the CATV system to ensure its performance in accordance with the best accepted and proven standards of the cable television industry. 
B.  The grantee shall provide technical improvements and modifications to ensure the continued operation of the CATV system in accordance with the best accepted and proven standards of the cable television industry. Such improvements and modifications shall include, but not necessarily be limited to: 
1.  Continued availability and enhancement of national or international transmission capabilities via communications satellites; 
2.  Enhancement and expansion of system channel capacity and programming; 
3.  Improvement and expansion of public access, local origination, local government, and local educational programming; 
4.  Maintenance and improvement of the system physical plant in accordance with the best accepted and proven CATV industry practices and FCC regulations; 
5.  Consideration of two-way interactive capability, programming and services including institutional services; 
6.  Application of any other new technologies or advance in the CATV field designed to enhance and improve CATV services. 
C.  In making determinations relative to the financial and technical feasibility or appropriateness of specific system improvements or modifications and the grantee's compliance with this section, the city shall take the following factors into consideration: 
1.  Whether there exists a reasonable subscriber demand and, where appropriate, demonstrated willingness to pay for the proposed improvements or modifications; 
2.  Whether the technology associated with the proposed improvements or modifications has been tested and proven reliable; 
3.  Whether the grantee is financially and technically able to provide the proposed improvements or modifications; 
4.  Whether the provision of the proposed improvements or modifications will allow the grantee a reasonable return on its investment in such proposed improvements or modifications; 
5.  Whether the proposed improvements or modifications are provided or planned for in the grantee's other cable television systems in San Diego County. 
D.  In implementing the provisions of this section, the city may request, as it deems necessary, and the grantee shall provide, a report regarding the feasibility or appropriateness of implementing specific system improvements or modifications deemed desirable by the city. Additionally, the grantee shall provide in December of each year an annual status report to the city manager relative to implementation of specific system enhancements as provided for in the franchise ordinance or progress toward implementation of system enhancements as referenced in subsection B of this section. All reports required of the grantee under this subsection shall specifically address the factors included under subsection C of this section and shall include a section which compares the CATV system services currently provided by the grantee within National City with similar services provided by the grantee in all its other franchise areas in San Diego County. Additionally, upon request of the city manager, the grantee shall provide system services information for any or all of its franchises in California. The city manager's office will be responsible for obtaining comparative service information relative to CATV systems other than the grantee's. It is understood that the city and any grantee under this chapter may mutually or independently retain technical consultants for the purpose of obtaining information relative to the current "state of the art" in the cable television industry. 
E.  The grantee shall provide the city with advance written notification of any system improvements or modifications proposed for implementation within its respective franchise area. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.180 - System compatibility and connectibility. 
A.  It is the desire of the city that all CATV systems franchised to operate within the city shall be compatible and interconnectible with one another and with systems in adjacent cities. 
B.  When it is financially and technically feasible, legally possible and mutually agreeable between the proposed interconnected systems, the grantee shall negotiate the construction, operation and modification of its system to interconnect it with all other adjacent CATV systems within and outside the city for the purpose of sharing programming. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.190 - Miscellaneous provisions. 
A.  The grantee shall pay to the city a sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for expenses incurred by it in publishing legal notices and ordinances in connection with the granting of a franchise pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; such payment shall be made within thirty days after the city shall furnish such grantee with a written statement of such expense. 
B.  The grantee shall maintain a toll free telephone number twenty-four hours per day, seven days a week, so that CATV maintenance service shall be promptly available to subscribers and shall also keep a maintenance service log indicating the nature of each complaint, when it was received, and how and when it was resolved. This log shall be maintained for at least two years and shall be available for inspection by the city. 
C.  The grantee shall provide each new subscriber with information on how to register inquiries or complaints and shall indicate therein that if the subscriber feels that the grantee has failed to resolve his complaint, the subscriber should contact the city manager's office for further action. 
D.  No person, firm or corporation in the existing service area of the grantee shall be arbitrarily refused service; provided, however, that the grantee shall not be required to provide service to any subscriber who does not pay the applicable connection fee(s) or monthly service charge(s) or to provide service as specified in Section 6.10.191. 
E.  The city council may, upon finding that extraordinary circumstances applying to the land, buildings or CATV system do exist, waive any or all of the requirements of this chapter. 
F.  The grantee shall, without charge and upon request of the city manager or appropriate public school official, provide all basic subscriber services of its system as hereinafter provided: 
1.  One cable television connection to each city facility designated by the city manager including, but not limited to, the Civic Center, police stations, fire stations, public libraries and other facilities that are owned, rented, leased or controlled by the city which are located within the grantee's franchise area. Each such connection shall consist of, at a minimum, of a drop connection to the exterior of the building or property, and one outlet installation. 
2.  One cable television connection to each public school site designated by the superintendent of schools or other appropriate official. Each such connection shall consist of, at a minimum, a drop connection to the exterior of the building and one outlet. 
3.  If connection of city or school facilities as referenced in the preceding subsections presents substantial cost and other connection problems, the subject public agency and the grantee shall mutually determine whether or not the benefit derived from such connection is justified in light of the cost, and if so, the connection procedure to be utilized and the timing of the connection. Specific facilities connection requirements may be included in any franchise ordinance granted under this chapter. 
4.  The grantee shall continue service as presently offered to the city and public schools and guarantee access to additional services when such services become technologically and economically feasible or when such additional services are offered throughout the grantee's franchise area. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.191 - Exceptions to extension of service requirements. 
The grantee shall, subject to the provisions of Section 6.10.192, not be required to extend service into any area not previously provided with cable television service, where the investment required per prospective subscriber is greater than the current maximum capital investment per subscriber throughout the city. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.192 - System extensions to excepted areas. 
The grantee shall extend service to areas excluded from the mandatory extension provisions of Section 6.10.090C if the potential subscribers agree in writing to pay construction costs that exceed the "per subscriber" costs set forth in Section 6.10.191. The grantee shall commence construction of the cable service extension in these areas within one year of receiving the required written agreements. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.200 - Adoption of rules and regulations by the city council. 
A.  Power to Adopt Rules and Regulations. The city council is authorized to adopt by resolution rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of this chapter governing the operation of CATV systems in the city, and such rules and regulations shall apply to and shall govern the operations of the grantee of any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Procedure for Adopting Rules and Regulations. The city council may adopt rules or regulations consistent with the provisions of this chapter or amend, modify, delete or otherwise change such rules and regulations previously adopted in the following manner: 
1.  The city council shall pass a resolution of intention describing the rules or regulations to be adopted, amended, modified, deleted or otherwise changed and set a day, hour and place for public hearing. Such resolution shall direct the city clerk to publish the same at least once within fifteen days of the passage thereof. 
2.  The city clerk shall cause such resolution to be published at least once in the official newspaper of the city and shall cause a copy of same to be mailed or delivered to any grantee not less than ten days prior to the time fixed for hearing thereon. 
3.  At the time for public hearing or at any adjournment thereof, the city council shall proceed to hear and pass upon such evidence, comments and objections as may be presented. Thereafter, the city council, by its resolution, may adopt, amend, modify, delete, or otherwise change the rules and regulations. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.210 - Application for franchise. 
A.  Application for an original or renewal franchise under this chapter shall be in accordance with the format and filing instructions approved by the council. 
B.  Prior to the granting of a franchise pursuant to this chapter, the council shall pass a resolution declaring its intention to grant the same, stating the name of the proposed grantee, the character of the franchise and the terms and conditions upon which it is proposed to be granted. Such resolution shall fix and set forth the day, hour and place when and where any persons having any interest therein or any objection to the granting thereof may appear before the council and be heard thereon. It shall direct the city clerk to publish the resolution at least once within fifteen days of the passage thereof in an official newspaper of general circulation. The notice shall be published at least ten days prior to the date of hearing. At the time set for the hearing the council shall proceed to hear and pass upon all protests, and its decision thereon shall be final and conclusive. Thereafter, the council may grant, modify or deny the franchise. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.220 - Effect of annexations. 
A.  In the event any new territory becomes annexed to the city, the city council shall determine which grantee or grantees shall serve such new territory. 
B.  In the event any portion of unincorporated territory covered by an existing franchise granted by the county of San Diego is annexed to the city prior to the time that the grantee of such county franchise has commenced installation of a CATV system within such territory, all rights acquired by the grantee under its county franchise shall terminate as of the date on which the annexation to the city becomes effective. 
C.  In the event any portion of unincorporated territory covered by an existing franchise granted by the county of San Diego is annexed to the city after the grantee thereof has commenced or completed construction and installation of a CATV system within such territory, the rights reserved under the franchise to the county of San Diego or to any officer thereof shall insure to the benefit of the city, and all regulatory provisions of this chapter and any other rules and regulations applicable to CATV systems operating within the city, whether then in effect or subsequently adopted, shall be applicable to and binding upon the grantee. The grantee shall, relative to the annexed territory, be obligated to pay franchise fees in an amount mutually determined by the city and the grantee. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.230 - Effect of preemption. 
In the event the Federal Communications Commission or the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California or any other federal or state body or agency having jurisdiction shall now or hereafter exercise any paramount jurisdiction over the subject matter of any franchise under this chapter, then to the extent such jurisdiction shall lawfully preempt or preclude the exercise of like jurisdiction by the city, the jurisdiction of the city shall, to the extent so preempted or precluded, cease and no longer exist, and the franchise shall be deemed amended accordingly; provided, however, that only those provisions of the franchise so affected by the exercise of such paramount jurisdiction shall be amended and all other provisions of the franchise shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.240 - Locking devices to permit exercise of parental discretion and adequacy of signal scrambling procedures. 
A.  The grantee shall make available to its subscribers, upon request and for a nominal fee as fixed in its rate structure, locking devices to permit exercise of parental control over programming. 
B.  The grantee shall insure through adequate signal scrambling or other techniques that pay or premium services for which subscribers do not pay the associated per channel or per program fee are not received by such subscribers. 
(Ord. 1816 (part) 1984)  
6.10.250 - Violations. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make or maintain any unauthorized connection in physical contact with any part of a franchised CATV system within the city for the purpose of taking or receiving or enabling himself or others to receive any television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sounds. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, without the consent of the grantee or property owner as appropriate, to wilfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used for distribution of the CATV services of the grantee. Violation of this subsection shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
C.  From and after the effective date of this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain within any public street in the city or within any other public property of the city or within any privately owned area within the city which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the city, any equipment or facilities for distributing any television signals through a CATV system unless a franchise authorizing such use of such street or property or area has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.260 - Revocation of franchise. 
A.  The city reserves the right to revoke any franchise granted under this chapter and to rescind all rights and privileges associated with the franchise in the following circumstances, each of which shall represent a default and breach under this chapter and the franchise grant: 
1.  If the grantee should default in the performance of any of its material obligations under this chapter or under such documents, contracts and other terms and provisions entered into by and between the city and the grantee; 
2.  If the grantee should fail to provide or maintain in full force and effect, the liability and indemnification coverages or the performance bond as required in this chapter; 
3.  If any court of competent jurisdiction, the FCC or any state regulatory body by rules, decisions, or other action determines that any material provision of the franchise documents, including this chapter, is invalid or unenforceable prior to the commencement of system construction; 
4.  If the grantee should frequently violate any orders or rulings of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to this franchise unless such orders or rulings are being contested by the grantee; 
5.  If the grantee ceases to provide services for any reason within the control of the grantee over the CATV system. The grantee shall not, however, be declared at fault or be subject to any sanction under any provision of this chapter in any case in which performance of any such provision is prevented for reasons demonstrated to be beyond the grantee's control. A fault shall not be deemed to be beyond the grantee's control if committed by a corporation or other business entity in which the grantee holds a controlling interest, whether held directly or indirectly; 
6.  If the grantee attempts to evade any of the provisions of this chapter or the franchise agreement or practices any fraud or deceit upon the city; 
7.  If the grantee's construction schedule is delayed for more than eighteen months later than any schedule contained in the grantee's franchise agreement, including any extensions thereof; 
8.  If the grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged a bankrupt. 
B.  The city may make a written demand that the grantee comply with any such requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule or regulation or correct any action deemed cause for revocation. If the failure, refusal or neglect of the grantee continues for a period of thirty days following such written demand, the city may place its request for termination of the franchise upon a regular council meeting agenda. The city shall cause to be served upon such grantee, at least ten days prior to the date of such council meeting, a written notice of this intent to request such termination, and the time and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published by the city clerk at least once, ten days before such meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. 
C.  The council shall hear any persons interested at the time at the hearing, and shall determine, in its discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just cause. No formal proceedings or formal rules of evidence shall apply at such hearing, and the city council may designate a hearing officer to make a report and recommendations. 
D.  If such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just cause, the council shall direct the grantee to comply within such time and manner and upon such terms and conditions as are deemed reasonable. 
E.  If the council determines such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was without just cause, the council may, by resolution, declare that the franchise of such grantee shall be terminated and bond forfeited unless there is compliance by the grantee within such period as the council may fix. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
6.10.270 - Application of chapter. 
This chapter shall upon the date it becomes effective and as it may subsequently be amended, apply to and govern the operation of any and all CATV franchises granted by the city. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and those of any particular franchise ordinance, the provisions of the franchise ordinance shall govern. 
(Ord. 1816 (part), 1984)  
Chapter 6.20 - RESIDENTIAL RENTALS 
Sections: 
 
6.20.010 - Residential rental units defined. 
"Residential rental units" means any room or combination of rooms within a building or a trailer coach rented out to serve as a single-family dwelling, to be occupied by an individual or group of individuals. 
(Ord. 2224 § 5 (part), 2003; Ord. 2062 § 1, 1993: Ord. 1407 § 1, 1974)  
6.20.020 - Minimum license fee. 
Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity owning residential rental units in the city shall pay a license or tax fee based on the number of units owned, in lieu of a business tax under Chapter 6.04, as follows: 
A.  Persons owning one to four units at one location or a total of one to four units at various locations, shall pay fifty dollars per unit for the first unit, and fifteen dollars per unit for each additional unit. 
B.  Persons owning a total of five or more units at various locations, but fewer than thirty-one units at any one location, shall pay a license fee of fifty dollars per unit for the first unit, and fifteen dollars per unit for each additional unit, or may, at his or her option, pay a base tax of seventy-five dollars in addition to the sum of the tax set forth in the tax table in Appendix A based on gross receipts (gross rents) derived by such person from all units owned by the person within the city. The gross tax rate is one tenth of one percent. 
C.  Persons owning thirty-one to sixty units at one location shall, for each such location, pay a base tax of one hundred dollars in addition to the sum of the tax set forth in the tax table in Appendix A based on gross receipts (gross rents) derived by such person from each complex owned by the person within the city. The gross tax rate is one tenth of one percent. A separate calculation and payment must be provided for each location of rental properties. 
D.  Persons owning sixty-one or more units at one location shall, for each such location, pay a base tax of one hundred fifty dollars in addition to the sum of the tax set forth in the tax table in Appendix A based on gross receipts (gross rents) derived by such person from each complex owned by the person within the city. The gross tax rate is one tenth of one percent. A separate calculation and payment must be provided for each location of rental properties. 
(Ord. 2224 § 5 (part), 2003; Ord. 2085 § 2, 1994: Ord. 2062 § 2, 1993: Ord. 2037 § 10, 1992: Ord. 1407 § 2, 1974)  
6.20.030 - Annual review. 
The gross tax rate of one-tenth of one percent will be reviewed annually for inflation against the San Diego All Urban Consumer Price Index. The maximum annual increase in the gross tax rate shall be no more than five percent. 
(Ord. 2085 § 3, 1994)  
6.20.040 - Exemptions. 
A.  No tax shall be imposed on a residential rental unit in any of the following situations: 
1.  The unit is the primary residence of the property owner for at least six months of the year and no portion of the residence is rented, leased or sublet for any portion of the year; 
2.  The unit is occupied by a family member, is rented at less than current owner expense, and is declared as family occupied on the owner's county property tax declaration or federal income tax return. "Current owner expense" is defined to include mortgage payments, property taxes, association fees, assessments, property insurance, and utilities; 
3.  The unit is not available for rent for any period of time; 
4.  The unit is directly owned by a federal, state, county, local or special district governmental agency; 
5.  The unit is unoccupied and is under construction and will not be occupied for any portion of the tax year; or 
6.  The unit sells and escrow closes during the first two months of the taxable year. 
B.  Proof of exemption eligibility will be required for certain exemptions and may be different for each exemption claimed. Exemption eligibility is only good for one year and must be renewed each taxable year by the tax due date or be subject to an administration fee. 
(Ord. 2224 § 5 (part), 2003: Ord. 2085 § 4, 1994: Ord. 1407 § 4, 1974)  
6.20.050 - Change of ownership. 
All annual taxes imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable in advance on the first day of January of each year and delinquent on the first day of March. If ownership of any unit changes during this period or after the tax has been paid, the new owner will be responsible for registering and paying only the base amount of the tax and will not report and pay on gross receipts until the following January. The base amount is as follows: 
A.  One to four units, fifty dollars; 
B.  Five to thirty units, seventy-five dollars; 
C.  Thirty-one to sixty units, one hundred dollars; 
D.  Sixty-one or more units, one hundred fifty dollars. 
(Ord. 2085 § 5, 1994)  
6.20.060 - Administration and enforcement. 
A.  The finance director is responsible for the administration of this chapter. The provisions of Chapter 6.04 pertaining to the application and issuance of business licenses and the collection, enforcement and penalties for delinquent taxes shall be utilized in the administration of this chapter. 
B.  The finance director shall issue a residential rental tax license upon payment by the person or entity liable for the taxes described in this chapter, commencing in calendar year 2004. 
C.  It is unlawful to operate or rent a residential rental unit without payment of required fees and taxes, to violate any of the mandatory provisions or prohibitions of this chapter or to knowingly or intentionally misrepresent to any officer or employee of this city any material fact in connection with the administration or collection of taxes pursuant to this chapter. Each violation of any of the mandatory provisions or prohibitions in this chapter is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars, imprisonment for six months or both. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation for which the violator may be separately charged. 
(Ord. 2247 § 2, 2004; Ord. 2224 § 5 (part), 2003) 
Appendix A 
Units 	Base 
1 to 4 	$ 50.00 / $15.00 
5 to 30 	$ 75.00 + gross rate 
31 to 60 	$100.00 + gross rate 
61 + 	$150.00 + gross rate 
 
  
Gross 	Tax 
$ 20,000 to $ 99,999 	$ 60.00 + base 
$ 100,000 to $ 299,999 	$ 200.00 + base 
$ 300,000 to $ 599,999 	$ 450.00 + base 
$ 600,000 to $ 899,999 	$ 750.00 + base 
$ 900,000 to $ 1,499,999 	$ 1,175.00 + base 
$ 1,500,000 to $ 2,499,999 	$ 2,000.00 + base 
$ 2,500,000 to $ 3,499,999 	$ 3,000.00 + base 
$ 3,500,000 to $ 4,499,999 	$ 4,000.00 + base 
$ 4,500,000 + 	$ 5,000.00 + base 
  
Title 7 - PROPERTY CONSERVATION AND COMMUNITY APPEARANCE CODE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 7.02 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
7.02.010 - Short title. 
Title 7 is known as the "property conservation code (PCC)" or "property conservation and community appearance code (PC and CAC)." 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.02.020 - Statutory authority. 
Statutory authority for this title is: 
A.  California Administrative Code; 
B.  California Government Code; 
C.  California Health and Safety Code; 
D.  California Penal Code; 
E.  California Streets and Highways Code; 
F.  California Vehicle Code; 
G.  Other enabling legislation enacted by the state of California; 
H.  The National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.02.030 - Purposes. 
It is the purpose of Title 7 to provide for the systematic and orderly regulation of activities affecting the usefulness, quality, appearance and protection of private and public property and the living environment of the community, to stem and dissuade the proliferation of blight, to stabilize property values through property maintenance and up-keep, to enhance the community image as a safe and desirable place to reside, and to achieve a workable interrelationship and common effort among the various city departments in these endeavors. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.02.040 - Jurisdiction. 
Title 7 applies to the entire corporate limits of the city except federal military reservations. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.02.050 - Compliance with other laws. 
A.  Nothing in Title 7 excuses required compliance with any other law or regulation. 
B.  In addition to a designated code compliance officer, and whenever necessary to the maintenance of public health and safety, the provisions of Title 7 may be enforced by any peace officer or other city employee charged with a responsibility for the administration and enforcement of the municipal code. 
(Ord. 2140 § 6 (part), 1998: Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.02.060 - Code conformance officer. 
A.  See Section 7.32.010. The code conformance officer is not a policeman, police officer or sworn peace officer. 
B.  The code conformance officer is an employee of the city having authority to investigate reports of municipal code violations, to give appropriate warnings to violators, to issue citations and to take other steps necessary for the fulfillment of the city's municipal code enforcement programs. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.02.070 - Related municipal code regulations. 
For related municipal code regulations see Section 7.04.030. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
Chapter 7.04 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
7.04.010 - Supplementary effect. 
These definitions pertain to the context of this Title 7. They supplement the definitions included in Section 1.04.010, the definitions contained in the respective codes attached to Title 7 and the definitions included in the respective chapters of this title. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.04.020 - Chapter definitions prevail. 
Where inconsistency or conflict occurs between the definitions in this title and any other definitions found in this municipal code, Title 7 shall prevail. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.04.030 - General definitions. 
The following words, phrases and acronyms, whenever used in this title, shall be construed as defined in this chapter unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words, phrases or acronyms: 
A.  "CCO" means the code conformance officer(s) of the city. 
B.  "CCP" means the code conformance program of the city embodied in this title and supplemented by both management and legislative policies. 
C.  "Conservation code" is an abbreviation for "Property Conservation and Community Appearance Code." 
D.  "LUC" means Title 18, Land Use Code. 
E.  "Municipal code" means the National City Municipal Code. 
F.  "NCMC" means the same as "municipal code." 
G.  "PCC" means Property Conservation Code (Title 7). 
H.  "PC and CA (PCCAC) Title 7" means the Property Conservation and Community Appearance Code. 
I.  "UBC" means the Uniform Building Code. 
J.  "UFC" means the Uniform Fire Code. 
K.  "UHC" means the Uniform Housing Code. 
L.  "Woblers" means the option of citing code violations as either infractions or misdemeanors. 
(Ord. 1812 (part) 1984)  
7.04.040 - Interpretation. 
A.  Whenever there is uncertainty or ambiguity in the meaning of any part of Title 7, the city attorney will address those questions and set forth an interpretive opinion that will be binding. Where such interpretations embrace questions of policy rather than law, the city council will make such interpretations. 
B.  The routine interpretation, comprehension and application of Title 7 rests with the code conformance officer. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
Chapter 7.06 - ABANDONED BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES* 
Sections: 
* Noncodified list of cross-references: 
Abandoned Wells - NCMC Chapter 14.20 Abandoned Vehicles - NCMC Chapter 11.48 Removal of Signs from Abandoned Buildings - NCMC Section 18.62.060 
Uniform Building Code - NCMC Title 15 
Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings - NCMC Title 15 
Uniform Fire Code - NCMC Title 15 
Abandoned Appliances - California Penal Code 
Prior ordinance history: Ords. 1812 (part), 2094 and 2123. 
 
7.06.010 - Purpose and intent—Findings. 
It is the purpose and intent of the city council to establish procedures to minimize or eliminate blight and adverse threats to the public health, safety and welfare caused by improper maintenance of abandoned or vacant structures, and to establish penalties and enforcement mechanisms to bring such properties into compliance. The city council finds and determines that: 
A.  Vacant buildings which have become unsecured or dilapidated, or which are partially destroyed for an unreasonable period of time, attract undesirable individuals including vagrants and criminals who use the buildings for illicit drug activity and other unlawful purposes. 
B.  The existence of vacant buildings which have become unsecured or dilapidated, or which are partially destroyed for an unreasonable period of time, or which have been damaged by fire or decay or otherwise, and which cannot be repaired so as to conform to the requirements of Title 15 of this code, creates blight, which often spreads to surrounding areas. 
C.  The existence of vacant buildings which have become unsecured or dilapidated, or which are partially destroyed for an unreasonable period of time, or which have been damaged by fire or decay or otherwise and cannot be repaired so as to conform to the requirements of Title 15 of this code, constitutes a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, because such conditions invite vandalism, arson, drug dealing, other crime problems and fire hazards, and create unsightliness and blight that depreciates property values. 
D.  The existence of vacant buildings which become unsightly because of deteriorated, weathered, chipped, cracked or peeled paint creates an economic disincentive to the value of surrounding property. Paint that is loose or falling to the ground causes a potential health and safety violation due to possible lead-based paint that could be ingested by children, causing sickness, mental retardation and possibly death. 
E.  Unless corrective measures are undertaken to cure and prevent such public nuisances, such serious threats to the public health, safety and welfare will continue to exist. Therefore, the need to correct such conditions is sufficiently great so as to outweigh the potential benefits of inaction, if any, to the owners of such vacant buildings. 
(Ord. 2175 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7.06.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, "abandoned building" means a building that is vacant, and which: 
A.  Has become unsecured or dilapidated; or 
B.  Is partially destroyed and remains so for a period in excess of six months; or 
C.  Has been damaged by fire, decay or otherwise, and cannot be repaired so as to conform to the requirements of Title 15 of this code; or 
D.  Because of its physical condition invites vandalism, arson, drug dealing, and other crime problems; or 
E.  Because of its physical condition constitutes a refuge for vagrants; or 
F.  Because of its physical condition constitutes a fire hazard; or 
G.  Because of its physical condition creates blight and depreciates surrounding property value; or 
H.  Has been determined by the director of building and safety to constitute a "dangerous building" as defined in the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, as adopted pursuant to Title 15 of this code; or 
I.  On at least three occasions within a twenty-four-month period, has been barricaded and thereafter became unsecured so that persons could enter it. 
(Ord. 2175 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7.06.030 - Abandoned buildings—Maintenance and barricading. 
A.  Any abandoned building shall be substantially barricaded by its owner in a manner specified by the director of building and safety to prevent unauthorized entry. 
B.  All gas and electric utility services shall be disconnected within five days of vacation of a building. Reconnections will require approval by the department of building and safety. 
C.  Unauthorized entry into or occupancy of an abandoned building is prohibited. 
D.  Specifications and orders by the director of building and safety for barricading a building may include any of the following: 
1.  Boarding of doorways, crawl spaces, windows and openings are to be accomplished by use of one-half inch or thicker exterior grade plywood, fastened by lag screws or one-way bolts to the frame or a cross brace, or both; 
2.  All barricades shall be painted to match the dominant exterior color of the elevation of the building on which the barricade is placed. The dominant exterior color shall be that color that occupies at least sixty percent of the particular elevation; 
3.  In the case of commercial buildings located on main or secondary thoroughfares, opaque window coverings may be allowed by the director in lieu of a barricade, provided all the windows are maintained, and, if broken or cracked, replaced within seventy-two hours. The director may require broken or cracked windows to be replaced in lieu of barricading. 
E.  Abandoned buildings shall be maintained free of weeds, litter and rubbish at all times. Violations shall be abated and cost recovery allowed as provided in this chapter and related chapters for abatement of public nuisances. 
(Ord. 2175 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7.06.040 - Abandoned buildings—Nuisance—Abatement. 
Any building determined by the director of building and safety to be an "abandoned building" under the provisions of this chapter, is a public nuisance and shall be abated in accordance with the procedures for abatement of public nuisances and recovery of costs set forth in Chapter 1.36 of this code. The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings may be used where the building qualifies as a "dangerous building" under that code. 
(Ord. 2175 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7.06.050 - Demolition and restoration required. 
All work requiring a demolition permit pursuant to Title 15 of this code shall include the required removal of all foundations and basements and restoring the site to natural grade and condition. Failure to comply with such a permit or any order by the director of building and safety is a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2175 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7.06.060 - Evacuating and barricading damaged buildings. 
The director of building and safety may order and/or accomplish the immediate evacuation and barricading of any building thought to be structurally damaged by seismic activity, wind, tsunamis, flooding, decay, structural failure, dysfunction of sanitation systems or infestations of insects or vermin wherein persons therein would be endangered. The director may employ the provisions of Chapter 1.36 or other provisions of law allowing for summary abatement, when necessary. 
(Ord. 2175 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7.06.070 - Abandoned furniture and other materials. 
A.  Any furniture, appliances, clothing, signs, or new or used materials of any sort placed upon private property without specific permission of the property owner or tenant, or upon public property without specific permission of the agency to whom the property belongs, is deemed to be abandoned. 
B.  Property owners including public agencies, upon giving reasonable notice to the owners of such materials where that is possible, may take possession of such abandoned materials and dispose of them in accordance with law. 
C.  Upon receipt of notice by the city that abandoned materials are present on private property, the owners of the materials or the property shall promptly remove them. Failure to comply with such notice is a violation of this code. 
(Ord. 2175 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7.06.080 - Maintenance and rehabilitation of boarded or vacant buildings. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection C of this section, the owner of any boarded building, whether boarded by voluntary action of the owner or as a result of enforcement activity by the city, shall cause the boarded building to be rehabilitated for occupancy within ninety days after the building is boarded. 
B.  Except as provided in subsection C of this section, no person shall allow a building designed for human use or occupancy to stand vacant for more than ninety days. 
C.  An owner may permit a building to be boarded without being rehabilitated for occupancy or to stand vacant for more than ninety days; provided, that one of the following conditions applies: 
1.  The building is the subject of an active building permit for repair or rehabilitation and the owner is progressing diligently to complete the repair or rehabilitation; or 
2.  The building meets all codes, does not contribute to blight, is ready for occupancy, and is actively being offered for sale, lease, or rent; or 
3.  The director of building and safety determines that the building is not likely to contribute to blight because the owner is actively maintaining and monitoring the building. Active maintenance and monitoring shall include: 
a.  Maintenance of landscaping and plant materials in good condition, 
b.  Maintenance of the exterior of the building, including but not limited to paint and finishes, in good condition, 
c.  Regular removal of all exterior trash, debris, and graffiti, 
d.  Maintenance of the building in continuing compliance with all applicable codes and regulations, 
e.  Prevention of criminal activity on the premises, including but not limited to use and sale of controlled substances, prostitution and criminal street gang activity. 
(Ord. 2175 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7.06.090 - Vacant building monitoring fee. 
A.  Fee Imposed. An annual building monitoring fee as set forth in the National City fee schedule adopted by the city council shall be paid by every owner of a vacant building. The fee shall be periodically reviewed and adjusted by resolution of the city council. The fee shall not exceed the estimated reasonable costs of monitoring the vacant building. The fee shall be payable as to any residential or nonresidential building which: 
1.  Is boarded up by voluntary action of the owner or as the result of enforcement activity by the city; or 
2.  Is vacant for more than ninety days for any reason. 
B.  Fee Waiver. The vacant building monitoring fee shall be waived by the director of building and safety upon a showing by the owner that: 
1.  The owner has obtained a building permit and is progressing diligently to repair the premises for occupancy; or 
2.  The building meets all applicable codes and is actively being offered for sale, lease or rent; or 
3.  Imposition of the fee would impose a substantial economic hardship on the owner or would hinder the rehabilitation of the building. 
C.  Procedure. 
1.  The vacant building monitoring fee shall be billed to the owner of the property and mailed to the owner's address as set forth on the last equalized assessment roll of the county assessor. 
2.  Any owner billed may apply for a waiver for the grounds set forth in subsection B of this section by submitting a written statement of the grounds for the waiver, together with the owner's daytime telephone number, to the director of building and safety within thirty days after the billing is mailed to the owner. The director of building and safety shall review the written statement and may contact the owner to discuss the application of the waiver. The director of building and safety shall prepare a written decision regarding the waiver request, which shall be mailed to the owner. 
3.  An owner aggrieved by the decision of the director of building and safety relating to an application for a waiver may appeal the director's decision to the advisory and appeals board by submitting a written notice of appeal to the director of building and safety as set forth in Section 15.04.060 of this code. The decision of the board shall be final. 
4.  If the fee is not paid within sixty days after billing, or within sixty days after the decision of the director of building and safety or the advisory and appeals board becomes final, the city council may thereupon order that the fee be specially assessed against the property, it shall confirm the assessment and thereafter order the assessment to be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary real property taxes are collected. The assessment shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in the case of delinquency as is provided for ordinary real property taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of real property taxes are applicable to the special assessment. 
(Ord. 2175 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7.06.100 - Administrative penalty. 
A.  Administrative Penalty Imposed. Any owner of a building which remains boarded in violation of Section 7.06.080A or any owner of a building which remains vacant in violation of Section 7.06.080B shall be liable for an administrative penalty in an amount not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars per building for the first violation. If the building is not brought into compliance within thirty days following notification, the owner shall be liable for an administrative penalty not to exceed five hundred dollars per building, for the second and all subsequent violations. Each succeeding thirty-day period when the building remains in violation shall constitute a new violation. 
B.  Action by Advisory and Appeals Board. The administrative penalty shall be imposed by the advisory and appeals board upon the recommendation of the director of building and safety after the owner shall have been afforded a hearing before the board. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the appeal provisions of Section 15.04.060 of this code. In setting the penalty, the board shall consider the severity of the blighting conditions on the property and the owner's efforts, or lack thereof, to remedy the problem. The decision of the board shall be final. 
C.  Penalty—Payment. The administrative penalty shall be due and payable within thirty days after the decision of the board. If the penalty is not paid within forty-five days after the decision of the board, the city council may thereupon order the penalty be a personal obligation of the property owner or that it be specially assessed against the property involved, or both. If the city council orders that the penalty be specially assessed against the property, it shall confirm the assessment and thereafter the assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary real property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary real property taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of real property taxes are applicable to the special assessment. 
The city council may also cause a notice of lien to be recorded. The notice shall, at a minimum, identify the record owner or possessor of the property and set forth the last known address of the record owner or possessor, the date on which the penalty was imposed by the board, a description of the real property subject to the lien, and the amount of penalty. The notice of lien shall be recorded without payment of fee. 
D.  Penalty Waiver. The administrative penalty shall be waived if the advisory and appeals board finds that imposition of the penalty would create a substantial economic hardship on the owner, would hinder the rehabilitation of the building, or the owner rehabilitates the property within a designated period of time. 
E.  Right of Judicial Review. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the advisory and appeals board or city council may obtain judicial review of the decision by filing an appeal to be heard by the San Diego County Superior Court in accordance with the timelines and provisions set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4. 
(Ord. 2175 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7.06.110 - Nuisance—Criminal penalty. 
In addition to the administrative penalties specified in Section 7.06.100, the owner, occupant, or agent of any lot or premises within the city who permits or allows the existence of an abandoned building as defined in this chapter, or who violates any mandatory provision or prohibition of this chapter upon any lot or premises owned, occupied, or controlled by such person, is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof is punishable as prescribed in Section 1.20.010. 
(Ord. 2175 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7.06.120 - Demolition and blight removal account. 
The city shall establish a revolving fund account designated for demolition and blight removal. The city may use this fund for the purchase of blighted or abandoned property or buildings maintained in violation of this chapter. Any person maintaining a building in violation of this chapter may offer the property for sale to the city at the property's fair market value. All fees, costs and expenses shall be borne by the buyer and seller according to customary real estate sales practice. The city shall pay for the property appraisal necessary to establish the fair market value based on the condition of the property, to be performed by an appraiser acceptable to both parties. The city may enter into separate arrangements with other public entities for acquisition, management and disposition of the property. 
(Ord. 2175 § 1 (part), 2000)  
Chapter 7.08 - ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS* 
Sections: 
* Noncodified list of cross-references: 
Noise - NCMC Title 12 
Billboards Near Freeways - NCMC Section 9.32.020 
Environmental Review and Compliance - NCMC Chapter 18.138 
San Diego County Health Regulations 
San Diego County Air Pollution Control Regulations 
California Health and Safety Code 
 
7.08.010 - Odor. 
A.  The prolonged emission of odor that noticeably exceeds the odor threshold on any adjacent residential property is a violation. "Prolonged" means, but is not limited to, any period of more than five minutes in any hour. 
B.  The emission of noxious odors outdoors determined by medical practitioners to be causing discomfort, pain or severe breathing inhibitions to any person at any time is a violation and may be determined by the city manager to be a public nuisance. Thereafter, the director of building and safety is empowered to order the immediate disconnection of public utilities which in any way contribute to such emissions and to take necessary and prudent action to contain such emission. He may enter the property for that purpose. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.08.020 - Poisons. 
Causing or allowing the outdoor storage, emission, migration or dissemination of any substance found by the county health officer to be virulent poison is a violation. The fire chief is empowered, after given reasonable notice to the property owner or person responsible, to enter the property and make emergency containment or removal of such poisons, sufficient to prevent harmful contamination of the environment. The costs of such emergency work shall be paid by the property owner or person responsible, pursuant to the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.08.030 - Hazardous substances. 
(Reserved) 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.08.040 - Spraying and sandblasting. 
It is a violation of this code for any person to cause or allow the migration of sprayed paint, sandblasting compounds or similar industrial materials, including toxic insecticides, or any other noxious substance onto any public property or onto the private property of any other person without making reasonable attempts to prevent the migration of such substances. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.08.050 - Compost piles. 
It is a violation to operate, maintain or permit any horticultural, agricultural or botanic "compost pile, pit, bin or heap" that in any way produces odor that exceeds the odor threshold (for definition of "odor threshold" see Section 7.10.010E) upon the residential property of any other person. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
Chapter 7.10 - GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION* 
Sections: 
* Noncodified list of cross-references: 
City contracts with private disposal firms for the collection of garbage and refuse. Copies are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
California Health and Safety Code 
San Diego County Health Regulations 
City Council Resolution No. 7923 
 
7.10.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used, they shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to such respective terms in this section: 
A.  "Commercial unit" includes each building and space primarily used for distributing and selling goods, wares, merchandise and services. 
B.  "Garbage" means organic refuse and waste or fruit, vegetable and animal matter prepared and intended for human consumption, and not so used. 
C.  "Manufacturing unit" includes each building and space primarily used for producing and making, processing or warehousing goods, wares and merchandise. 
D.  "Multiple residential unit" includes: 
1.  Each building having three or more spaces primarily used as a separate family dwelling; or 
2.  Three or more residential units situated on one lot. 
E.  "Odor threshold" means the lowest concentration of odorous matter that produces an olfactory response in normal human beings. Odor thresholds shall be determined in accordance with the American Society for Testing Materials Test Method D 1391-57 (reconfirmed to 1967) or in an equivalent manner acceptable to the CCO. 
F.  "Public dump" or "public dumping ground" is any parcel or plot of ground on which garbage or combustible or noncombustible rubbish not originating therein is deposited either with or without permission of the owner of such parcel or plot of ground, and with or without compensation being paid to the owner for the privilege of depositing such material. 
G.  "Residential unit" includes each building and space primarily used as a dwelling. 
H.  "Rubbish" means refuse and waste material, whether combustible or noncombustible, not included within the definition of garbage as herein defined, including but not limited to paper, rags, leaves, glass, cans, ashes, tree and vine trimmings. It shall not include plaster, rock sand, dirt, automobile frames or fenders, or waste material pertaining to building operations, construction or repair. It shall not mean discarded water heaters or furniture. 
I.  "Recyclables" or "recyclable materials" means plastic bottles, plastic containers, glass bottles, glass jars, newspapers, aluminum and/or metal cans, and any other material designated by the city as a recyclable material in Chapter 9.52. 
(Ord. 2169 § 1 (part), 1999; Ord. 1939 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.10.020 - Collection required—Violations. 
A.  Every owner or occupant in charge of any private property where rubbish, garbage, or refuse is generated shall subscribe to regular collection service by the city's designated rubbish hauler, or shall provide for alternate means of collection individually approved by the city council. 
B.  It is unlawful for any owner or occupant in charge of any private property to permit, suffer, or allow the accumulation of rubbish, garbage, or refuse on the property for a period of time in excess of one week. 
C.  Where a determination cannot readily be made as to the person or entity in charge of private property, the responsibility for complying with this section shall rest with the property owner. 
(Ord. 1944, 1988: Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.10.030 - Burying or burning prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to bury or burn, or cause to be buried or burned, any garbage or rubbish, on property owned by or under the control of that person upon any public street, alley, public place, vacant property or upon any premises within the city. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.10.040 - Receptacles required. 
A.  It shall be the duty of every tenant, lessee or owner-occupant of any private dwelling house, and of every other person having garbage and rubbish to provide and keep within the private property and on the same premises suitable and sufficient containers for the accumulation of garbage and rubbish during the interval between pickups without causing or allowing public or private property to become littered. 
B.  Storage. All garbage and rubbish shall be stored in such a manner that no portion of the material can be transferred off the lot by natural forces and will not be attractive to rodents or insects. The area for storage shall be located in accordance with Land Use Code regulations and screened from view from public ways and adjoining lots as provided for herein. 
C.  All garbage created or produced in the city shall be disposed of by an approved type waste disposal system or deposited in a container or containers of a type approved by the director of public works. Such receptacles shall be provided by and at the expense of the person producing or accumulating such garbage, and shall be kept in the rear of the premises, except that such garbage receptacle may be placed upon the street or alley where collection of such garbage and rubbish is made subject to Section 7.10.120. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.10.050 - Garbage and rubbish containers. 
A.  Receptacles for the containment of garbage or rubbish placed for collection shall be as provided by the city rubbish collection contractor. 
B.  Receptacles for the containment of yard waste shall comply with these limitations: 
1.  They shall have the capacity of no more than forty gallons in volume; 
2.  Their weight shall not exceed fifty pounds when filled; 
3.  Reusable rigid containers or cans shall be constructed of nonabsorbent and corrosion-resistant materials and should be easily cleanable; 
4.  The diameter of the can's opening shall be no less than the diameter anywhere below the top and the can should be tapered to facilitate discharge of compacted waste when the container is inverted; 
5.  The interior of the can shall be smooth, without projections which would interfere with emptying the contents; 
6.  The can shall have no cracks, holes or jagged edges which could injure collection personnel; 
7.  The can shall be fitted with handles located directly opposite one another on the sides of the container for easy lifting; 
8.  Cans shall be equipped with covers or lids which are tight-fitting to resist the intrusion of water and vectors; 
9.  Cans shall be designed so that they cannot be tipped over easily. 
C.  Single-use plastic and paper bags furnished by the city rubbish collection contractor must be only those manufactured expressly for solid waste storage and shall meet the standards of the National Sanitation Foundation as to thickness and bursting strength. 
D.  Commercial dump-type receptacles (bins) shall meet the minimum specifications established by the city's rubbish collection contractor. They shall be maintained in good working order and shall be kept clean and sanitary. Such bins shall be equipped with solid, noncombustible and closeable lids that are sufficient to contain a fire within the bin. It is a violation to place any sort of liquid wastes into a bin unless they are contained in leak proof vessels. 
E.  Preparation of Recyclable Refuse for Collection—Alternate Methods. 
1.  In those areas of the city where recyclable material collection containers are provided to users by the city rubbish collection contractor, recyclable materials defined in Chapter 9.52 shall be separated from garbage and rubbish and placed in the respective recycling collection container for collection by the contractor in accordance with Chapter 9.52. 
2.  Recyclable materials shall not contain garbage or rubbish. 
F.  Brush and limbs of trees may be placed for collection outside of receptacles in tied bundles not more than four feet in length, not more than eighteen inches in diameter, and not more than sixty pounds in weight each. 
G.  Garbage receptacles shall be kept covered. No person shall permit a garbage receptacle to remain uncovered or open, or in such condition that flies or vermin may obtain access thereto, except when necessary to place garbage therein or remove therefrom; for such purposes covering shall be immediately replaced. 
H.  It is unlawful for any person to place any discarded material in, upon or near any receptacle, container or bin, unless he or she has an ownership or possessory interest or right in that receptacle, container or bin. 
(Ord. 2169 § 1 (part), 1999: Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.10.060 - Mixing garbage and refuse. 
A.  Garbage and Refuse in Same Container. It is unlawful for any person to keep, accumulate or permit to be kept or accumulated any garbage in or upon any public or private place unless the same shall be drained and securely wrapped and placed in containers having a close-fitting cover such as herein specified, which shall be kept closed at all times except when open to be filled or emptied. Garbage and rubbish may be placed in the same refuse container in accordance with the above provisions. Mixed garbage and refuse is not permitted in any dump-type collection bin that does not have a fully operable, flyproof, self-closing lid. 
B.  Dangerous and Infected Substances. No person shall place or deposit in any solid waste receptacle for collection pursuant to the provisions of this chapter any unbroken and exposed hypodermic needles, medicines, pills, poisons, caustic acids, oils, explosives, or similar dangerous substances which might cause human injury or harm. 
C.  No person shall place or deposit in any solid waste receptacle for collection pursuant to the provisions of this chapter wearing apparel, bedding, or other articles from any home or place where any infectious or contagious disease has prevailed. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.10.070 - Cleanliness of receptacles. 
All refuse containers shall be kept clean, sanitary and portable by the owner or person using the same. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.10.080 - Enclosures required. 
A.  All commercial, industrial, institutional, and multi-family residential uses shall be provided masonry trash enclosures which shall comply with the trash enclosure design guidelines adopted from time to time by resolution of the city council. It shall be the duty of the owner(s) of the affected property to provide and install the enclosure required by this Chapter 7.10. The planning commission may waive this requirement pursuant to a finding that the use does not generate a need for exterior trash receptacles. Properties with trash receptacles having cumulative capacity of ninety gallons or less shall not be subject to this requirement if suitable and sufficient containers, as determined by the planning department are provided in accordance with Section 7.10.040A of this Chapter. 
B.  Multifamily residential properties containing no more than three units shall not be subject to the requirements of this section if the planning department determines that all of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The property is not of sufficient size, or the location and arrangement of buildings on the property precludes installation of a trash enclosure; 
2.  All trash receptacles can be screened so that they cannot be viewed from adjacent properties or city streets; 
3.  Dumpsters are not in use; receptacles are limited to metal or plastic cans. 
C.  Any building or structure or portion of building or structure used for storage of rubbish and waste shall contain an approved floor drain connected to the public sewer system. 
D.  Enclosures shall be constructed with a roof. 
(Ord. 2169 § 1 (part), 1999: Ord. 1955, 1988; Ord. 1939 § 2, 1988; Ord. 1950 § 1, 1987: Ord. 1812 (part), 1984) 
(Ord. No. 2017-2440, § 2, 10-17-2017) 
TABLE 1  
TABLE 1   
7.10.090 - Garbage and refuse container storage areas (enclosures), maintenance. 
A.  All provisions of this chapter pertaining to garbage and refuse containers apply to enclosures wherein such containers are placed. Enclosures shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. Graffiti shall be promptly removed. Gates shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times and shall remain closed whenever they are not in use. Enclosures shall not be used for any other purpose. The person responsible for maintaining the garbage and refuse containers in enclosures is responsible for maintaining the enclosure and the surrounding area. This shall include the immediate removal of overfilled containers. Failure to effect such removal is a violation. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.10.100 - Abatement of lawful nonconforming enclosures or facilities. 
A.  All multiple-family, commercial and industrial uses with outdoor areas used for storage or placement of garbage or rubbish containers of any kind are required to have suitable enclosure pursuant to Section 7.10.080. Wherein any use existing on the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this title does not comply, it shall enjoy lawful nonconforming use status. Within a period of three years thereafter, the nonconforming features shall be abated by either termination or construction of permitted enclosures. Failure to comply is a violation. 
B.  Where the planning director finds, pursuant to site plan review, that the only reasonable locations for such enclosures are within required off-street parking spaces, the enclosures and receptacles may be placed in such off-street parking spaces as are designated by the planning director. If such placement of enclosures and receptacles in parking spaces reduces the number of available parking spaces to less than the minimum land use code requirements, no violation of parking regulations will be deemed to ensue. 
C.  Where the planning director finds, pursuant to site plan review, that no area exists on-site for placement of a trash receptacle enclosure, he is authorized to allow the joint use of receptacles and enclosure, provided such receptacle can be located within one hundred feet of the use served, and the parties concerned in the joint use of receptacles and enclosure shall evidence agreement for such joint use, service costs, and maintenance by a proper legal instrument approved by the city attorney as to form and content. Such instrument, when approved, shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder and copies thereof filed with the city clerk. 
D.  Where the planning director finds, pursuant to site plan review, that no area exists for on-site placement of a trash receptacle enclosure of any type, he is authorized to require structural alteration of the building where it is found that a portion of the building abutting a street or alley is available for alteration to accommodate the placement of a trash receptacle. 
E.  Where the planning director finds, pursuant to site plan review, that no area exists on-site for placement of a trash receptacle enclosure and there is no area available for joint use of trash receptacles and enclosure, and no portion of the building is available for alteration to accommodate placement of a trash receptacle, enclosures may be allowed to be placed within an adjoining parkway, alley or portion thereof. Installation of such enclosure shall be pursuant to issuance of an encroachment permit by the city council upon a finding that such enclosure, at the location proposed, will not constitute a hazard to pedestrians, parking or the circulation of motor vehicles. 
F.  Where the planning director finds, pursuant to site plan review, that the only reasonable location available for an enclosure is within a required yard or portion thereof, and that such enclosure will not be located within ten feet of any window of any dwelling unit or five feet of a combustible wall, and that placement of the enclosure will not obstruct access about the building, the enclosures and receptacles may be placed within a required yard or portion thereof, and no violation of setback or yard requirements will be deemed to ensue. The use of individual thirty to thirty-five gallon containers within an approved enclosure may be required where it is determined that the use of a commercial dump-type receptacle is not feasible. 
(Ord. 1890, 1986; Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.10.110 - Placement of receptacles and enclosures. 
A.  Enclosures and Receptacles On-Site. Enclosures and receptacles shall not be placed on any private property within a required yard area or within ten feet of any window of any dwelling unit or within five feet of any combustible wall. 
B.  Placement of Garbage and Rubbish Receptacles for Collection. Rubbish and garbage which is to be collected shall be placed within ten feet of the curbline of the public street or if there is no such curb, within ten feet of the surfaced portion of the public street; in the event that the rubbish or garbage are to be collected from a public alley, the receptacle shall be placed within ten feet of the edge of the right-of-way of such alley. In no case shall such receptacle be placed within or upon a street or alley roadway, upon any sidewalk in a manner that would interfere with pedestrians. 
C.  Curb Cuts Authorized. When no other access is available, the city engineer may issue permits to cut a portion of curb to allow receptacles to be moved into the street for collection. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.10.120 - Hours for placing containers on public rights-of-way. 
A.  Between refuse collection days all containers shall be kept on private property. 
B.  No container shall be placed out at the curb or alley or within any public right-of-way prior to four p.m. on the day prior to scheduled collection. Containers shall be removed prior to noon on the day following collection day. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.10.130 - Clean-up after collection. 
A.  No person, including a contractor authorized to collect garbage and rubbish, shall drop, spill or permit garbage to fall upon private grounds or public streets in the city. 
B.  Persons responsible for placing containers within public rights-of-way for collection are also responsible for the cleanup of any spillage or debris resulting from such placement or from collection activities. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.10.140 - Odor. 
It is unlawful to keep or maintain any garbage or refuse under any conditions whereby the materials yield any odor that exceeds threshold (for definition of "odor threshold," see Section 7.10.010E) within any dwelling unit on the same or adjacent properties. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.10.150 - Scavenging prohibited. 
No person, other than the owner thereof, or an employee of the city, or a person holding a contract with the city for the collection of garbage and refuse, shall interfere in any manner with any garbage or rubbish receptacle or the contents thereof, or remove any such receptacle from the location where the same was placed by the owner thereof, or remove any of the contents from any such receptacle. Prior to citing an individual for a violation of this section, a warning shall first be given. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.10.160 - Interference with collection prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation within the city to hinder access of the collectors to the garbage or rubbish containers. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.10.170 - Dumping prohibited. 
A.  Placement of Rubbish in Ditches or on Public or Private Property. No person shall deposit or place in any ditch, arroyo, or storm drain, or upon any street or park without first obtaining a permit therefor from the public works director, or upon any lot belonging to another, or upon his own lot in such a manner that the same is or may become a nuisance, any bailing wire, tin cans, brush, tree trimmings, ashes, earth, dirt, stones, paper, dead animals, garbage, rubbish, refuse or any other kind of matter. 
B.  Permit to Operate Public Dump Required. No person shall maintain or operate a public dump without first obtaining from the city council a written permit to do so. 
C.  Liability for Cleanup of Spilled, Deposited or Abandoned Matter. Any person who spills, deposits or abandons any matter whether intentionally or unintentionally on any highway or public or private property so as to impede or impair the normal use thereof or so as to create a condition which requires the property to be cleaned or cleared shall, in addition to any other penalty, be liable for the payment of the cost of any and all expense necessary to clean or clear the property of such matter and to restore the property to its natural or former condition. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.10.180 - Hauling through city. 
A.  Transportation of Garbage. No person shall carry, convey or transport garbage through any street, alley, or public place in the city, unless such person is an employee of the city in performance of his duties, or employee of a person or firm holding a contract with the city for the removal of garbage, or is the owner of the premises on which such garbage was created. 
B.  Permit to Bring Rubbish or Garbage into City. No person shall bring, carry, transport or convey into the city any rubbish or garbage, or place, deposit, leave, dump, bury or burn the same upon any property within the city, notwithstanding that the owner of such property consents thereto, unless the person first has applied for and received from the city a permit in writing to do any or all of the acts in this section enumerated. 
C.  Covering Required. Any rubbish or garbage being hauled through the city shall be contained within a vehicle or covered by a tarp or other suitable covering. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
Chapter 7.12 - ACCUMULATION OF JUNK 
Sections: 
 
7.12.010 - Definitions. 
"Junk" means any combustible or noncombustible nonputrescible waste, including but not limited to trash, refuse, paper, glass, cans, bottles, rags, fabrics, bedding, ashes, trimmings from lawns, shrubbery or trees, except when used for mulch or like agriculture purposes, household refuse other than garbage, lumber, metal, plumbing, fixtures, bricks, building stones, plaster, wire or like materials, from the demolition, alteration or construction of buildings or boat parts, plastic or metal parts or scraps, damaged or defective machinery, whether or not repairable, and damaged or defective toys, automotive equipment, recreational equipment or household appliances or furnishings, whether or not repairable. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.12.020 - Accumulation deemed public nuisance. 
The outdoor accumulation of junk contrary to this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.12.030 - Accumulation prohibited. 
No person shall accumulate junk or permit junk to be accumulated, or stored outdoors or permit the storage thereof, on any portion of a lot or parcel of land except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.12.040 - Storage of junk prohibited. 
No person shall store junk: 
A.  On any lot that is not in his ownership or possession, unless he has permission from the owner of such lot to do so. 
B.  On any lot used for residential purposes, unless done in strict compliance with Section 7.12.050 and subsection F of this section. 
C.  On any parcel of land adjacent to a lot used for residential purposes, except: 
1.  As a part of and incident to a lawfully established and conducted commercial or industrial enterprise; or 
2.  When done in strict compliance with Section 7.12.050. 
D.  On the roof of any building or structure. 
E.  This chapter does not prohibit the accumulation or storage of used lumber, lumber scraps and/or materials fabricated out of wood for use as firewood or fuel; provided, however, that any such accumulation shall be neatly stacked and shall be maintained in accordance with the provisions of Section 7.12.050; and provided further, that the components of such an accumulation shall be sawed or otherwise reduced in size so that no piece thereof exceeds thirty-six inches in length or one foot in width. 
F.  This chapter does not prohibit the temporary storage of junk on properties used for commercial or industrial activities for a reasonable time prior to disposal thereof in a public dump or other place where disposal can lawfully be made. Such storage is limited to materials originating on the premises and not brought there from any other place. No item or accumulation of junk shall be kept outdoors on the premises for a period of more than thirty days. See also Section 7.12.050B. 
G.  On a lot or parcel of land improved with residential buildings or occupied by a bona fide residence, the person occupying such residence may store junk on the rear one-third of that lot or parcel for a period of not more than thirty days where that junk was not brought there but which was accumulated through normal activities of household uses on the same premises; provided, that such person may store materials of a noncombustible and non-putrescible character in a building upon the premises. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.12.050 - Regulations. 
A.  No person shall accumulate junk or permit junk to be stored or accumulate on a lot used for residential purposes or on a lot adjacent to a lot used for residential purposes: 
1.  Within four feet of any building or structure, except that junk may be accumulated within two feet of a fence or wall which is constructed of nonflammable material and is not used for structural support of a building; 
2.  Within ten feet of any side lot line; 
3.  Within fifteen feet of any rear lot line; 
4.  Within the front yard or within the exterior side yard of a corner lot; 
5.  The accumulation shall not be maintained so as to be conducive to the breeding, shelter or harborage of insects, rodents, vermin or pests; 
6.  The accumulation shall not be strewn about or maintained in an unsightly condition; 
7.  The accumulation shall be maintained so as not to constitute a fire hazard; 
8.  Any accumulation of junk maintained on a lot for more than thirty days shall be stored in opaque containers; 
9.  The accumulation shall be maintained so as not to constitute a danger or potential danger to the public health, safety or welfare. 
B.  This section also applies to rooftop areas (see Section 7.12.040D). 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.12.060 - Retroactive regulations. 
Within two years of the effective date of this chapter every person owning or in possession of land on which there is an accumulation of junk which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter shall remove such accumulation of junk or bring such accumulation of junk into conformity. Failure to comply is a violation. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.12.070 - Junkyards. 
This chapter does not prohibit the accumulation and temporary storage of junk in the course of the lawful operation of a motor vehicle storage or impound yard, or salvage yard conducted in a manner authorized by the Land Use Code or by this code. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to authorize the establishment or maintenance of a junk yard, motor vehicle storage or wrecking yard, or salvage yard. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.12.080 - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter are subject to the enforcement regulations set forth in Chapter 7.32 of this title, whether or not abatement action is pursued subject to Section 7.12.090, et seq. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.12.090 - Abatement. 
A.  If the code conformance officer determines that an accumulation of junk exists in violation of this chapter, he may give written notice and an order to abate to the owner or to the occupant of the premises, or if such person cannot be located on the premises to any person over the age of eighteen years who is apparently in possession of the premises, or if there is no such person, then by mailing such written notice and order by certified mail with return receipt requested, to the person shown to be the owner by the latest equalized assessment roll or any more recent record in the office of the county assessor. Such written notice and order shall be substantially in the following form: 
 You are hereby informed that the Code Conformance Officer of the City of National City has determined that there is an unlawful accumulation of junk, contrary to NCMC Title 7 on the following premises: ___________ 
 (Street address or other designation of premises) 
 You are hereby ordered to remove said accumulation of junk from said premises within _______ days from the date of this Notice and Order or, alternatively, and within the same period of time, to bring said accumulation of junk into conformity with the requirements of said Title 7. You are hereby advised of your rights to appeal from this Notice and Order by filing an appeal in writing, with the City Clerk of National City within _______ days of your receipt of this Notice. Failure to comply with this Notice and Order in the absence of an appeal constitutes a violation. 
B.  Any person served with a notice and order made pursuant to Section 7.12.080 may appeal to the city council as provided in subsection C of this section, and such appeal shall stay the effect of such notice and order until the city council hears the appeal and issues its order modifying, vacating or affirming such notice and order. Such appeal and stay of the notice and order shall not relieve any person from liability or responsibility, criminal or civil, for maintaining an unlawful accumulation of junk and shall not stay or prevent the filing or prosecuting of a criminal or civil action for the maintenance of such unlawful accumulation of junk. 
C.  Within a period of three days (exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays), or the time otherwise specified in the notice, following the service of written notice and order by the code conformance officer, the person ordered to remove the accumulation of junk may file with the city clerk a written appeal from such notice and order. Such appeal shall contain the appellant's name, mailing address and a general statement of exceptions taken by the appellant to the notice and order. Upon receipt of an appeal, the city clerk shall immediately notify the code conformance officer and shall set such appeal for hearing before the city council. Such clerk shall forthwith give written notice of the time, date and place of hearing to the code conformance officer and shall send a copy of such notice through the United States mail to the appellant at the address specified in the appeal. Personal service is an adequate alternative. Where acceptance of such mail delivery or personal service is refused, notice may be given by posting a copy thereof in a prominent place at or near what seems to be the main entrance of the premises. At the time, date and place indicated, the code conformance officer shall produce evidence of the existence of the unlawful accumulation of junk which is the subject of his notice and order. The appellant may likewise produce relevant evidence. The city council shall consider all relevant evidence produced at such hearing and, if it finds by the preponderance of the evidence that there is in fact an unlawful accumulation of junk, it may declare the same to be a public nuisance. The determination that such accumulation of junk constitutes a public nuisance shall be supported by such findings as are necessary and proper, which findings need not be reduced to writing unless the appellant so requests at the hearing. Upon determining that a public nuisance exists, the city council may order the abatement thereof upon such terms and conditions as it deems reasonable and just under the circumstances, or it may modify or affirm the notice and order made by the code conformance officer. If the city council does not find that a public nuisance exists, it shall vacate the order of the code conformance officer, in which event the city council need not make findings. In the event that the city council determined that a public nuisance exists and orders the abatement thereof, the code conformance officer shall serve the order of abatement, shall enforce the order, may supervise the abatement of the nuisance if he deems it necessary to do so, and may make such further orders in furtherance of such order of abatement as he deems necessary under the circumstances. 
D.  The cost of abatement, as confirmed, may be collected by the city by any or all of the following or any other lawful means: 
1.  Recordation in the office of the county recorder of a certified copy of such resolution confirming such report so as to give notice of the lien; 
2.  Civil action by the city; 
3.  Filing a certified copy of such resolution confirming such report with the auditor of the county who shall enter the assessment on the county tax roll opposite the subject property. The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes. If delinquent, the amount is subject to the same penalties and procedures of foreclosure and sale provided for ordinary municipal taxes. The legislative body may determine that in lieu of collecting the entire assessment at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes, such assessment of fifty dollars or more may be made in annual installments, in any event not to exceed five hundred dollars and collected one installment at a time at the times and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes in successive years. If any installment is delinquent, the amount thereof is subject to the same penalties and procedure for foreclosure and sale provided for ordinary municipal taxes. The payment of assessments so deferred shall bear interest on the unpaid balance at the rate of ten percent per year. 
(Ord. 1894, 1986; Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
Chapter 7.14 - LITTER, DEBRIS AND RUBBISH* 
Sections: 
* Noncodified list of cross-references: 
Health and Sanitation - NCMC Title 9 
Weed Abatement - NCMC Chapter 1.12 California Health and Safety Code 
 
7.14.010 - Definitions. 
"Litter" means garbage and rubbish as defined herein, and all other loose material which, if thrown, deposited or allowed to accumulate as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare, and which is not within a receptacle provided therefor. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.14.020 - Effect of weed abatement law. 
This chapter has no effect upon and in no way modifies, waives or supersedes the provisions of the National City weed abatement regulations as set forth in Chapter 9.12 of this code. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.14.030 - Effect of Chapters 7.10 and 7.12. 
This chapter is supplemental to Chapters 7.10 (Garbage and Refuse Collection) and 7.12 (Accumulation of Junk) of this code, adding provisions dealing with the careless and random scattering of rubbish and refuse. It does not, in any way, modify, waive or supersede the requirements of those chapters. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.14.040 - Littering prohibited. 
A.  General Prohibition. No person shall throw, deposit or accumulate litter in or upon any public place or private premises as hereinbefore defined within the city, except while such person is temporarily engaged in clearing the public place or private premises of litter or improving the public place or private premises. 
B.  Litter on Streets Prohibited. No person or persons shall leave, discard, deposit, throw away or cause to be left, discarded, deposited or thrown away, any container of any type material, waste, food paper, wood, trash or any refuse upon any street, alley, gutter, sidewalk or parkway. 
C.  Deposit of Sweepings upon Street Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person, firm, company or corporation to deposit upon any sidewalk or street within the city any sweepings from any sidewalk, stairway or other opening leading to the street or sidewalk. All such sweepings or materials from any sidewalk or any other opening leading to the street or sidewalk within the city shall be removed in a pan, shovel or other container and placed in a receptacle for rubbish. 
D.  Littering Parks Prohibited. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. 
E.  Depositing Litter on Occupied Private Property Prohibited. No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not; except, that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. 
F.  Deposit of Litter on Vacant Lots Prohibited. No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not. 
G.  Debris Dropped from Vehicles Prohibited on Streets. No person shall throw, deposit or drop, or cause to be thrown, deposited or dropped, any dirt, debris, boulders, pebbles, hardpan, rock, glass or any material whatsoever on any street in the city, or permit any dirt, debris, pebbles, hardpan, rock, boulders, or glass to drop, roll or leak from any vehicle on any street in the city. It is unlawful for any person to place upon the surface of the street, alley or public place in the city any nails, broken glass, sharp implements, crushed rock, or any other substance tending to cause injury to the tires of vehicles passing along such street, alley or public place. In the event that such debris is deposited on any street in the city, the director of public works shall require the person responsible to immediately remove the debris and clean the street right-of-way. In the event that the city undertakes to effect such cleanup, the cost thereof shall be charged to the person responsible. 
H.  Throwing Litter from Vehicles Prohibited. No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon private property. 
I.  Depositing Litter in Fountains, Lakes, Ocean, etc. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, ocean, bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within or partly within the city. 
J.  Scattering Waste Paper, Lunch Remains, etc. To leave or scatter about any boxes, empty or otherwise, waste paper, remains of lunches, newspaper or rubbish of any kind, except that such material and matter may be left and deposited in receptacles provided for such purpose. 
K.  Dropping Litter from Aircraft Prohibited. No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the city any litter, handbill or any other object. 
L.  Every person operating tow vehicles on public streets or alleys is responsible for the pickup and removal of all residue from vehicle collision scenes, from which such operator is engaged in the removal of damaged vehicles. Such pickup shall be done at the time of the vehicle removal. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.14.050 - Required removal of litter from sidewalks. 
It shall be the duty of all owners and occupants of buildings in the city and the duty of all owners of vacant lots in the city to keep the sidewalks adjacent to such premises clean and free of any container of any type of material, waste, food, paper, wood, trash, or any refuse; and all noxious weeds and vegetation; and discarded chewing gum. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.14.060 - Disposal of dead animals. 
All provisions of this chapter apply to the placement and removal of dead, diseased or injured animals. See also Title 8 of this code. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.14.070 - Dumping into sewers or storm drains prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful to place or divert stormwater into any sewer. 
B.  It is unlawful to place any sewage or any other liquid or material of any kind, except stormwater, into a public or private storm drain. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.14.080 - Litter receptacles required. 
A.  In accordance with the provisions of the California Administrative Code, litter receptacles meeting acceptable standards shall be placed in public places including, but not limited to the following: 
1.  Drive-in restaurants and fast food outlets; 
2.  Gasoline service stations; 
3.  Shopping centers; 
4.  Grocery stores; 
5.  Boat launching and take-out areas; 
6.  Boat mooring and fueling stations; 
7.  Public piers; 
8.  Parks and campgrounds; 
9.  Beaches; 
10.  Outdoor parking lots which have the capacity of fifty or more automobiles and which are contiguous to the public places listed herein; 
11.  Movie theaters and playhouses. 
Litter receptacles shall be required to be in place at the above locations only when such places are open to the public. 
B.  Receptacle Standards. Standards for the design, marking and maintenance of litter receptacles shall be established by the public works director. All such receptacles shall be made with noncombustible materials and shall have self-closing lids. 
C.  Property Owner Responsibility. The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection is not prohibited. 
D.  Abuse or Improper Use of Litter Receptacles Prohibited. 
1.  No person shall damage, deface, abuse, misuse or set afire any litter receptacle not owned by him so as to interfere with its proper function or to detract from its proper appearance. 
2.  No person shall deposit leaves, clippings, pruning or gardening refuse in any litter receptacle. 
3.  No person shall deposit household refuse or garbage in any litter receptacle; provided that this subsection shall not be construed to mean that waste food consumed on the premises at any public place may not be deposited in litter receptacles. 
E.  Use of Receptacles. Persons placing litter in authorized public or private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements onto any public place or private premises. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.14.090 - Removal of building refuse. 
All owners, contractors and builders of structures shall, upon the completion of any such structure, gather up and haul away at their sole cost and expense, all refuse of every nature, description or kind, which has resulted from the building of such structure, including all lumber scraps, shingles, plaster, brick, stone, concrete and other building material, and shall place the lot and all nearby premises utilized in such construction in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.14.100 - Responsibility for litter removal. 
A.  The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
B.  Owners of Premises—Maintaining Adjacent Public Place Free of Litter. Persons owning or occupying private premises within the city shall keep the public place abutting or adjacent to such premises free of litter, except while such person is temporarily engaged in clearing the public place and adjacent private premises of litter or improving such public place or private premises. No person owning, occupying, or controlling private premises shall sweep into or deposit in any public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any private premises or public place. 
C.  Owner or Occupant Responsibility to Maintain Sanitary Premises. Every owner, tenant, occupant or person owning or having the care and control of any premises in the city shall keep the premises or those under his care and control in a clean sanitary condition, and no person shall permit any garbage, rubbish, or any other substance which may be or will become offensive to be deposited or to remain in or upon any premises owned or occupied by him or under his care and control except as otherwise provided by law. It shall be the responsibility of such person to provide for collection and disposal of the contents of litter receptacles personally or by means of the services of the contract agent or the city. 
No person shall cause or permit rubbish to accumulate at any place or premises under his charge or control for a period in excess of one calendar week. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.14.110 - Removal of litter from vacant or unoccupied property. 
A.  It is the responsibility of the respective property owner(s) to prevent, control and remove litter from all vacant or unoccupied property. Being a nonresident property owner in no way relieves such responsibility. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.14.120 - Abatement by city. 
The abatement of litter is subject to all the provisions of Section 7.12.090. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
Chapter 7.18 - ON-STREET ACTIVITIES* 
Sections: 
* Noncodified list of cross-references: 
NCMC Chapters 11.32 and 11.40 
 
7.18.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Itinerant merchant" as used in this chapter, means any person who engages in a temporary business in the manner described in Section 11.32.150. 
B.  "Unimproved sidewalk" as used in this Title means any portion of a public street parkway between the edge of roadway and property line, wherein there is no improved sidewalk, which is used as a walkway by pedestrians. Such unimproved sidewalks are public sidewalks. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.18.020 - Parked vehicles overhanging public sidewalks or street parkways. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to park, or otherwise leave unattended, any vehicle in such a manner that any part of that vehicle overhangs onto a public sidewalk, or onto any street parkway, or onto the space between the property line and the curb or edge of roadway where there is no curb. 
B.  Any vehicle parked or left unattended in violation of this section will be towed away and impounded by the police department at the owner's expense in the manner provided for by California Vehicle Code Section 22654, et seq. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.18.030 - Vehicles parked upon parkways prohibited. 
A.  No vehicle shall be parked or left unattended within or upon a public street parkway, as that term is defined in Section 11.04.120 of this code. 
B.  Any vehicle parked or left unattended in violation of this section will be towed away and impounded by the police department at the owner's expense in the manner provided for by California Vehicle Code Section 22654, et seq. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.18.040 - Obstacles on public property, public sidewalks or parkways. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to place any obstacle, sign, placard, exhibit, display or other item on a public sidewalk or street parkway without having specific written permission by the city council to do so. This does not apply to garbage and refuse receptacles placed upon sidewalks for collection as provided for in Chapter 7.10. 
B.  All obstacles improperly placed upon public property, public sidewalk or street parkway will be summarily removed by the public works director and disposed of. 
C.  See Section 10.40.010. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.18.050 - Placing of trash, building materials or obstacles upon streets and alleys prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to place or allow to be placed any trash, building materials or obstacles of any kind, except as provided for by the California Vehicle Code, upon public streets or alleys. 
B.  Any such materials or obstacles shall be summarily removed by the public works director and disposed of. The actual cost of removal of any such materials or obstacles and restoration of any damaged roadway attributed to such placement will be paid by the violator. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.18.060 - Tracking litter or mud onto streets or alleys prohibited. 
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents of litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit on any street, alley or other public place mud, dirt, sticky substance, litter or foreign matter of any kind. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.18.070 - Repairing or washing cars on public streets prohibited. 
A.  Except for emergency repairs necessary to move a disabled vehicle off the street, it is unlawful for any person to perform vehicle repairs on public streets or alleys. 
B.  Except in a residential area, it is unlawful to wash a vehicle on any public street. Vehicles may be washed with potable water containing detergent solutions in residential areas over porous surfaces such as lawns and gravel areas where feasible. Remaining detergent solutions prepared for use in vehicle washing, but not used up in that process, may not be disposed of by emptying buckets or other containers directly or indirectly to the storm water conveyance system or receiving waters. Disposal to the sanitary sewer (e.g., through a sink, toilet or floor drain) or to a porous surface is required. The use of "hose off" or single use engine degreasing chemicals is prohibited, unless the effluent is captured and disposed of into a sanitary sewer. All other motor vehicle washing other than at individual residential properties is prohibited, unless all wash and rinse water is diverted to or contained and disposed to a porous area or the sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. 2250 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.18.080 - Bus benches. 
A.  No bus bench shall be placed on any public street right-of-way or on any public property without specific written permission by the city engineer. 
B.  All advertising displays and messages placed upon bus benches on public streets or public property shall be subject to approval by the director of planning. The director of planning may order the removal of such displays or messages whenever they are found to be inconsistent with public policy. 
C.  No bus bench shall be allowed to fall into a state of disrepair. 
D.  Bus benches found by the director of planning to be inappropriate, pursuant to the preceding subsections A, B and C, will be removed by the public works director and disposed of. 
E.  Bus benches placed on private property shall not have any sort of advertising message placed thereon, except noncommercial messages of public interest such as directing attention to bona fide charitable organizations and nonprofit organization activities. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.18.090 - Itinerant merchants. 
The provisions of Section 11.32.150 are incorporated in this title, by reference, to provide for enforcement authority pursuant to Chapter 7.32. (See also Section 7.20.070.) 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.18.120 - Sidewalk and parkway maintenance required. 
A.  See Section 13.04.280. 
B.  The provisions of Section 13.04.280 also apply to the entire width of the parkway, whether or not a sidewalk is located therein. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.18.130 - Climbing or jumping curbs prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle to or from a public way onto private property at any place other than approved driveways. "Climbing" or "jumping" concrete curbs or asphalt berms where there is no driveway is prohibited. 
B.  Temporary access over curbs may be allowed by the public works director or city engineer during the course of construction on the site which will include construction of driveway approaches, subject to the protective devices and other limits he determines to be necessary. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.18.140 - Transport and storage of hazardous materials. 
(Reserved) 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
Chapter 7.20 - OUTDOOR ACTIVITIES 
Sections: 
 
7.20.010 - Definitions. 
In this chapter, the following terms shall mean: 
"Graywater" means nonpotable drain water, commonly discharged from laundry tubs, washing machines, floor drains, bathing facilities and similar receptacles used for washing or bathing. It includes water that is not fit or safe for human consumption. "Graywater" that has been contaminated with any type of organic or fecal matter is sewage. 
"Sewage" is any type of water discharge containing organic or fecal matter. 
"Outdoor" means to the exterior of an enclosed building or structure. Activity carried on within a structure that is not completely enclosed on all sides is considered "outdoor activity." 
(Ord. 2169 § 3 (part), 1999: Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.20.020 - Billposting. 
See Chapter 7.28. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.20.030 - Charitable organization collection stations. 
A.  Indoor or outdoor collection stations where discarded furniture, clothing, appliances and other household items are left by donors for collection by bona fide charitable organizations licensed by the city are allowed in the commercial or industrial zones, subject to the approval of the city council. 
B.  It shall be the responsibility of any such permittee and the respective property owner(s) to maintain such collection stations in a neat, tidy and sanitary manner at all times. Where they are unable to achieve such compliance, the city council may order discontinuance without formal hearings. 
C.  Evidence of scattered trash, debris, residue, paper, cloth, cans or litter attributed to the presence of a collection station and the collection station itself are a public nuisance. 
D.  Where occurrence of fires, mischief, tampering, or vandalism has shown that such collection stations are attractive nuisances the city council may order discontinuance forthwith. 
E.  The name of the sponsoring organization and their telephone number shall be legibly posted on all bins, receptacles or containers of any kind used at such collection stations. Any receptacles or containers that are not posted will be considered as being unlawful accumulations of junk pursuant to Chapter 7.12. 
F.  It is unlawful to place or to encourage the placement of such collection stations on public street right-of-way or any other public property. 
G.  Whenever it is shown that such collecting stations attract discarded materials that are not or cannot be inserted in bins, the city council may order their removal. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.20.040 - Applying graffiti. 
See Chapter 10.54. 
(Ord. 2074 (part), 1994: Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.20.050 - Discharges of water into ground or into storm drains—Prohibited. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection C of this section, it is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to discharge sewage, graywater or water draining from any swimming pool, sink, washtub or wash basin, washing machine, or from any other source or liquid receptacle being used as a cleaning device onto the ground or into a storm drain, gutter, flood channel or any other water collection system, other than the municipal sewer system or a lawfully permitted septic system. 
B.  This section shall not apply to water run-off from construction sites. Water run-off and discharge from construction sites shall comply with the requirements established in Chapter 14.22. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to graywater that is discharged to the ground via a lawfully permitted graywater discharge system that meets the requirements of Appendix G of the Uniform Plumbing Code, as adopted. 
(Ord. 2169 § 3 (part), 1999: Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.20.060 - Harbor regulations. 
See Chapter 9.34. The provisions of Chapter 7.32 of this title do not preclude or preempt the responsibility of the San Diego Unified Port District to enforce harbor regulations. 
(Ord. 1812 (part) 1984)  
7.20.070 - Itinerant vendors, peddlers and solicitors. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person engaged in activity as an itinerant vendor, peddler or solicitor to enter upon private property, while so engaged, where such property is distinctly posted "no peddlers," "no solicitors" or similar words. 
B.  The unauthorized presence of such persons in violation of this section is cause for the city treasurer to immediately revoke applicable business licenses or solicitation permits held by that person. 
C.  It is unlawful for any itinerant peddler to sell or offer to sell any merchandise or service outdoors on private property without the property owner's written permission or to conduct such activities in any way that would violate the provisions of Title 18 (Zoning) of this code. Except as provided by Section 11.32.150, the sale of any item from vehicles parked outdoors is explicitly forbidden. Any such vehicle used for sale or display of any item will be impounded by the police department and may be held in storage until the violation has been prosecuted. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.20.075 - Outdoor display of goods prohibited. 
A.  Outdoor display for sale of goods or merchandise on any privately owned property, or any publicly owned property subject to regulation by the city is prohibited, other than newspapers, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, and except as provided in Chapter 6.56, 9.06, 11.32 and 18.92 of this code. 
B.  Outdoor display for sale of goods or merchandise on any street or sidewalk, other than newspapers, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or goods or merchandise which carry a political, religious, philosophical or ideological message, is prohibited, except as provided for in Chapters 6.56, 9.06 and 11.32 of this code. 
C.  Outdoor display for sale of goods or merchandise in any city park is prohibited, except as provided for in Chapter 10.52 of this code. 
(Ord. 2071, 1993)  
7.20.080 - Occupying a recreational vehicle—Restricted. 
A.  It is unlawful to occupy a recreational vehicle, as defined in Title 11 of this Code, for more than ten consecutive minutes between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. while that vehicle is parked on a street or on public or private property, except when that vehicle is parked within a lawfully permitted mobile home park or campground, or except when actively loading or unloading a recreational vehicle for a period not to exceed two hours as permitted under Subsection 11.32.366(b)(1). To occupy means to be physically present within the recreational vehicle for more than ten consecutive minutes. 
B.  It is unlawful to attach or hookup a recreational vehicle to a utility service providing gas, water, sewage, telephone or cable TV, or any combination, at any time, except in a lawfully permitted mobile home park or campground. 
C.  It is unlawful to hookup or attach a recreational vehicle to a utility service providing electricity, except where that connection is made to a battery recharging device for a period not to exceed twenty-four hours for the purpose of recharging the vehicle's battery, and for no other purpose. 
(Ord. 2169 § 3 (part), 1999: Ord. 1812 (part), 1984) 
(Ord. No. 2016-2410, § 2, 3-15-2016)  
7.20.090 - (Reserved).  
7.20.100 - Off-road vehicles. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to operate for recreational purposes any vehicle or off-highway vehicle, as defined in the California Vehicle Code, or a motorized scooter, on any unimproved public or private property in the city. 
B.  Notice of this regulation may be given by placing appropriate signs on the property or by verbal order of a police officer or code conformance officer. 
C.  When an individual has been given such verbal notice and anytime thereafter is found to be violating that order, the offending vehicle may be seized and impounded by the city until the violation is prosecuted. Impound costs shall be borne by the owner of the vehicle or his designee. 
D.  "Recreational purposes" means that the vehicle is being driven on property without any apparent purpose and for the apparent pleasure of the operator or a bystander. This definition shall not apply when the vehicle is being used for the delivery or pickup of goods or materials or the provision of services to that property. 
(Ord. 2169 § 3 (part), 1999: Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.20.110 - Removal of traffic obstructions. 
A.  The city traffic safety committee shall investigate conditions reported by the police department or city engineer wherein there is a serious or potentially serious traffic hazard condition caused by obscured vision at street and alley intersections, driveways or sidewalks. For the purposes of this section, a serious traffic hazard condition occurs and obscures vision when any landscaping, fence, lawn ornament, sign, apparatus, structure or containment other than a building, occupies the visual field of drivers on public streets in such a way that the usual capability or control of vehicles is thereby impaired or limited. The standards adopted by the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) and the California Highway Patrol (CHP) shall be used in making findings of hazard. 
That committee shall, where appropriate, submit a report and recommendation to the city council for corrective action. 
The city council may, after conducting a public hearing thereon, make a finding that a traffic hazard exits and that the contributing view-obscuring conditions are a public nuisance. 
An order by the city council to abate such a public nuisance and the abatement shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 7.12.090. 
B.  This section is not subject to any grandfather privilege that might be raised on the grounds that the subject traffic hazard predates the adoption of this regulation or that the condition has existed for an extended length of time, with or without knowledge of city traffic officials, or others. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to fail to remove a serious or potentially serious traffic hazard resulting from a condition maintained outdoors on private property owned or occupied by that person which may cause obscured vision to an approaching motorist, within ten days following written notice from the city council, or the city manager acting for the city council. Notice may be provided by: 
1.  Posting a notice on the property; or 
2.  By sending a written notice to the property owner or occupant by both certified mail and by first class mail; receipt of either of which shall constitute service of notice; or 
3.  By a combination of both subsection (C)(1) and (C)(2) of this section. 
D.  This section shall not be construed to create a mandatory duty on the part of the city or any official or employee of the city under Section 815.6 of the California Government Code, nor shall this section be construed to impose any civil liability upon the city or any official or employee of the city. 
(Ord. 2169 § 3 (part), 1999: Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.20.120 - (Reserved).  
7.20.130 - Repairing and washing of vehicles on residential property—Restricted. 
A.  Except as permitted in Section 7.20.130B or C, it is unlawful to wash or repair a motor vehicle upon property used for residential purposes within the city limits. 
B.  A motor vehicle may be repaired upon residential property owned by or rented to that vehicle owner in an enclosed garage, within the rear yard setback or on a paved parking space or driveway of that property. 
C.  Noncommercial motor vehicles registered to a resident of the property may be washed on that property, provided that no liquids, with the exception of potable water, drain onto a public street. 
(Ord. 2250 § 2 (part), 2004; Ord. 2169 § 3 (part), 1999: Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.20.140 - Storage of inoperative or unlicensed vehicles, recreational vehicles and boats on private property, or parking on landscaped setback—Restricted. 
A.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Title 18, it is unlawful to park, repair, or store any vehicle within or upon any unpaved portion of any public or private property. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the washing of a vehicle upon an unpaved portion of private property, provided that no liquids used in the washing shall drain onto a public street, with the exception of potable water. 
B.  It is unlawful to repair, store, or wash any vehicle within or upon any paved or unpaved portion of public property, or to park a vehicle except in an area designated for parking. 
C.  Except in paved areas or driveways specifically designed for parking, it is unlawful to park any vehicle, including a recreational vehicle or boat trailer, within the front yard or the exterior side yard setbacks of private residential property, or on the parkway or landscape area of the public right-of-way. 
D.  It is unlawful to park or store an unlicensed vehicle, any vehicle lacking current or valid registration plates or tags, any junked, wrecked, abandoned or inoperable vehicle, or any vehicle for which a certificate of nonoperation has been issued by the department of motor vehicles on residential property, except within a fully enclosed garage or building or behind a solid fence where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property. Any vehicle that is leaking fuel, oil, or transmission fluid shall not be parked on a public street, or on private property except within a garage or under a covered parking area. 
E.  It is unlawful to park or store any recreational vehicle or boat trailer: 
1.  On a residential parcel unless that recreational vehicle or boat trailer is owned by and registered to an occupant of a legal dwelling unit on the same parcel; or 
2.  On any other parcel unless the parcel is zoned and licensed for use as a recreational vehicle storage yard or repair facility. 
F.  Any vehicle, including a recreational vehicle or boat trailer, parked, or stored in violation of this Section 7.20.140 is declared to be a public nuisance, and is subject to abatement and removal in accordance with Chapters 1.44 and 11.48. Citations for violations of this section shall not be issued until twenty-four hours have elapsed after the placement of a notice of warning upon the offending vehicle or the concerned property when access to the vehicle is denied. Any vehicle lacking valid registration or subject to a certificate of non-operation that visually appears operable shall first be subject to administrative citation under Chapter 1.44 as a means of abatement before resort to Chapter 11.48 when initial abatement efforts are unsuccessful. 
(Ord. 2250 § 2 (part), 2004; Ord. 2169 § 3 (part), 1999: Ord. 1812 (part), 1984) 
(Ord. No. 2016-2410, § 3, 3-15-2016)  
7.20.150 - Use of tarpaulins—Prohibited. 
In all zones, the use of tarpaulins as temporary or permanent structures is prohibited, including but not limited to the following: 
A.  Awnings. 
B.  Carports. 
C.  Car covers. 
D.  Lean-tos. 
E.  Patio covers. 
F.  Roofs. 
G.  Shade structures. 
H.  Sheds. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2375, § 2, 10-2-2012)  
Chapter 7.21 - GARAGE, YARD AND RUMMAGE SALES 
Sections: 
 
7.21.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to regulate garage and yard sales of used goods on residential properties and rummage sales on institutional property. In a technical sense, these types of sales of used goods possess commercial characteristics but, because of the manner in which conducted or operated, are generally considered noncommercial in nature. These regulations are intended to prevent the expansion of commercial operations into residential and institutional properties, upgrade the community image, and regulate sales activity outdoors of used personal property so as to keep such sales noncommercial and not in violation of zoning laws. The provisions of this Chapter 7.21 are not intended to create a substitute procedure for, or to allow sales regulated by, Chapter 18.92 governing outdoor display of merchandise on commercial or industrially zoned property. Persons who comply with this Chapter 7.21 are exempt from payment of business taxes under Chapter 6.04. Private sales of individual items of personal property which are not displayed out of doors are exempted from the prohibitions or application of this section. 
(Ord. 2141 § 3 (part), 1998)  
7.21.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Garage sale" means any display and sale conducted by an individual or group of home owners, apartment dwellers or occupants of a residential dwelling for the purpose of disposing of unwanted or surplus household furnishings or other used, personally owned goods (collectively included under the term "used goods" as defined in this section), usually conducted in a garage or driveway on a residential property, for which no inventory is kept and no sales tax is required to be paid on the transaction carried out. The term "garage sale" includes sales of household goods conducted on any portion of a residential premises including a yard, and hence sometimes called a "yard sale." 
"Identifiable goods" means any tangible personal property which bears a serial number, personalized initials or inscription and includes secondhand tangible personal property which bears evidence of once having had a serial number or personalized initial or inscription. 
"Permit" means a permit issued by the finance department to conduct a garage, yard or rummage sale. 
"Rummage sale" means any indoor or outdoor display and sale of "used goods" as defined below, conducted for fund raising purposes by a charitable or fraternal organization that is exempted or qualified for exemption by Section 501(C)3 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
"Used goods" means surplus household furnishings or other used, personal goods, clothing and similar personal belongings that are owned by or have been donated to the seller. The term specifically excludes new furnishings, new merchandise or new goods that are being sold at retail or wholesale. 
(Ord. 2141 § 3 (part), 1998)  
7.21.030 - Permit and fee requirements. 
A.  Any resident, or an organization or club of the city on behalf of its members, may conduct a garage sale or rummage sale, respectively, as defined in this chapter; provided, however, that a permit is first obtained from the finance department of the city. The fee prescribed in the National City fee schedule for each permit must be paid at the time of permit issuance. The permit fee required under this Section 7.21.030 is in addition to any fee required under Chapter 15.60 regarding temporary use permits. 
B.  Applications for a permit must be made at least forty-eight hours prior to the proposed sale. The application shall provide the following information: 
1.  Name and address of the person(s) or organization(s) wishing to conduct the sale; 
2.  The location where the sale is to be conducted; 
3.  A general description of the property qualifying as used goods to be offered for sale; 
4.  Dates and time period when sale shall be conducted; 
5.  Signature of person(s) or agent conducting sale; 
6.  Authorization of property owner or managing agent of multifamily apartment or condominium complexes. 
C.  A separate permit and fee payment is required for each address at which a sale is to be conducted, except that a single permit fee may be charged when a group of residents arrange a neighborhood garage sale for the collective purpose of funding a neighborhood civic program or activity. 
(Ord. 2141 § 3 (part), 1998)  
7.21.040 - Regulations on sales. 
A.  All used goods being sold must be the property of those conducting the sale or on whose behalf the sale is being conducted. 
B.  It shall be presumed that goods on display consisting of three or more products of a similar nature in an original unopened container or packaging constitute new merchandise that is being vended as part of a commercial enterprise, and are therefore prohibited under this Chapter 7.21. 
C.  Conducting a garage or rummage sale for which no permit was issued counts as a garage or rummage sale for purposes of computation of the annual sales limit. Each sale and each permit is limited to a maximum period of four consecutive days per sale. 
D.  No more than two garage sales may be conducted at the same address within the same calendar year at any single-family residence. No person may conduct more than two garage sales within the same calendar year regardless of location. 
E.  No more than two rummage sales may be conducted by a qualifying organization during any calendar year. 
F.  Special rules for multifamily apartment and condominium complexes: The maximum number of garage sales permitted at any residential apartment complex with three or more units, or in a condominium complex with three or more dwelling units, is limited to a maximum of two sales per calendar year. The property owner, managing agent or management official must co-sign the application to authorize the sale on the premises before a permit will be issued. 
G.  Persons displaying or selling goods in violation of Chapter 7.21 shall immediately cease and desist from further sales activity and shall remove all goods and wares from display upon direction of an authorized officer of the city. An enforcement official is authorized to impound goods being displayed or sold in violation of this chapter as evidence pending citation and enforcement. 
H.  Except at licensed swap meets, sales of used goods outdoors on property used for commercial or industrial purposes is prohibited, and no permit shall be issued under this Chapter 7.21 for that purpose. 
I.  All permits issued by the city shall include written notice of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2141 § 3 (part), 1998)  
7.21.050 - Prohibited items. 
It is unlawful for any person to exchange, barter, trade or sell at a garage or rummage sale the following items: firearms, ammunition, explosives, animals and livestock, any identifiable goods, and all other items the sale or possession of which may be prohibited by ordinance or resolution duly adopted by the city council of the city or by the laws of the state or county. 
(Ord. 2141 § 3 (part), 1998)  
7.21.060 - Advertising signs. 
Only one unlighted advertising sign not exceeding six square feet in area may be located on the premises of the sale. The sign must be of a temporary nature, may be displayed not more than one week in advance of such sale, and must be removed upon conclusion of the sale. Signs are prohibited in the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 2141 § 3 (part), 1998)  
7.21.070 - Display requirements. 
A.  All used goods to be sold must be displayed on property owned or controlled by the permittee or which the permittee is authorized to use by the property owner or manager. 
B.  No used goods shall be displayed on streets or public sidewalks. 
C.  No used goods shall be displayed on a vacant or undeveloped lot. 
(Ord. 2141 § 3 (part), 1998)  
7.21.080 - Permit sign. 
The finance officer will issue a distinctive permit sign to each permittee. The permit sign must be posted in a conspicuous spot, to be visible from the abutting public right-of-way or access point for enforcement purposes. 
(Ord. 2141 § 3 (part), 1998)  
7.21.090 - Refunds. 
Refunds of any permit fee paid will not be made. A credit will be issued if the permit is physically surrendered to the finance department prior to the first authorized day of the permit. After that date, the fee is noncreditable and the issued permit counts against the number of permits authorized in Section 7.21.040. 
(Ord. 2141 § 3 (part), 1998)  
7.21.100 - Additional rules. 
The finance officer may promulgate additional rules to implement and administer the provisions of this Chapter 7.21 and may use existing stocks of forms until depleted. 
(Ord. 2141 § 3 (part), 1998)  
7.21.110 - Deadlines. 
The finance officer shall not issue a permit unless application is made at least forty-eight hours in advance. 
(Ord. 2141 § 3 (part), 1998)  
7.21.120 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  It is unlawful: 
1.  To conduct a garage, yard or rummage sale without a permit; 
2.  To alter a permit or permit sign; 
3.  To fail to discontinue operation of an unpermitted sale or to fail to remove displayed goods upon request of an enforcement official; 
4.  To post signs in violation of Section 7.21.060; 
5.  To fail to post a permit sign; 
6.  To sell used goods that are not the property of the permittee or a person on whose behalf the sale is conducted, or to sell other than used goods; 
7.  To apply for a permit on behalf of a person or organization that is not authorized to conduct a garage, yard or rummage sale; 
8.  To make a false statement or representation on a permit application; or 
9.  To display used goods on a street, public sidewalk or vacant lot. 
B.  Each violation of the provisions of this chapter is an infraction, punishable by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars for a first violation, a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a second violation of this section within one year, or a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for each additional violation of this section within one year. 
(Ord. 2141 § 3 (part), 1998)  
Chapter 7.22 - HOUSING CONDITIONS* 
Sections: 
* Noncodified list of cross-references: 
 
Property Maintenance Provisions List - NCMC Chapter 7.24 7.22.010 
Definitions. 
"Housing" for the purposes of this chapter means any place used or occupied for a dwelling, habitation, sleeping room or dormitory except permitted hotels, motels and institutional places of residence. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.22.020 - Uniform Housing Code. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter are supplementary to the adopted Uniform Housing Code as it is set forth in Chapter 15.16. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to lessen the provisions of that chapter or any applicable housing regulation imposed by the state. 
B.  Nothing contained in this chapter is meant or intended to make less restrictive, or in any way lessen, the provisions of that chapter or of any applicable housing regulations imposed by the state. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.22.030 - Maximum permitted occupant loads. 
The maximum number of persons that may occupy a dwelling place is: 
A.  Boardinghouses, group houses, roominghouses and residence hotels shall have minimum usable floor area in bedrooms of two hundred fifty square feet per resident person, and one full facility bathroom for each sex and for each six residents. Except in hotels and institution type buildings with central kitchen and dining area, there shall be one kitchen and one separate dining room for each twelve residents. 
B.  It is unlawful for any property owner or person responsible for the use of such premises to allow premises to be used in violation of this section. 
C.  This section shall not apply to homes for battered women as defined and regulated by Chapter 18.141 of this code. 
(Ord. 1991 § 7, 1990; Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.22.040 - Temporary activities prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to occupy, reside in or sleep in any inoperative vehicle, in any building posted as "unsafe to occupy," on any public sidewalk, street or parkway, garage, backyard, or in any other place that is not a "dwelling" as defined in Titles 15 and 18, except in a hotel, motel or institutional residence place. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.22.050 - Public utilities required. 
A.  All dwellings and places of residence must be continuously provided with public utilities including potable water, electricity, energy for hot water heaters and sewer services. 
B.  It is unlawful for any apartment house owner or tenant to allow the occupancy of, or to occupy, such a residence that is not being supplied with these public utilities. 
C.  All such residences shall be continuously provided with garbage and refuse collection facilities and collection services. This shall be the responsibility of the property owner or the person in charge of the premises. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.22.060 - Retroactive compliance required. 
The provisions of this chapter that would be in violation of the date of adoption shall enjoy lawful nonconforming use status for a period of one year. Thereafter, they shall be in full force and effect for all properties. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
Chapter 7.24 - APARTMENT HOUSE AND CONDOMINIUM PROPERTY MANAGEMENT* 
Sections: 
* Noncodified list of cross-references: 
Title 18 Summary - Chapter 7.22/Appendix - Guidelines 
 
7.24.010 - Definitions. 
(Reserved) 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.24.020 - Apartment house management required. 
A.  The owner of each multiple-family dwelling complex of four or more dwelling units on any site shall provide a resident or nonresident manager who can be contacted by residents or by public agencies on any matter relating to questions of lawful compliance with this title or related building, zoning, health, housing, fire prevention or penal laws. Such managers shall have the responsibility of an authority for arranging for an achieving compliance therewith. 
B.  The owner of each multiple-family dwelling complex of nine or more dwelling units on any site shall provide a resident manager. Such owners shall also file with the National City department of building and safety, an address and telephone number of a responsible person having authority to act, pursuant to subsection A of this section, in the absence of the resident manager. The director of building and safety shall distribute this information to the police and fire department. 
C.  Resident owners may be managers. 
D.  The homeowners' association of all residential condominium projects shall designate a person or persons through whom public agencies may communicate regarding the matters described in this section. 
E.  Failure to comply with any part of this section is a violation. 
(Ord. 2285 § 1, 2006: Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.24.030 - Owners and tenants responsibilities. 
A.  It is the responsibility of both the owners and tenants of apartment house and condominium places to comply with the regulations mentioned in this chapter. The city will not arbitrate or distinguish between their interests or private contractual relationships. 
B.  Owners and tenants are encouraged, but not required to agree to and comply with their own management guidelines. 
C.  It is unlawful for owners or managers to allow or permit the use of their apartment house property(s) in any way that has been declared a public nuisance by the city council after a duly noticed public hearing. Such public nuisance includes, but is not limited to: 
1.  Allowing housing facilities and conditions to remain in violation of city codes and ordinances beyond time limits prescribed in notices issued by city personnel; 
2.  Repeated and successive violations or inattention to notices; 
3.  A proliferation of incidents on the premises calling upon the services of the city's public safety or health departments. 
D.  The city council may order the vacation of such premises found to be a public nuisance, until required repairs or corrections have been made. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
Chapter 7.28 - HANDBILLS AND BILLPOSTING* 
Sections: 
* Noncodified list of cross-references: 
Handbill Distribution - NCMC Chapter 6.46 
 
7.28.010 - Definitions. 
The term "handbill" used in this Chapter 7.28 means any material of paper, cloth or similar lightweight fabric upon which printed material or graphics, or both, is placed. The term "handbill" includes objects commonly known as posters, billposters, "dodgers," circulars, leaflets and the like, which are typically used to provide information or advertise an event or sale. It does not include any medium regulated by Chapter 18.62. 
(Ord. 2168 § 3 (part), 1999: Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.28.020 - Reserved.  
7.28.030 - Reserved.  
7.28.040 - Reserved.  
7.28.050 - Handbill—Restrictions. 
A.  Except as provided in Section 7.28.050B, it is unlawful to post, paste, staple, nail, stamp or otherwise affix a handbill to or to paint any message upon any sidewalk, street, street tree, utility pole or box, hydrant, trash receptacle, bus or public bench, any other public property or building, or upon the side of any building which abuts a public right-of-way. 
B.  The prohibitions of subsection A of this section do not apply to public safety or traffic safety signs, or to identification data or identification tags placed by an owner or a public agency upon property it owns or controls, or to signs lawfully posted on private property in conformity with Title 18 of this code. 
C.  The restrictions of subsection A of this section are equally applicable to the placement or distribution of handbills on private property by persons other than the owner of the property. Handbills deposited on private property shall be weighted down or so placed so as to prevent being blown about by wind. 
D.  Handbill distributors shall not enter upon property that is posted against solicitors or peddlers, and shall leave other property promptly upon the request of the owner, agent or occupant of that property. 
E.  Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to supersede or modify the requirements of Chapter 18.62 regulating outdoor sign displays. 
(Ord. 2168 § 3 (part), 1999: Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.28.060 - Removal and costs required. 
Handbills posted in violation of Section 7.28.050A are subject to summary removal by the owner of the affected object, property or structure upon which the handbill is affixed, or by the city manager or designee. The costs of removal may be assessed in accordance with law against the party responsible for the violation. It shall be rebuttably presumed that any person, principal or organization whose message is displayed on the handbill or which benefits from the message displayed upon the handbill is the party responsible for the costs of removal. 
(Ord. 2168 § 3 (part), 1999: Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
Chapter 7.30 - MOSQUITO AND FLY BREEDING PLACES* 
Sections: 
* Noncodified list of cross-references: 
See San Diego County Health Department regulations. 
 
7.30.010 - Deemed nuisance. 
Within the corporate limits of the city, any breeding place of mosquitos or flies is a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.30.020 - Abatement authority. 
Such nuisance as declared in Section 7.30.010 may be abated by the health officer of the city in any manner permitted by law or by any proceeding or remedy provided by law. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.30.030 - Violations. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to permit or maintain any nuisance as provided in Section 7.30.010 within the corporate limits of the city. 
B.  Each day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued or permitted shall be punishable as provided in this code. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
Chapter 7.31 - LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE 
Sections: 
 
7.31.010 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all properties within National City. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2330, § 2, 3-2-2010)  
7.31.020 - Definitions. 
Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the meaning established below: 
A.  "Code enforcement" means the code enforcement officer of the City of National City. 
B.  "Landscaping" means the use of architectural and horticultural materials to provide control of erosion, dust, weeds, and accumulation of litter in a manner complementary to the purpose of adding natural environmental quality to the premises. "Landscaping" includes the planting and maintenance of some combination of trees, shrubs, ground cover, vines, flowers, lawns, or other planting materials, other than weeds, providing shade, visual screening, aesthetic enhancement, soil conservation, and the removal or reduction of fire hazards, rodent harbingers, vermin, and disease-bearing creatures. In addition, the combination or design may include natural features such as rock and stone and structural features such as pools, artwork, screens, walls, fences, and benches. See also "fence" defined in Section 18.04.244 and 
C.  "Screening," defined in Section 18.04.585 of Title 18 Land Use Code. 
D.  "Landscape maintenance" includes sufficient irrigation, fertilization, pruning, trimming and training, and all other reasonable acts necessary to keep plants in a healthy vigorous condition. "Maintenance" also includes removal of weeds, dead materials, and accumulated litter, rubble or other foreign substances; and reseeding and replacement of dead plants and planting where necessary to restore a landscaped area to the level of coverage required of a new installation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2330, § 2, 3-2-2010)  
7.31.030 - Maintenance required. 
It shall be the responsibility of each property owner to adequately maintain the landscaping of private property and the adjoining public street parkway landscape, except street trees. All landscaping shall be properly maintained. Trees located within public street parkways will be pruned and trimmed by city employees and not by private property owners. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2330, § 2, 3-2-2010)  
7.31.040 - Street trees on private property. 
The city may plant, maintain, and remove designated trees on private properties adjacent to street rights-of-way where adequate rights of entry, as determined by the city, are in effect and written permission has been granted by the property owner relieving the city of liability. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2330, § 2, 3-2-2010)  
7.31.050 - Certain trees a public nuisance. 
A.  Any tree, shrub, or plant located on private property infested with a disease or insects which, in the opinion of code enforcement, is infections and may spread such disease or insects to other trees or shrubs in the city constitutes a public nuisance. Code enforcement shall give written notice to the property owner directing that such public nuisance be removed or abated within seven days. If such public nuisance is not abated or removed within seven days after notice is served, code enforcement is granted authority to direct employees to enter said property and spray, trim, prune, treat, or removed all or any part of the tree or shrub determined to be infested, or to otherwise abate or cause to be abated such public nuisance. 
B.  Any tree or shrub growing or standing on private property in such a manner that any portion thereof interferes with utility poles, lines, wires, or electric equipment lawfully erected, constructed, or maintained along any public street, sidewalk, or intersection thereof or with any person or persons lawfully using the same, or any such tree which has become diseased or weakened in such a manner as to be dangerous to persons lawfully using the streets or sidewalks constitutes a public nuisance. Code enforcement shall cause notice to be served upon such property owner directing that such public nuisance be abated or removed within seven days after said notice is served. Code enforcement is authorized to abate or cause to be abated such public nuisance by trimming, pruning, cutting, or removing all such portion of such tree, shrub, or plant as may be necessary to eliminate such interference, obstruction, or condition. Whenever it is necessary for code enforcement to direct the use of city employees to abate, removed, or cause to be abated or removed, public nuisance as contained in this section, the cost of such work performed by city employees shall be billed to the property owner at the cost of the work performed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2330, § 2, 3-2-2010)  
7.31.060 - Violations. 
Failure to comply with the onsite landscaping and maintenance requirements contained in this chapter constitutes a violation of the municipal code of this city and is a misdemeanor. Enforcement proceedings shall be the same as any other municipal violation case. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2330, § 2, 3-2-2010)  
7.31.070 - Abatement of nonconforming uses. 
All properties, as provided to herein, now landscaped, which are inadequately maintained shall be brought into compliance with this Title within six months 7of the date of adoption of the National City Municipal Code provided not less than thirty days' notice, in writing, shall be given to the owner and occupant of such premises to comply. All properties, as provided for herein, not now landscaped shall be landscaped whenever a building permit for structures valued sixteen thousand dollars or more is issued for the site. All other properties or portions of properties, not landscaped shall be kept free of rubbish, litter, debris, unused merchandise, unused building materials, machinery, or vehicular paraphernalia not essential to the occupancy of the premises. This section is not intended to repeal any provisions of any municipal ordinance, or any provisions of this title. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2330, § 2, 3-2-2010)  
Chapter 7.32 - ENFORCEMENT* 
Sections: 
* Noncodified list of cross-references: 
NCMC Title 1 
 
7.32.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Citations" means promises to appear in court of the type and form used by the National City police department. 
B.  "Code conformance officer" means the person(s) named by the city manager to fill that position. 
C.  "Enforcement" means warnings, criminal prosecution, civil relief and city abatement. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.32.020 - Persons charged with enforcement of this title. 
A.  Unless otherwise specified, it is the responsibility of the code conformance officer to enforce all the provisions of this Title 7 of the National City Municipal Code. In addition, the city manager may designate and assign administrative responsibilities for enforcement activities to any of the city's departments to fully utilize available manpower, expertise and resources. 
B.  The code conformance officer shall coordinate all of Title 7 enforcement activities with all of the city's departments and shall have authority to screen and to route and assign in-coming complaints to those departments designated by the city manager. 
C.  The code conformance officer shall prepare and the city manager may establish administrative guidelines for Title 7 administration. 
(Ord. 2169 § 4, 1999; Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.32.030 - Citations. 
A.  The provisions of Section 1.28.010 are extended to include the code conformance officer. 
B.  The code conformance officer is empowered to issue citations for any violation of any provision of this title. 
C.  Whenever an offender refuses to sign a promise to appear in court (citation), the code conformance officer may refer the matter to a sworn peace officer or to the city attorney for action. Citations may be served by certified mail. The code conformance officer will not make physical arrests. 
D.  The code conformance officer at his own option may use various "warning notices" in place of citations at the first official demand made upon violators. Failure to comply with any such notice will be cause for a citation or filing of a complaint in the appropriate court. 
E.  Each day that a violation continues will constitute a separate offense. 
F.  Separate complaints may be filed on each count of any violation of this title. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.32.040 - Inspection warrants. 
The code conformance officer is empowered to seek, obtain and employ inspection warrants issued by the court wherein necessity is clearly demonstrated in the interest of protecting and preserving public health and safety. Such warrants shall be limited to the jurisdiction of Title 7. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.32.050 - Effect upon other National City Municipal Code titles. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter is superseded by any other enforcement provision in this code. 
B.  Where jurisdiction for regulation, enforcement, or abatement is found in more than one title of this code, the code conformance officer, pursuant to guidelines set forth by the city manager, is authorized to refer apparent code violations to the appropriate city department(s) for action, pursuant to Section 7.32.020B. 
C.  It is clearly the intent of this title and its administrative guidelines to recognize the capabilities of the city's departments to perform specialized services in their respective fields. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.32.060 - Violations—Misdemeanors and infractions (Woblers). 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this title. A violation of any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this title shall constitute a misdemeanor; except that notwithstanding any other provision of this code, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor under this title may in the discretion of the code conformance officer be charged and prosecuted as an infraction; and, with the further exception that any violation of the provisions of this title dealing with parking within public street rights-of-way and alleys, operation of motor vehicles, use of highways and streets by animals, vehicles or pedestrians, shall constitute infractions. Penalties for misdemeanors and infractions are prescribed elsewhere in this code. 
B.  The city attorney may up-grade an infraction complaint to become a misdemeanor complaint at any time. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.32.070 - Civil penalties. 
A.  Whenever the enforcement person finds and determines that violations would be appropriately classed as public nuisances, he may initiate civil action to abate them. 
B.  The city attorney may elect to proceed with civil proceedings upon receiving support of the city council. 
C.  Both criminal and civil proceedings may be pursued for the same violation or circumstances. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.32.080 - City abatement proceedings. 
Whenever the provisions of this title provide for city abatement of public nuisances, the code conformance officer shall be the principal person charged with the duty to pursue abatement and to supervise their accomplishment. All city departments and employees are required to cooperate whenever the respective abatement regulations or related codes name their city department. All agencies will cooperate. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.32.090 - Effect of contracted services. 
A.  Wherein the city contracts with or is preempted by other governmental agencies for the administration and/or enforcement of regulations adopted by the city, such as health, housing, air pollution, mobilehome parks and sewage treatment, the director of building and safety is the city's liaison representative, under the direction of the city manager. The code conformance officer is authorized to cooperate with those agencies and to coordinate Title 7 enforcement activities with them. Referrals for service, where appropriate, may be routinely made directly by the code conformance officer. Nothing in Title 7 abrogates those contracts. 
B.  Wherein the city contracts with public or private agencies for the collection of garbage and refuse, the director of public works, under the direction of the city manager, is the city's liaison representative. The code conformance officer is authorized to coordinate Title 7 enforcement activities directly with that contractor(s). Nothing in Title 7 abrogates those contracts. 
(Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.32.100 - Appeals. 
A.  Prior to the issuance of a citation or the filing of a complaint in an enforcement case, the alleged violator shall be advised in writing of the right to appeal the enforcement action to the planning commission by service of a "notice of violation." Should the alleged violator wish to appeal the notice of violation, he/she shall file a written notice of appeal in the office of the planning director within three working days after service of the notice of violation. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a fee (the "appeal fee") in an amount to be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. Not less than five days nor more than twenty days after an appeal is filed with the planning director, the planning commission shall hear said appeal. 
B.  At the time of the appeal, after all evidence is received and heard, the planning commission shall determine the issue by either granting the appeal or denying the appeal. The decision of the planning commission shall be final and conclusive. 
C.  A timely appeal shall stop prosecution of a violation until the planning commission has decided the appeal. Where an alleged violator does not file a timely appeal after being served with a notice of violation, prosecution of that violation may commence forthwith. 
D.  The provisions of Chapters 7.06, 7.10, 7.18, 7.20, 7.22, 7.26, and 7.30 are not subject to any appeal privilege. 
E.  If the planning commission determines, after considering an appeal, that the alleged offense constitutes a violation, the planning commission shall deny the appeal, prosecution of that offense may thereafter proceed, and the appeal fee shall be retained by the city. In denying an appeal, the planning commission may grant the violator a reasonable period of time to correct the violation prior to the commencement of prosecution. 
F.  If the planning commission determines, after considering an appeal, that the alleged offense does not constitute a violation, no further enforcement action will be taken, and the appeal fee shall be returned to the alleged violator within three working days after the planning commission's decision. 
(Ord. 2119 § 1, 1996: Ord. 1812 (part), 1984)  
7.32.110 - Abatement—Notice—Service. 
A.  The notice of violation required by Section 7.32.100 may be served by any of the following methods: 
1.  Personal service; or 
2.  Certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. Simultaneously, the same notice may be sent by regular mail. If a notice that is sent by certified mail is returned unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective pursuant to regular mail, provided the notice that was sent by regular mail is not returned; or 
3.  Posting the notice conspicuously on or in front of the property which is subject of the notice. 
B.  Personal service shall be effective upon delivery. Service by posting shall be effective on the date of posting the notice. Service by certified mail in the manner described above shall be effective on the date of mailing. Service by mail shall be to the alleged violator's address as indicated on the current assessment roll of the San Diego County assessor. 
(Ord. 2119 § 2, 1996)  
Chapter 7.34 - SHOPPING CART CONTAINMENT 
Sections: 
 
7.34.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter only, and unless the context clearly requires a different meaning, the words, terms, and phrases set forth in this section are defined as follows: 
A.  "Business premises" means the interior of a cart owner's commercial establishment, adjacent walkways, any loading area, and the parking area, as defined herein. 
B.  "Cart owner" means the owner or operator of a commercial establishment that provides carts for use by its customers for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind. Cart owner includes the on-site manager or designated agent of the actual cart owner. 
C.  "Cart identification sign" means a sign or engraved surface which is permanently affixed to a shopping cart containing all of the information specified in Section 7.34.050 of this chapter. 
D.  "Cart removal warning" means a placard, sign, or painted text which meets the requirements of Section 7.34.030 of this chapter. 
E.  "Individual cart identification number" means a number unique to each cart owned or provided by a cart owner. 
F.  "On-site cart containment program" means one or more of the following measures: 
1.  Disabling devices on all shopping carts which prevent them from being removed from the business premises by locking the wheels or otherwise preventing the movement of the carts. 
2.  An on-site security guard to deter customers who attempt to remove carts from the business premises. 
3.  Bollards and chains around the business premises, if permitted by the Fire Marshal, to prevent cart removal. 
4.  Obtaining a security deposit from customers for the on-site use of shopping carts. 
5.  The rental or sale of utility carts that can be temporarily or permanently used for the transport of goods. 
G.  "Parking area" means a parking lot or other property provided by a commercial establishment for use by a customer for parking an automobile or other vehicle. In a multi-store complex or shopping center, "parking area" includes the entire parking area used by or controlled by the complex or center. 
H.  "Physical containment system" means one of the following, as approved by the director of development services: 
1.  Disabling devices on all shopping carts which prevent them from being removed from the business premises by locking the wheels or otherwise preventing the movement of the carts. 
2.  Any other system of equipment approved by the director of development services which physically contains shopping carts on premises. 
I.  "Qualified cart retrieval service" means a commercial service, operated by a third party and paid by a cart owner to retrieve and return shopping carts. The director of development services shall develop minimal service standards by which a cart retrieval service may be designated as a qualified cart retrieval service and maintain a list of all such service providers. 
J.  "Shopping cart", sometimes referred to herein as a "cart", means a basket that is mounted on wheels or a similar device provided by the operator of a commercial establishment for the use of customers for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind. A cart sold by a commercial establishment to a retail customer for that customer's personal use is not a shopping cart for the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2342, § 1, 6-22-2010)  
7.34.020 - Cart containment system—Required; exception. 
A.  Every cart owner shall operate and maintain an on-site cart containment program. A cart owner may be exempted from this requirement if he or she provides proof of contracting with a qualified cart retrieval service, and submits an operations plan which demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director of development services that the qualified cart retrieval service will both actively locate shopping carts within a one-mile radius of the cart owner's business premises and respond to complaints from the public in a manner which results in the retrieval of shopping carts within twenty-four hours after receiving notice. 
B.  Each cart owner must contain all shopping carts on the business premises at all times. 
C.  Any instance in which a shopping cart owned or provided by a cart owner is found off of the business premises shall be considered a violation by the cart owner of Subsection (B) of this section. A cart owner who, after receiving notice of the violation, fails to cure such violation within twenty-four hours is subject to an administrative citation. Each twenty-four-hour period thereafter that the cart remains off premises shall be considered a separate violation. Following the issuance of more than ten administrative citations to the same cart owner within a thirty-day period, subsequent violations by that cart owner may be prosecuted by the city attorney's office pursuant to Section 1.36.150 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2342, § 1, 6-22-2010)  
7.34.030 - Cart removal warnings. 
A.  Every cart owner shall post and maintain cart removal warnings which meet all of the following minimum specifications: 
1.  Meet or exceed eighteen inches in width and twenty-four inches in height. 
2.  Using block lettering not less than one-half inch in width and two inches in height, contain a statement in two or more languages to the effect that unauthorized removal of a shopping cart from the business premises or possession of a shopping cart in a location other than on the business premises, is a violation of state law and the National City Municipal Code. 
3.  List a local or toll-free telephone number for cart retrieval. 
4.  Be affixed to an interior wall of the building or otherwise permanently and prominently displayed within two feet of all customer entrances and exits. 
B  Cart removal warnings on the exterior of the building are not considered "signs" for the purpose of calculating maximum allowable signage under Title 18 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2342, § 1, 6-22-2010)  
7.34.040 - Employee training—Cart removal prevention. 
Each cart owner shall conduct ongoing employee training to educate new and existing employees about procedures to prevent cart removal, including the operation of the cart containment system. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2342, § 1, 6-22-2010)  
7.34.050 - Cart identification signs for shopping carts. 
A.  Each shopping cart owned or used within the city shall have, permanently affixed and easily visible, a cart identification sign or engraved surface which includes all of the following information: the name, the site-specific street address, and telephone number of the cart owner or commercial establishment to which the cart belongs or both; the individual cart identification number; a valid toll-free phone number for cart retrieval; the procedure (if any) to be followed to obtain permission to remove the cart from the business premises; and a notice to the public that unauthorized removal of the cart from the business premises is a violation of state law and the National City Municipal Code. 
B.  It shall be the responsibility of each cart owner to comply with subsection (A) of this section, and to continuously maintain, or cause to be maintained, the cart identification sign so that all of the required information is accurate and clearly legible. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2342, § 1, 6-22-2010)  
7.34.060 - Cart removal from business premises—Written permission required. 
No person shall be deemed to be authorized to remove a cart from a business premises unless he or she possesses written authorization from the cart owner. This section shall not apply to the possession of a shopping cart removed from the business premises at the direction of the cart owner for the purposes of repair or maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2342, § 1, 6-22-2010)  
7.34.070 - Physical containment system. 
A.  A cart owner shall be required to install a physical containment system to the satisfaction of the director of development services when the cart owner establishes a facility consisting of more than five thousand square feet of new construction. 
B.  A cart owner may be required to install a physical containment system to the satisfaction of the director of development services and the city attorney following the issuance of more than ten administrative citations in a thirty-day period. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2342, § 1, 6-22-2010)  
7.34.080 - Regulatory fee authorized. 
A regulatory fee shall be established to enforce this regulation and to fairly apportion the cost of mitigating the negative effects of off-site shopping carts. A business that installs a physical containment system to the satisfaction of the director of development services, or which does not provide any shopping carts to its customers, shall be exempted from this fee. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2342, § 1, 6-22-2010)  
7.34.090 - City powers not limited by this chapter. 
Nothing in this chapter is intended to limit the ability of the city to remove or dispose of any cart to which a cart identification sign is not attached, or to remove or dispose of any cart which impedes the provision of emergency services, or which is an immediate threat to public health and safety, to the full extent permitted by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2342, § 1, 6-22-2010)  
7.34.100 - Violations. 
A.  A violation of any provision of this chapter or a failure to comply with any mandatory requirements of this chapter is subject to prosecution in accordance with Title 1 of the National City Municipal Code and may be enforced through injunctive relief or other relief available by law. Penalties for violations of the provisions of this chapter may result in a misdemeanor citation for each day in violation, punishable by a maximum of six months in jail and a one thousand dollar fine, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.  Administering departments will be authorized to charge cost recovery fees for services provided under this chapter. Cost recovery may also be recovered for equipment and personnel expenses incurred, including for shopping cart return. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2342, § 1, 6-22-2010)  
Chapter 7.35 - ACCEPTANCE OF RECYCLABLE ITEMS FROM SHOPPING CARTS 
Sections: 
 
7.35.010 - Prohibitions—Acceptance of recyclable items from shopping carts. 
It is unlawful for any business to accept recyclable items that are delivered in a shopping cart off-premises of the business that appears to own the shopping cart. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2336, § 1, 4-20-2010)  
7.35.020 - Violations. 
A.  A violation of any provision of this chapter or a failure to comply with any mandatory requirements of this chapter is subject to prosecution in accordance with Title 1 of the National City Municipal Code, and may be enforced through injunctive relief or other relief available by law. Penalties for violations of the provisions of this Chapter may result in up to a misdemeanor citation for each day in violation, punishable by a maximum of six months in jail and a one thousand dollar fine, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.  Administering departments are authorized to charge cost recovery fees for services provided under this chapter, such as for the return of shopping carts. Cost recovery fees may also be recovered for equipment and personnel expenses incurred. Said fees may be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2336, § 1, 4-20-2010)  
Title 8 - ANIMALS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 8.04 - ANIMAL CONTROL AND IMPOUNDMENT—GENERALLY* 
Sections: 
* Prior ordinance history: Ords. 828 §§ 1-4 and 1476. 
 
8.04.005 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of the city council to provide for the administration of animal control services, to maintain public health through the restrictions on keeping certain animal species with their attendant diseases and zoonotic conditions, including exotic Newcastle disease, avian flu and West Nile virus, and to supplement the provisions of the humane laws contained in the Food and Agricultural Code, the Penal Code and the various miscellaneous laws of the state of California respecting animal control in this title within the city limits. 
(Ord. 2245 § 2 (part), 2004; Ord. 2171 § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.04.010 - Administration and authority. 
A.  The city manager, through the chief of police, is authorized to maintain field services and maintain or contract for an animal shelter and related animal control services, subject to city council approval. Within this chapter, the term "animal control officer" shall also include personnel of a contracting agency, as the context may require. 
B.  Persons designated animal control officers by the chief of police, and employees of a contracting agency, are authorized to impound stray animals and any animal whose possession, care or custody is in violation of state law or this title, and effect quarantines in accordance with statutory quarantine procedures. Animal control officers and qualified employees of a contracting agency shall exercise all powers and authority conferred by the penal code, and investigate and enforce the provisions of state law and this code. Animal control officers and qualified employees of a contracting agency are authorized to euthanize animals in a humane manner when necessary for public health or safety or the well being of the animal in accordance with state law. Animal control officers are authorized to carry firearms in the discharge of their duties in accordance with state humane laws. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, animal control officers shall not seize or impound a dog for violation of the restraint requirements of this code when the dog has not strayed from and is upon private property owned by the dog owner or the person who has a right to control the dog, or upon private property to which the dog owner or person who has a right to control the dog has a right of possession. 
C.  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to interfere with or obstruct an animal control officer in the performance of his or her duties. Obstruction includes rescuing or attempting to rescue an animal during impoundment procedures. 
D.  An animal control officer is authorized to arrest any person without a warrant for any crime pertaining to the humane laws and animal control committed in their presence, and to issue citations for all violations of law he or she is responsible for administering or enforcing. 
E.  An animal control officer may issue administrative citations pursuant to Chapter 1.44 of this code in lieu of a criminal citation to any person violating a provision of this title without the requirement for the prior issuance of a notice of violation for a first violation. 
F.  Violations of this title are infractions, except when designated as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2196 § 1 (part); Ord. 2171 § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.04.015 - Definitions. 
Within this title, the following definitions apply: 
A.  "Animal" means any dumb creature, including but not limited to any non-human biped or any quadruped, reptile, amphibian or bird. It includes a "large animal," "large bird" or a dog or cat. 
B.  "Assistance animal" means any animal trained for and used by a disabled person to assist that person in dealing with his or her disability. It includes an "assistance dog." 
C.  "Assistance dog" means any service dog, guide dog, signal dog or other dog trained and used by and licensed to a disabled person to assist that person in dealing with his or her disability. Assistance dogs are also described in Food and Agricultural Code Section 30580. It shall also include a dog being trained for such service. 
D.  "At large" or "run at large" means to be untethered, unleashed or not confined to the limits of the owner's or handler's property by a fence or enclosure capable of containment or not under the physical control of an owner or handler when the animal is upon any property other than that of the owner or person responsible for the animal. 
E.  "Cat" means only a domesticated feline (felis domesticus) of either sex. It specifically excludes any feral cat, wildcat, leopard, puma, ocelot, lion, tiger, jaguar or any other feline considered ferae naturae regardless of its actual or alleged state of domesticity. 
F.  "Dog" means only a canine (canis familiaris) of either sex. It specifically excludes a wolf (lupine), fox (canid), coyote (canis la trans) or any canine hybrid. 
G.  "Handler" means any person in possession of an animal, or who is charged with or is exercising the care, control and custody of the animal. It includes the person who owns the animal when that person is exercising the care, custody and control of the animal. 
H.  "Large animal" means any animal other than a dog or cat that attains a body weight at maturity that exceeds twenty-five pounds. It includes, without limitation: horse, mule, donkey, burro, jackass, pony, oxen, cattle (bull, cow or calf), hog, pigs (including potbelly pigs), sheep, goats, any non-human primate (monkey, chimpanzee, ape, simian, etc.), llama, alpaca, dromedary. 
I.  "Large bird" means any emu, cassowary, ostrich; any turkey, flightless fowl or any other avian exceeding three pounds in weight; or any raptor (hawk, owl, falcon, etc.). 
J.  "Leash" means a cord or strap of leather, canvas or other strong, non-elastic material that does not exceed six feet in length, with a hook or snap at one end and a loop or handle at the other which is designed to be held by a human hand. 
K.  "Not On a Leash". See "unleashed." 
L.  "Owner" means a person or entity that has legal title to or the right to dispose of or euthanize an animal. The term may include any person who exercises apparent control or dominion over an animal to the exclusion of the rights or interest of others, even if there is no documentation establishing a legally protected or protectible property right of that person in that animal. When the owner is a corporation or business entity, the acts, liability or omissions of its officers, agents or employees regarding the care, maintenance or control of an animal shall also be imputed to the corporation or business entity in addition to the liability of the individual responsible for the act or omission. 
M.  "Rooster" means a male chicken regardless of age. 
N.  "Run At Large". See "at large." 
O.  "Small animal" or "small bird" means any animal or bird that is not a large animal or large bird. 
P.  "Stray" means the same as "at large". 
Q.  "Unleashed" or "not on a leash" means that a dog or other animal is not attached to one end of a leash the other end of which is neither fastened to a stationary object nor held by a person who possesses the physical ability to restrain the dog or animal. It shall be rebuttably presumed that any person weighing less than the weight of the dog or animal being restrained does not possess the physical ability to restrain it. 
(Ord. 2245 § 2 (part), 2004; Ord. 2196 § 1 (part); Ord. 2171 § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.04.020 - Impoundment, disposal and return of animals. 
Impounded animals shall be handled and returned or disposed of as follows: 
A.  The animal control officer shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owner of any dog or animal bearing a license tag or indicia from which ownership can be readily determined. Notification and all pre-seizure or post-seizure impound hearings shall be provided in accordance with applicable provisions of Government Code Section 53074, Penal Code Section 597.1, and subsection E of this section. 
B.  Unless irremediably suffering from a serious illness or severe injury or being a newborn animal requiring maternal care that is impounded without its mother, animals shall be held for the period specified by state law, unless sooner claimed and delivered to the owner after satisfaction of redemption and licensing requirements and, when required by Penal Code Section 597.1, demonstration that the owner can and will provide the necessary care. An unlicensed animal may be released from impound following the satisfaction of redemption requirements, without licensing, provided the owner is issued a written notice to license the animal within twenty-one calendar days from the date of release, failure of which will subject the owner to citation. If the animal continues to remain impounded beyond the legally required holding period, the animal control officer or contracting agency may dispose of the animal pursuant to subsection D of this section. 
C.  Animals that are irremediably suffering from a serious illness or severe injury or newborn animals requiring maternal care that are impounded without their mother shall be euthanized and disposed of in a humane, sanitary manner in accordance with applicable humane, health and safety law. The animal control officer or contracting agency may use discretion in determining whether an animal is within the definition of this section, and may use the services of a veterinarian in making that determination. Adoptable and treatable animals may be retained for disposition pursuant to this section. 
D.  After the period specified by state law has elapsed following impoundment, the animal control officer or contracting agency may sell or transfer any unclaimed animal at private or public sale or auction, or release the animal to an animal rescue or adoption organization in accordance with state law. Dogs four months of age and older shall be vaccinated against rabies prior to any transfer under this section, unless exempted from such vaccination requirement by a California licensed veterinarian. Animals that cannot be reasonably transferred under this section shall be euthanized in a humane manner. 
E.  Upon impoundment of an animal wearing a license tag, identification listing the owner's name and address, or indicia from which ownership can be readily determined, the animal control officer shall ensure a notice is promptly posted at the owner's address of record, or mailed or personally delivered to the owner of record that the animal is in the custody of the contracting agency. 
The notice shall conform to the requirements of Government Code Section 53074 and include a statement that the owner may within five calendar days from the date of service request a hearing as to the legality of the impoundment. Such request shall be in writing and must be received by the animal control officer within the specified time period. 
The time during which the animal shall not be disposed of other than by return to the owner shall be extended until the conclusion of the hearing. If at the conclusion of the hearing the impoundment is found to be unjustified, the animal shall be returned to the owner without charge. If the animal is returned to the owner prior to the hearing, any fees other than vaccination or licensing fees paid by the owner to the animal control officer or contracting agency as a result of an unjustified impoundment shall be refunded to the owner. 
(Ord. 2196 § 1 (part); Ord. 2171 § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.04.030 - Animal shelter and field cost recovery fees. 
A.  Animal control officers shall charge such fees for animals under their custody and control as are established in the National City fee schedule for field operations. Impound fees and related custodial and administrative charges shall be as provided for by the National City fee schedule, or the applicable fee schedule of any public or private agency with which the city has contracted for shelter services. 
B.  Animal sheltering fees and cost recovery fees shall be assessed against any owner or person responsible for the care, custody or control of an animal for the city's direct or contracted costs of impoundment, capture, rescue, treatment, medication, food, disposal or euthanasia; provided, however, that the animal control officer, the city finance officer, or the contracting agency may waive cost recovery when it is not cost effective. The city finance officer and the contracting agency shall be responsible for the collection of respective fees. 
(Ord. 2196 § 1 (part); Ord. 2171 § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.04.040 - Presumption of responsibility of owner for violations or fees. 
Whenever the presence, care, custody or control of an animal is found to be in violation of this title, it shall be rebuttably presumed that its owner is the person responsible for the violation or payment of fees and costs upon proof of ownership being established. This presumption shall be nullified upon proof of transfer or sale by the former owner prior to the dates of violation or impoundment. 
(Ord. 2171 § 2 (part), 2000)  
Chapter 8.08 - LARGE ANIMALS AND LARGE BIRDS AT LARGE OR GRAZING 
Sections: 
 
8.08.010 - Definitions. 
The terms "at large," "handler," "large animal," "large bird" or "owner" are as defined in Section 8.04.015. 
(Ord. 2245 § 3, 2004; Ord. 2171 § 3 (part), 2000: Ord. 828 § 5, 1951)  
8.08.020 - Large animal or large bird at large—Prohibited. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any owner or handler of any large animal or large bird to allow it to run at large within the city limits. 
(Ord. 2171 § 3 (part), 2000: Ord. 828 § 6, 1951)  
8.08.030 - Grazing restrictions. 
A.  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any owner or handler of any large animal or large bird to graze it, or allow it to be grazed, on any property without the written consent of the owner or lessee of that property, or to allow it to cross over or onto any public sidewalk, street or public property. 
B.  Any large animal or large bird lawfully grazed shall be furnished adequate water, food and shelter against inclement weather by the owner or handler. 
C.  It is unlawful to graze a large animal or large bird upon any property of less than twenty thousand square feet in area. 
(Ord. 2171 § 3 (part), 2000: Ord. 828 § 7, 1951)  
8.08.040 - Impoundment. 
The animal control officer shall impound any large animal or large bird whose custody, care or control is in violation of Sections 8.08.020 or 8.08.030. Impoundment and disposition shall be in accordance with Section 8.04.020. 
(Ord. 2171 § 3 (part), 2000: Ord. 828 § 8, 1951)  
Chapter 8.12 - DOG LICENSES 
Sections: 
 
8.12.010 - License required. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection B of this section, it is unlawful to own, handle, possess or maintain a dog over the age of four months within the city limits unless the dog is licensed in accordance with this chapter. 
B.  Any person owning, handling, possessing or maintaining a dog over the age of four months shall be exempted from licensing for a period not to exceed thirty continuous days from the dog's first arrival in the city, provided satisfactory proof by way of written declaration under penalty of perjury establishing the date of entry is presented to the animal control officer by the owner or person responsible for the dog. 
C.  A dog, validly licensed in another jurisdiction, that remains within the corporate limits of the city for more than thirty days shall be licensed in accordance with this section. To encourage registration, at the option of the owner a license shall be issued for the duration of any unexpired portion of the previous license upon payment of the transfer fee specified in the National City fee schedule, or a new or original license be issued upon payment of the standard license fee. This option shall be available only during the first thirty days following the arrival of the dog in the city. 
(Ord. 2245 § 4 (part), 2004; Ord. 2196 § 2 (part); Ord. 2171 § 4 (part), 2000: Ord. 828 § 9, 1951)  
8.12.020 - Term. 
Dog licenses shall be valid for twelve months, twenty-four months, or thirty-six months from the date of issuance, depending upon the age of the dog and the amount of the license fee paid, provided however that the license period shall not extend beyond the remaining period of validity for the current rabies vaccination. 
(Ord. 2196 § 2 (part); Ord. 2171 § 4 (part), 2000: Ord. 2018 § 4, 1991: Ord. 1285 (part), 1971: Ord. 828 § 10, 1951)  
8.12.030 - License tag. 
A.  A numbered receipt bearing a brief description of a licensed dog and a correspondingly numbered metal license tag bearing the expiration date shall be issued with each license granted. The numbered metal license tag shall be firmly attached by the licensee to the collar or harness and shall be worn by the dog for which issued at all times, except when the dog is securely confined on or within the property or vehicle of the owner. 
B.  It is unlawful to attach, or permit to be attached, a license tag to the collar or harness of, or otherwise cause or allow such tag to be worn or carried by, any dog other than the dog for which such a tag was issued. 
(Ord. 2245 § 4 (part), 2004; Ord. 2171 § 4 (part), 2000: Ord. 828 § 11, 1951)  
8.12.040 - Rabies vaccination required. 
A.  All dogs over the age of four months must be vaccinated as a prerequisite to the issuance of a license. 
B.  Each license applicant shall provide the information required on the license application form approved by the city manager, and shall furnish proof that the dog has been vaccinated for rabies with vaccine approved for use in California by a licensed veterinarian, unless the owner or person in possession of the dog submits a certificate from a licensed veterinarian issued within the preceding fifteen days stating that the rabies vaccination would be likely to seriously injure the dog. Any dog so exempted from rabies vaccination shall be kept restricted to the enclosed yard of its owner, except when confined within a motor vehicle. Certificates of exemption shall be renewed every sixty days if required by a licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. 2196 § 2 (part); Ord. 2171 § 4 (part), 2000: Ord. 830 § 1, 1951: Ord. 828 § 12, 1951)  
8.12.050 - Issuance. 
Licenses shall be issued by the city finance director after payment of all fees required by law, except that a license shall be issued without payment of fee for any assistance dog or other dog exempted by state law from payment of license fees. The finance director may also negotiate and contract with licensed veterinarians within the city to issue licenses and collect and remit fees. A dog that has been microchipped for identification and meets all other requirements for licensing shall be issued a one-time free license for one year, which free license shall be in addition to any other city animal control licensing incentives that may be applicable. 
(Ord. 2258 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 2171 § 4 (part), 2000: Ord. 980 § 2, 1960: Ord. 828 § 13, 1951)  
8.12.060 - Replacement fee. 
Whenever a license tag has been lost or destroyed, a new receipt and tag expiring on the same date as the original may be issued for the same dog on the payment of the replacement fee established in the National City fee schedule. 
(Ord. 2171 § 4 (part), 2000: Ord. 2018 § 5, 1991: Ord. 828 § 14, 1951)  
8.12.070 - Transfer of ownership—Fee. 
Whenever the ownership of a dog has changed, the new owner may secure a transfer of license to him or her by endorsement on the records of the city and after presentation to the city finance director of the original receipt, endorsed by the original licensee as a transferor and the payment of the transfer fee established in the National City fee schedule. 
(Ord. 2171 § 4 (part), 2000: Ord. 2018 § 6, 1991: Ord. 828 § 15, 1951)  
8.12.080 - License fees. 
Assistance dogs shall be issued a license without payment of fee upon presentation of satisfactory proof of qualifying use or training status. The license fee for all other dogs shall be as established in the National City fee schedule; provided, however, that there shall be added a penalty established in the National City fee schedule if application is made subsequent to the date on which the animal is required to be licensed. 
(Ord. 2258 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 2171 § 4 (part), 2000: Ord. 2018 § 7, 1991: Ord. 1629 § 1, 1978; Ord. 1141 § 2, 1966: Ord. 884 § 1, 1955: Ord. 830 § 2, 1951: Ord. 828 § 16, 1951)  
Chapter 8.16 - DOG REGULATIONS* 
Sections: 
* Prior ordinance history: Ords. 828 §§ 17—25, 1099, 1402 and 1621. 
 
8.16.005 - Definitions. 
A.  The terms "handler," "leash," "run at large" and "unleashed" are as defined in Section 8.04.015. 
B.  "Biting dog" means any dog that has bitten another animal or human in this or another jurisdiction at least once, without provocation and not in defense of itself or its owner or handler. It shall also include any potentially dangerous or vicious dog, as defined by the Food and Agricultural Code. 
C.  The terms "potentially dangerous or vicious dog" are as defined in Food and Agricultural Code Sections 31602 and 31603. 
(Ord. 2258 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord. 2245 § 5 (part), 2004: Ord. 2171 § 5 (part), 2000)  
8.16.010 - Care. 
It is unlawful for an owner or handler of a dog to fail to provide that dog with adequate food, water and shelter. Female dogs in the oestrual period must be confined or segregated in such a manner as to eliminate the congregating of male dogs in the immediate vicinity of and prevent access to the female. 
(Ord. 2171 § 5 (part), 2000)  
8.16.020 - Dogs at large or unlicensed. 
A.  It is unlawful for an owner or handler of a dog to allow that dog to run at large within the city limits. A dog is not at large if confined within a motor vehicle. 
B.  It is unlawful for an owner or handler of any dog required by this title to be licensed to suffer, allow or permit such dog to be within the city limits without the license tag issued for that dog, or without a collar or harness around its neck to which is attached the license tag issued pursuant to Section 8.12.030, except when the dog is securely contained in a motor vehicle or upon the owner's or handler's property. 
C.  It shall be rebuttably presumed that a person acting as a handler and weighing less than the weight of the dog being restrained lacks the physical capacity to restrain the dog and thereby prevent it from running at large. 
D.  "Handler" means any person in possession of an animal, or who is charged with or is exercising the care, control and custody of the animal. It includes the person who owns the animal when that person is exercising the care, custody and control of the animal. 
E.  "Owner" means a person or entity that has legal title to or the right to dispose of or euthanize an animal. The term may include any person who exercises apparent control or dominion over an animal to the exclusion of the rights or interest of others, even if there is no documentation establishing a legally protected or protectible property right of that person in that animal. 
(Ord. 2245 § 5 (part), 2004; Ord. 2196 § 3 (part); Ord. 2171 § 5 (part), 2000)  
8.16.030 - Trespassing. 
A.  It is unlawful for an owner or handler of a dog to suffer, allow or permit such dog to enter or remain upon any public or private property within the corporate limits without the consent of the city manager for public property or the owner or lessee of private property. This prohibition applies whether the dog is on a leash or not. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person in the actual or apparent control of a dog to allow that dog to defecate upon the streets, sidewalks and other public property or on another's private property without thereafter immediately cleaning up and disposing of the deposited feces in a trash receptacle or other suitable receptacle. If the offending dog is at large and no person claims ownership or control, the dog shall be impounded. 
C.  It is unlawful for an owner or handler of a dog to fail or refuse to immediately clean up and dispose of feces deposited by that dog upon any street, sidewalk or public or private property upon notification to the owner or handler by the owner or person in charge of the property upon which the dog defecated. 
(Ord. 2245 § 5 (part), 2004; Ord. 2171 § 5 (part), 2000)  
8.16.040 - Harboring lost dogs. 
It is unlawful to harbor or keep any lost or strayed dog for a longer period than twenty-four hours without notification to the animal control officer. Any person finding a dog which appears to be lost or strayed shall notify the animal control officer within twenty-four hours and surrender the dog to him or her upon demand. 
(Ord. 2171 § 5 (part), 2000)  
8.16.050 - Barking dogs. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to allow any dog to howl, bark or make other sounds characteristic of that species to create a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line or within a noise sensitive zone between the hours of ten pm and seven am daily for more than three minutes, or at other times for more than ten consecutive minutes or for more than a total of fifteen minutes within any sixty minute period. Any such noise disturbance also constitutes a public nuisance. 
B.  A police officer or animal control officer shall not be required to act upon an anonymous complaint or upon any other barking dog complaint unless the complainant first certifies under a written declaration executed under penalty of perjury that satisfies the scope of subsection D of this section. The police chief may require the complainant to first make such written declaration before investigating. 
C.  Unless the animal control officer or a police officer actually observes the dog barking as specified in subsection A of this section, no criminal citation shall be issued by that officer unless a complainant shall first make a written declaration and initiate a citizen arrest of the responsible person, following which the police or animal control officer shall accept custody of the responsible offender and then issue the citation or take the arrestee before a magistrate. The officer may issue an administrative citation pursuant to Chapter 1.44 without prior notification should the complainant decline to effect a citizen arrest but has made a written declaration. 
D.  In order for a violation to be processed under either subsection B or C of this section, the following requirements are established: 
1.  That the complainant has made at least one reasonable verbal or written request to the owner or the person responsible for the custody and possession of the dog to either stop the dog from barking or to eliminate the cause for the dog's disturbances. (This requirement may be waived for good cause where it may appear that there is a potential and credible threat to the physical well-being of the complainant); 
2.  That the dog can be heard audibly from an adjoining public right-of-way or at the exterior of any building on any immediately contiguous property adjacent to the property on which the dog is kept; 
3.  That the dog: (a) was not acting in defense of its property against a trespasser; and (b) was not being provoked by any person other than the owner of the property upon which the dog was situated or the person responsible for the dog. A person who is merely a lawful passerby on a public street or sidewalk shall not be considered a source of provocation; 
4.  That the barking constituted a public nuisance as defined in Section 8.16.050(A); 
5.  The identity of other witnesses or complainants. 
E.  At the time of a first complaint, the complainant shall be instructed to maintain a log to establish the following: 
1.  Date and time of barking episodes; 
2.  Duration of barking; 
3.  Address of violation; 
4.  Any factors, or the non-existence of factors, which may have contributed to the barking, howling or yelping by the dog. 
F.  It shall not be a defense to violation of subsection A of this section that there was no one at the premises at the time the dog was barking if the dog was left outdoors. 
G.  A first violation of this section shall be an infraction, and any second and subsequent violations shall be misdemeanors. 
(Ord. 2245 § 5 (part), 2004; Ord. 2196 § 3 (part); Ord. 2171 § 5 (part), 2000)  
8.16.055 - Abatement of barking dogs. 
A.  A dog that meets the criteria for a barking dog established in Section 8.16.050A is a public nuisance and is subject to abatement under the following terms and conditions: 
1.  The complainant must be a person other than the animal control officer or a police officer. 
2.  The complainant must execute a written declaration under penalty of perjury establishing facts that bring the dog within the scope of Section 8.16.050 and request that proceedings to abate the barking dog be initiated. A fee of one hundred dollars shall be deposited with the city to defray the city's reasonable costs of processing the abatement. 
3.  The city manager or delegate shall serve written notice upon both the complainant and the owner or handler of the dog, sent by both first class mail and certified mail, setting a hearing at which the owner or handler may show cause why the dog should not be abated as a public nuisance. The hearing shall be no sooner than five days, nor more than ten days from the date of mailing. The hearing shall be informal and the rules of evidence shall not apply. 
4.  If a hearing examiner appointed by the city manager determines that the dog is a public nuisance within the definition of Section 8.16.050A, the following shall be ordered: 
a.  The owner shall keep the dog indoors, within the residence, except for periods when the dog is supervised outdoors by a handler; and 
b.  The owner shall provide, attach and maintain an activated anti-barking collar device to be worn by the dog at all times. 
c.  Alternatively, the owner may elect to construct and maintain a sound proofed enclosure; or to surgically alter the dog's vocal cords to eliminate the intensity of the bark, using a licensed veterinarian to perform the procedure; or to place the dog for adoption with the animal control officer. 
B.  During such time as the owner complies with the terms of the abatement conditions in subsection (A)(4) of this section, no further criminal or administrative citations shall be issued. If the above measures are ineffective, the owner shall be issued a second written notice and be given a period not to exceed fifteen days to correct the animal's behavior, after which further administrative or criminal citations may then be issued upon the occurrence of a subsequent act in violation of Section 8.16.050A. 
C.  In severe cases in which the dog's removal and impound is necessary, civil injunctive relief by a complaint pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 527.6 or administrative abatement in accordance with Chapter 1.48 may be instituted. An inspection warrant shall be first obtained where the property owner's consent to enter and impound the dog is withheld. 
D.  Conviction for a violation of Section 8.16-.050A shall be prima facie evidence that the dog is a public nuisance, and is subject to abatement under this section without further proof of facts. The terms of abatement under subsection (A)(4) of this section may be administratively ordered in addition to any terms imposed by a court for the conviction. 
(Ord. 2171 § 5 (part), 2000)  
8.16.060 - Dogs in food establishments—Prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any owner or handler of any dog other than an assistance dog to suffer, allow or permit it to enter any restaurant, grocery store, milk depot, fruit or vegetable market, meat market or any other place of business in the city where food or foodstuffs of any character used for human consumption is manufactured, sold, served or handled. This prohibition shall not apply at an outdoor eating establishment or seating area. 
(Ord. 2245 § 5 (part), 2004; Ord. 2171 § 5 (part), 2000)  
8.16.065 - Assistance dog access. 
An assistance dog may accompany a disabled person or trainer into any public establishment or place of public accommodation within the city limits. 
(Ord. 2171 § 5 (part), 2000)  
8.16.070 - Potentially dangerous or vicious dogs—Regulations and prohibitions. 
A.  This section supplements the definitions, procedures and penalties governing dangerous and vicious dogs contained in Food and Agricultural Code sections 31601 through 31683 and Penal Code Section 399.5. The animal control officer is authorized to initiate proceedings under those sections to declare a dog to be potentially dangerous or vicious. The animal control officer shall immediately impound any dog that, by its actions in biting or menacing a human being or other animals, meets the definition of a potentially dangerous or vicious dog. 
B.  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to maintain a dog within the city limits after it has been adjudicated a potentially dangerous or vicious dog pursuant to proceedings conducted under Food and Agricultural Code sections 31621 through 31626 or this section. 
C.  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person who has owned a dog finally adjudicated to be vicious to thereafter own, possess or maintain any other dog upon property which he or she owns, leases or controls within the city limits for a period of three years from the date of final adjudication. Any dog found in violation of this condition shall be impounded and processed in accordance with Chapter 8.04. 
D.  Pursuant to the authority of Food and Agricultural Code Section 31621, as an alternative abatement proceeding for a potentially dangerous or vicious dog, the animal control officer may post a notice on the property from which the dog was impounded advising the owner, or its handler when the owner cannot be ascertained, that the dog will be declared a vicious dog and be euthanized five business days after its impound or as soon thereafter as is practicable, unless the owner or handler, during the interim, requests an administrative hearing to contest the determination. A duplicate copy of the notice shall be mailed to the owner, or the handler if the owner cannot be ascertained, by certified mail and first class mail with return address. The request for the hearing may be verbal, written or both. The animal control officer or the head of the department shall immediately cause a hearing to be held following the procedures of Penal Code Section 597.1. Any city officer or official, other than the animal control officer ordering the impound, may conduct the hearing. The hearing shall be informal in nature and the formal rules of evidence shall not apply. The hearing shall be limited to the question of whether the dog is potentially dangerous or vicious, and whether or not the dog should be euthanized or some alternative method for its care and custody be provided. The notice of decision shall be served personally on the owner, or by mail, certified and first class with return address; receipt of either shall constitute service of notice. Failure to receive the notice shall not affect the validity of service or the proceedings. Failure to request the hearing within the time allowed shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the determination or the euthanasia of the dog. The owner or handler shall be liable for all costs and fees pursuant to Section 8.04.030. 
E.  The animal control officer shall order the euthanasia of any dog determined to be potentially dangerous or vicious pursuant to this section. Euthanasia may occur immediately only upon the waiver of the hearing; otherwise, it may occur only after five business days following the date of the service of the notice of decision under subsection D of this section if no appeal has been filed with the Superior Court. If an appeal is filed, the dog shall remain in impound pending the decision on the appeal. 
F.  The city attorney is authorized to file a civil action to abate a potentially dangerous or vicious dog, when appropriate. 
(Ord. 2245 § 5 (part), 2004; Ord. 2196 § 3 (part); Ord. 2171 § 5 (part), 2000)  
8.16.080 - Communicable diseases. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person knowingly to keep any dog afflicted with mange, ringworm, distemper or any other zoonotic, contagious or parasitic disease within the city, unless such dog is under the control and treatment of a licensed veterinarian. 
B.  It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to immediately take possession of any dog not so controlled and treated, and, after confirmation of disease by a licensed veterinarian, immediately dispose of the dog in accordance with Section 8.04.020(D) unless the owner immediately places such animal in isolation under the physical control and treatment of a licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. 2171 § 5 (part), 2000)  
8.16.085 - Unvaccinated dogs. 
A.  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor to own, possess or control any dog over the age of four months unless the dog has been vaccinated with a current rabies vaccine approved by the California Department of Health Services. Proof of current vaccination shall be demonstrated by a vaccination certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian that identifies the dog, the type of vaccine, and the duration of the immunization period. 
B.  The requirements of subsection A of this section shall not apply during any period when a licensed veterinarian has certified that inoculation would seriously injure the dog. During the interim, the dog shall be kept confined to and isolated on the property of the owner within a securely enclosed yard, kennel or pen. 
C.  The animal control officer shall impound any dog that does not bear evidence of current vaccination, or for which proof of vaccination cannot be produced, or for which reasonable cause exists to believe that the dog is infected with rabies. Disposition or return of the dog shall be in accordance with Section 8.04.020, except that a dog which has bitten a human may be impounded and kept under observation for ten (10) calendar days at the expense of the owner pending verification of the existence or nonexistence of rabies. 
(Ord. 2196 § 3 (part); Ord. 2171 § 5 (part), 2000)  
8.16.090 - Nonresidents—Exception. 
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to impound any dog not in compliance with this title which is found within the corporate limits of the city or the streets immediately contiguous to those limits; provided, however, that any dog which is owned and accompanied by any person living outside the city shall not be impounded and there shall be no violation of this title if, upon demand of the animal control officer or any police officer, such person shall immediately tie or restrain such dog by a leash and remove it from the jurisdiction. However, if the owner or handler fails to restrain the dog and remove it after the demand of the animal control officer or police officer, the dog shall then be impounded. 
(Ord. 2171 § 5 (part), 2000)  
8.16.100 - Yard fences required. 
A.  It is unlawful to allow a dog to run loose in any yard in the city unless the yard in which the dog is maintained is fully enclosed with fences and/or enclosures of sufficient height, strength and method of construction to restrain and contain the animal within the yard or enclosure and prevent the animal from escaping therefrom. Subject to the height limits prescribed in Chapter 18.50, a fence shall be considered insufficient to contain a dog unless it is at least the greater of four feet in height or the height of the dog to be contained measured at its shoulders plus twelve inches. 
B.  An animal control officer is authorized to impound any dog previously observed running at large that had returned to its owner or handler's property while the officer was in pursuit or when the officer had observed or received credible information that the dog's behavior constituted a public nuisance or a clear and present danger to human or animal safety, and the dog cannot be kept safely secured within the yard, a house or an enclosure or pen on that property, or the owner or custodian refuses to properly secure the dog on the property. 
C.  Violations of subsection A of this section shall be assessed a minimum fine of one hundred dollars, if the violation is not corrected within ten calendar days from the date of citation. 
D.  Notwithstanding compliance with the height requirements for fencing of subsection A, no person shall maintain a dog on property where the height of the fence is actually insufficient to prevent the dog from jumping or leaning over the fence so as to be able to menace pedestrians who are using a public sidewalk or right-of-way. 
(Ord. 2245 § 5 (part), 2004; Ord. 2196 § 3 (part); Ord. 2171 § 5 (part), 2000)  
8.16.110 - Assistance dogs. 
In general, the regulations of this title as they may relate to assistance dogs and assistance dogs in training, shall be interpreted and administered in a way as to afford maximum compliance with the spirit and intent of the Americans With Disabilities Act. 
(Ord. 2245 § 5 (part), 2004; Ord. 2196 § 3 (part); Ord. 2171 § 5 (part), 2000)  
8.16.120 - Attack, guard and sentry dog regulations. 
This section implements the provisions of the Dog Act of 1969, as amended, Health and Safety Code Sections 121875 through 121945, regulating attack, guard and sentry dogs. Definitions within the Dog Act of 1969, as amended, govern the interpretation and effect of this section. 
A.  The provisions, requirements and prohibitions contained in the Dog Act of 1969 and in particular the provisions of Health and Safety Code Section 121918 are hereby adopted as an ordinance of the city of National City. It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for an operator of a sentry dog company, or any handler employed by that operator, to fail to observe any of the mandatory provisions or prohibitions contained in Health and Safety Code Section 121918 as adopted by this section, or any of the requirements of this title as it applies to dogs. Those provisions of state law which are separately punishable as a violation of state law shall not be deemed adopted by ordinance as a city misdemeanor to avoid state preemption issues and shall be administered by the animal control officer for regulatory purposes under this title. The chief of police, through the animal control officer as designee, is responsible for implementing the provisions of state law and this code regulating attack, guard and sentry dogs. 
B.  In addition to a business license, any person who owns or operates a sentry dog company shall apply for and obtain a separate sentry dog operator permit to operate within the city of National City and shall pay the permit fees established in the National City fee schedule prior to posting any dog for assignment within the city limits. This licensing requirement does not apply to the owner or operator of a business or premise who owns and maintains an attack, guard or sentry dog on that specific premise. 
C.  An application for a sentry dog operator permit may be denied for good cause. Good cause shall include the making of a materially false application, the demonstrated failure of the applicant to observe animal control regulations or the state humane laws in this or other jurisdictions, or the conviction of or violation of probation for animal control regulations or the state humane laws in this or other jurisdictions within the state of California. If denied, no application may be resubmitted for one year, or the successful completion of probation, whichever shall be longer. Appeals from denial of application shall be handled under subsection E of this section. 
D.  A sentry dog operator shall notify both the chief of police and the fire chief of each address within the city of assignment of each attack, guard or sentry dog at least fifteen days prior to the posting of the dog at that address. This notification requirement shall also apply to any owner or operator of a business or industrial or commercial premise which owns and maintains an attack, guard or sentry dog on that specific premise. 
E.  Permits issued under this section may be revoked, suspended or conditions of probation be imposed by the animal control officer for violations of the Dog Act of 1969 or this title. The denial of an application of the revocation or suspension of a permit by the animal control officer may be appealed by an applicant or operator in writing to the chief of police within ten calendar days from the date of denial, revocation or suspension of a license or application. The chief of police shall appoint an examiner to conduct an informal administrative hearing and make recommendations to the chief concerning the denial, revocation or suspension of a license or application. Conditions of probation imposed by the animal control officer that are consistent with the Dog Act of 1969 or this title shall not be appealable, unless revocation or suspension results from violation of those conditions of probation. Unless appealed, the action of the animal control officer shall be administratively final. If appealed, the decision of the chief of police shall constitute the exhaustion of administrative remedy and shall be administratively final. 
F.  Any notices required for administration or enforcement of this section shall be sent in accordance with Section 1.42.030. 
(Ord. 2245 § 5 (part), 2004; Ord. 2196 § 3 (part); Ord. 2171 § 5 (part), 2000)  
8.16.130 - Biting dog regulations. 
A.  Any biting dog that is not processed under Section 8.16.070 shall be microchipped with an identifying tag at the owner's expense. The owner shall also be required to maintain comprehensive liability insurance in a minimum amount of one hundred thousand dollars combined single limit, as a condition of keeping the animal within the city limits, except when removal is required pursuant to Section 8.16.070(B). Proof of compliance with this subsection shall be furnished to the animal control officer by the owner within fourteen calendar days after notification. 
B.  It is unlawful for an owner to maintain a biting dog within the city limits in violation of subsection A of this section. 
(Ord. 2258 § 2 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 8.24 - COMMERCIAL KENNELS AND CATTERIES* 
Sections: 
* Prior ordinance history: Ord. 828 §§ 28—34. 
 
8.24.010 - Commercial kennel or cattery. 
A commercial kennel is as defined in Section 18.04.368. For purposes of this chapter, the term shall also include a commercial cattery where cats are raised or bred for sale or boarded for compensation. 
(Ord. 2245 § 6 (part), 2004: Ord. 2196 § 4 (part); Ord. 2171 § 7 (part), 2000)  
8.24.020 - Commercial kennel or cattery operating permits. 
A.  Applications to maintain a kennel shall be processed as conditional use permits through the planning commission. Applications shall be denied if impermissible with the zoning of the property, or, if the operation and maintenance of a kennel at that location, with due consideration for noise, sanitation and drainage, would be incompatible with, or inimical to, existing uses on contiguous parcels, and contrary to public health and welfare. 
B.  Once approved, a kennel or cattery operating permit shall be renewed annually by the animal control officer upon payment of the annual licensing fee established in the National City fee schedule, provided the kennel or cattery continues to be maintained in accordance with Chapters 8.24 and 8.32. 
(Ord. 2245 § 6 (part), 2004; Ord. 2196 § 4 (part); Ord. 2171 § 7 (part), 2000)  
8.24.030 - Environmental conditions. 
Sanitation, food handling, construction and veterinary health conditions of approved kennels shall comply with Chapter 8.32 and all applicable provisions of state law. 
(Ord. 2171 § 7 (part), 2000)  
8.24.040 - Inspection—Suspension and revocation of issued kennel and cattery operating permits. 
A.  A kennel permit is issued on the condition that the kennel is subject to unannounced inspections at all times during normal business hours, and except in an emergency, upon twenty-four hours advance notice at all other times. A refusal to allow an inspection or interference in the inspection process constitutes grounds for the immediate suspension of the license and the impoundment of all animals maintained at that site. 
B.  A kennel or cattery operating permit may be revoked for any violation of the Penal Code, the Food and Agricultural Code or this title as it relates to the care and custody of animals. The holder of the permit may appeal an order of revocation in accordance with the procedures established in Chapter 1.42 for administrative hearings. 
C.  Decisions on the appeal shall constitute the exhaustion of administrative remedy and be final as to the issue of revocation. 
D.  The cost of any impoundment of animals shall be at the expense of the owner or permit holder and shall constitute a lien upon said animals. Only when the decision on appeal is wholly in favor of the owner or permit holder, that is, that the order of suspension was wholly unjustified, shall the costs of impoundment be waived or reimbursed to the owner or permit holder. 
(Ord. 2245 § 6 (part), 2004; Ord. 2171 § 7 (part), 2000)  
Chapter 8.32 - KEEPING OF BIRDS AND ANIMALS* 
Sections: 
* Prior ordinance history: Ords. 891 §§ 1—3, 1358 § 2 (part), 1613 § 1, 1621 and 2034 §§ 2, 3. 
 
8.32.005 - Definitions. 
The following terms are as defined in Section 8.04.015: "animal," "handler," "large animal," "large bird" and "rooster." 
(Ord. 2171 § 8 (part), 2000)  
8.32.010 - Prohibitions on keeping animals and birds. 
A.  Except as provided in Section 8.32.015 and in order to protect the public health and welfare and prevent the spread of exotic Newcastle disease, avian flu and West Nile virus, it is unlawful to keep, possess or maintain anywhere within the city limits the following animals, birds or reptiles. Prohibited animals shall include, without limitation, the following: 
1.  Any venomous snake, lizard or reptile; 
2.  Any lizard or reptile, including a nonvenomous snake, exceeding six feet in length, or twenty-five pounds in weight; 
3.  Any ferret, skunk or polecat; 
4.  Any lion, tiger, leopard, cheetah, wildcat or other members of the feline family, other than a "cat" as defined in Section 8.04.015, regardless of actual weight or age; 
5.  Any primate (monkey, chimpanzee, etc.) except a monkey which is trained as a service animal and being used to assist a disabled person in dealing with their disability, provided the monkey does not exceed twenty pounds in weight; 
6.  Any pig; 
7.  Any wolf, fox, coyote or similar member of the canid or lupus family or any canine hybrid; 
8.  Any rooster regardless of size or whether it has been surgically de-crowed; 
9.  Any other large animal that is not a horse, burro, jackass, mule, cow, sheep or goat, llama or alpaca; 
10.  Any animal or bird whose possession is restricted by federal or state law without a permit. 
B.  The prohibitions on animals in subsection A of this section shall not apply in the case of a traveling circus or carnival which has obtained a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 15.60 to conduct exhibitions of a temporary nature and duration. Animals shall be securely kept and maintained in enclosures or cages in accordance with applicable humane and sanitary laws. It shall be a condition of any permit that the permit holder will be subject to unannounced inspections. 
(Ord. 2245 § 6 (part), 2004; Ord. 2171 § 8 (part), 2000)  
8.32.015 - Restrictions on keeping certain animals, birds and reptiles. 
A.  It is unlawful to keep, possess or maintain any animal, bird or reptile not prohibited by Section 8.32.010, except as follows: 
1.  Only horses, cows, goats, sheep, burros, mules, jackasses, llamas or alpacas may be kept, possessed or maintained, either alone or in combination with each other, not to exceed a total of five combined, on a parcel of land with a minimum area of at least twenty thousand square feet. 
2.  Any combination of the following classes of animals, not to exceed a total of twenty, with each class limited by a maximum of four adult rabbits, four chinchillas, four hen chickens, four turkeys, four ducks, four geese or twenty pigeons may be kept on any property zoned for single-family residential use that is greater than twenty thousand square feet in area. 
3.  Domesticated rats or domesticated mice, hamsters, parakeets or small ornamental songbirds or other birds or animals not prohibited by Section 8.32.010 may be kept in cages or similar enclosures on any property used for residential purposes. 
4.  Any number of domesticated mice or domesticated rats, hamsters, parakeets or small ornamental songbirds or other birds or animals not prohibited by Section 8.32.010 may be kept at any laboratory or pet shop properly located in a zone allowing for such use, provided the animals are kept under humane sanitary conditions in cages or enclosures which are designed to prevent them from being at large. 
5.  A maximum of three dogs and three cats, all over the age of four months, may be kept on any parcel of property less than two acres in size, occupied by a single-family residential dwelling, and on parcels of property greater than two acres in size occupoed by a single-family residence, a maximum of six dogs and three cats all over the age of four months may be kept; provided however, that the exterior area or areas where any dogs are kept must be enclosed at all times by a barrier, fence or pen meeting the requirements of Section 8.16.100. 
6.  A maximum of two dogs or two cats, all over the age of four months, or a combination not to exceed two may be kept or maintained in any one dwelling unit located within a mobile home park, multifamily dwelling or apartment or condominium complex, if allowed by the regulations of the owner or condominium association. 
7.  Large birds not exceeding a total of two may be kept on any parcel exceeding twenty thousand square feet in area pursuant to a permit issued by the animal control officer. 
8.  In addition to any animals allowed by subsection A of this section, a resident of a dwelling unit located in a mobile home park, multifamily apartment or dwelling or condominium may keep a maximum of two small ornamental birds or song birds, if allowed by the regulations of the owner or condominium association. 
9.  Except as provided otherwise in this section, no more than three cats exceeding four months of age shall be kept on any parcel of land within the city. 
10.  Only one nonvenomous snake not exceeding six feet in length or one reptile or lizard not exceeding twenty-five pounds in weight may be kept on any property, either alone or in combination with any other animal or combination allowed by this section. 
B.  1.  Exemptions to the above limits may be allowed for educational, conservation, religious or preservation purposes upon issuance of an animal permit by the city council or city manager. No permit shall be issued unless it shall affirmatively appear that the increase in numbers or combinations will not adversely affect the public health and safety or be incompatible with uses on contiguous properties. Each permit issued is subject to revocation, nonrenewal or both for violations of this title. An annual permit fee as established in the National City fee schedule shall be paid at the time of application and each renewal. 
2.  Violations of issued permits shall result in the impoundment of any animals, birds or reptiles in excess of the number or species allowed by subsection A of this section and the revocation of the permit. The permit holder may appeal the permit revocation in accordance with Chapter 1.42 within ten calendar days from the date of revocation to show cause why the permit should not be permanently revoked. Impounded animals shall be kept at the owner's expense during the appeal or pending decision, following which disposition pursuant to Section 8.04.020 shall occur. 
3.  Violations are also subject to administrative or criminal actions, as appropriate, notwithstanding the revocation of the permit. 
C.  The authority granted by subsection A of this section to keep or maintain animals, reptiles or birds shall not apply on any property, including a mobile home park, condominium association or apartment where other restrictions or prohibitions on the keeping of animals, birds or reptiles exist, either by regulation, lease, zoning or restrictive covenants. 
(Ord. 2249, 2004; Ord. 2245 § 6 (part), 2004; Ord. 2196 § 5 (part); Ord. 2171 § 8 (part), 2000)  
8.32.020 - Conditions of keeping or maintaining permitted animals, birds and reptiles. 
Except where a prohibition or restriction is specifically made applicable to "any person," it is unlawful for an owner, handler or any other person charged with the keep, care, possession or maintenance of an animal, bird or reptile to fail to comply with the following regulations: 
A.  All dead birds, animals and reptiles, and all manure, feces, feathers, skins and related detritus shall be removed and disposed of in a sanitary manner within forty-eight hours of death or occurrence. Pending disposal, the materials shall be stored in fly-tight, air-tight containers. 
B.  All stables, pens, coops, cages and other enclosures for animals, birds and reptiles shall be cleaned at intervals not to exceed two days between cleanings and at all other times maintained in a clean, sanitary condition, free from offensive odors. An odor is offensive if it can be detected at the adjoining property line. 
C.  All enclosures where animals, birds, reptiles are kept shall be painted at an interval not to exceed twelve months. 
D.  The floors of every enclosure where birds are kept shall be kept smooth and impermeable to water, and no accumulation of filth droppings or water shall be permitted. 
E.  Floors of runs or pens for animals shall be constructed of cement or nonporous material impermeable to water. Pens shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary condition at all times. 
F.  No large animals shall be kept or maintained within twenty-five feet of any dwelling used or intended for habitation by humans, including that of the owner. 
G.  All rabbits and, except as provided in subsection H, all birds shall be kept within an enclosure that is at least twenty-five feet distant from any dwelling used or intended for human habitation. Enclosures shall be situated in the rear yard, and shall not encroach into any side yard or rear yard set back required by Title 18 of this code. 
H.  Parakeets, canaries and similar small domestic ornamental birds or song birds may be kept in a cage within a dwelling unit. 
I.  Chinchillas, hamsters, rats, mice, guinea pigs and similar rodents may be kept in an enclosure in a basement, garage or in a building attached to a dwelling unit; otherwise these animals shall be kept in a hutch or similar enclosure that is at least twenty-five feet from any other dwelling used or intended for human habitation. 
J.  Except for cats, no animals shall be allowed to run at large. Notwithstanding, a cat owner shall control his or her cat or cats so as to avoid the creation of a public nuisance. Cats at large may be trapped using a nonlethal, humane trap and shall be turned over to an animal shelter or an animal control officer within twenty-four hours. The city shall not be responsible for trapping or transportation. 
K.  No feral pigeons shall be fed or maintained on any property in the city by any person. In order to prevent attracting wild animals and birds, domestic pigeons may only be fed within a coop on the property of the owner or handler, and cats may only be fed within a residence or an enclosure on the property of the owner. 
L.  No rat or mouse that is being lawfully maintained pursuant to this chapter shall be released or allowed to run at large within the surrounding community. 
M.  No person shall feed any wild bird upon the premises of any restaurant or facility serving or selling food for human consumption. 
N.  No animal or bird shall be allowed to howl, bellow, squawk, or make a sound characteristic of that species which creates a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line or within a noise sensitive zone between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. daily for more than three minutes, or at other times for more than ten consecutive minutes or for more than a total of fifteen minutes within any sixty minute period. This provision shall not apply to public zoos. Interference by noise shall also constitute a public nuisance. The procedures set forth in Sections 8.16.050 and 8.16.055 shall be utilized in responding to noise complaints and requests for abatement, in so far as applicable, under this section. 
(Ord. 2245 § 6 (part), 2004; Ord. 2196 § 5 (part); Ord. 2171 § 8 (part), 2000)  
8.32.030 - Communicable diseases. 
It is unlawful to keep any animal in the city affected with a zoonotic or communicable disease, mange, ringworm or other parasitic condition, unless the animal is kept isolated under the care and active treatment of a veterinarian. Any animal found in violation of this section shall be impounded and disposed of in accordance with Section 8.04.020, unless the owner shall immediately place the animal under the physical control and treatment of a licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. 2171 § 8 (part), 2000)  
8.32.035 - Violations—Nuisance. 
The keeping of any animal, bird or reptile in violation of this chapter is unlawful and a public nuisance, and is punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2171 § 8 (part), 2000)  
8.32.040 - Transition provisions. 
The prohibitions and restrictions enacted and made applicable to the possession of animals and birds in this chapter shall not apply to any animal or bird lawfully owned by a resident of the city until July 1, 2004, after which date the animal shall be immediately removed from the city or be surrendered to the animal control officer for disposition or placement when possible or for destruction when not possible. After July 1, 2004, it is unlawful for any person to possess or maintain an animal or bird in violation of this chapter. This transition provision shall not apply to any bird or animal that was regulated or prohibited by the adoption of Ordinance 2171 in the year 2000, the transition period for compliance having since expired and for which any prohibition, regulation or restriction is now fully applicable. 
(Ord. 2245 § 6 (part), 2004: Ord. 2171 § 8 (part), 2000)  
8.32.050 - Animal sales in public places prohibited. 
It is unlawful to offer for sale, sell, or to exchange or transfer for any form of consideration puppies or kittens on public property or on private property open to the public, including but not limited to areas in front of stores, commercial shopping areas, commercial parking areas, swap meets and auctions. 
(Ord. 2258 § 3, 2005)  
Chapter 8.34 - BEEKEEPING 
 
8.34.005 - Purpose. 
A.  Purpose. It is the purpose and intent of this division to provide for the safe and orderly keeping of bees in the city by establishing certain minimum standards for the keeping of bees to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2415, § 3, 10-18-2016; Ord. No. 2019-2462, § 2, 8-20-2019)  
8.34.010 - Definitions. 
"Beekeeper" means a person who raises bees. 
"Beekeeping or keeping of bees" means the owning and breeding bees for their honey and other products. 
"Docile bee(s)" means Apis mellifera species (honey bees). 
"Sensitive area(s)" means areas where people, including but not limited to the elderly, small children, individuals, persons with medical conditions, or confined animals that inhabit or frequent the area, that are more at a greater health risk than the general population if stinging incidents were to occur. Sensitive areas are characterized by a demonstrated need for a greater safety buffer. Sensitive areas include, but are not limited to, schools, playgrounds, picnic areas, outdoor sports facilities, daycare centers, senior care facilities, medical facilities, and animal boarding facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2415, § 3, 10-18-2016; Ord. No. 2019-2462, § 2, 8-20-2019)  
8.34.020 - General provisions. 
A.  The keeping of bees shall not be allowed within the city, except as provided in this chapter. It is unlawful to keep or maintain any bees or hive of or for bees within the territorial limits of the city, except as allowed in this chapter. 
B.  Beehives may be kept only on lots with a minimum area of ten thousand square feet within the open space and institutional zones subject to the following: 
1.  Beehives shall only be permitted on properties dedicated to agricultural or research use and shall be accessory to the primary use of the property. Examples include, but not limited to, farms, community gardens, schools, colleges, or laboratories. 
2.  Up to four beehives may be permitted on a parcel. 
3.  Beehives shall be placed at least twenty-five feet from the property line of the traveled way of any public streets or sidewalks closest to the parcel, at least twenty-five feet from any private access easement, at least fifteen feet from any side or rear lot line, and at least twenty-five feet from all on-site and neighboring dwellings. When three or four hives are kept or maintained on a parcel, no less than a one-hundred foot separation from the beehive(s) to the on-site dwellings, neighboring dwellings, or habitable structures shall be maintained. 
4.  Beekeepers shall keep sufficient open water available near the beehives during hot and dry weather in compliance with vector control regulations. 
5.  Beehives shall be well maintained at all times. 
6.  A beehive shall be no larger than fifteen cubic feet in volume. 
7.  Only docile bee species may be permitted. 
8.  Registration with the County of San Diego Department of Agriculture, Weights, and Measures is required prior to any beekeeping activities and prior to applying for a bee keeping permit under this chapter. 
9.  The following firefighting materials shall be maintained, in good working condition, at all times when the beehive is attended by the keeper, sufficiently near the beehive so as immediately to be available in case of fire: 
a.  A shovel; and 
b.  Either a fire extinguisher of the two and one-half gallon water-under-pressure type or the five gallon back-pump type or its equivalent; or a garden hose connected to a source of water. 
10.  Beehives shall be placed no less than one hundred feet from the property line of sensitive areas closest to the beehive(s). 
(Ord. No. 2016-2415, § 3, 10-18-2016; Ord. No. 2019-2462, § 2, 8-20-2019)  
8.34.030 - Enforcement and removal. 
A.  Public nuisance. All violations of this chapter are declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated by any method provided by law, judicial or administrative, and includes remedies provided in Title 1. 
B.  Enforcement. Each day of violation or non-compliance with this chapter shall be deemed as a new and separate offense and shall be subject to all the remedies and penalties available under the law and in accordance with Title 1 or as otherwise provided by local or state law. 
C.  Summary abatement—Imminent safety hazards. If any beehive is an immediate threat to the public health and safety by virtue of the physical condition of the beehive structure or by virtue of dangerous bee behavior as determined by the city manager or his/her designee, said beehive may be immediately and summarily abated and removed. Costs incurred by the city in the abatement and removal of bees and/or beehives shall be assessed against the owner or any other responsible party in accordance with Title 1 and California Government Code Section 38773.1 or 38773.5. 
D.  Notice of violation. Whenever any beehive or part thereof, other than those causing an immediate threat to the public health and safety, constitutes an illegal beehive and/or is placed or maintained in violation of this chapter, the city manager or designee shall give written notice to all responsible parties to remove the beehive or to bring it into compliance. The notice shall specify the nature of the violation, and give directions for a cure, which may include complete removal of the beehive(s). The notice shall advise the owner, or person in charge of, or responsible for, the beehive(s) of the hearing or appeal rights set forth in Title 1, if applicable. The date for removal specified in the written notice shall not be less than ten days from the date of the mailing of the notice. 
E.  Removal of uncured violations. Whenever the responsible parties fail to comply with an order of the city manager or designee made pursuant to this section, and the time for cure has elapsed without the cure being effected, the city manager or designee may remove the beehive, or order it removed, either by the city's own force or by a private party under contract. The expense of the removal may be charged, jointly and severally, to any and all responsible parties. Such amount shall constitute a debt owed to the city. Any costs, including attorney's fees, incurred by the city in collection of the costs shall be added to the amount of the debt. 
F.  Cumulative remedies. Remedies set forth in this chapter are not exclusive. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the city from enforcing the provisions of this chapter by any other criminal, civil, or administrative proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2415, § 3, 10-18-2016; Ord. No. 2019-2462, § 2, 8-20-2019)  
Chapter 8.36 - TRANSPORTATION OF ANIMALS IN VEHICLES 
Sections: 
 
8.36.010 - Transportation of animals. 
No person shall transport or carry on any public highway or public roadway any animal in a motor vehicle unless the animal is safely within the vehicle or protected by a cab or container, secured cage, cross-tether, harness or other device that will prevent the animal from falling from, being thrown from, or jumping from, the motor vehicle. Animals transported in violation of this section shall be impounded until the owner or handler can provide proper transportation. Transportation of dogs shall comply with Vehicle Code Section 23117. 
(Ord. 2171 § 9 (part), 2000: Ord. 1893 § 1 (part), 1986)  
8.36.020 - Animals in unattended vehicles. 
A.  No person shall leave an animal in any unattended vehicle without adequate ventilation and water, or in any other manner which subjects the animal to extreme temperatures which adversely affect the animal's health or welfare. 
B.  It shall be rebuttably presumed that an interior temperature exceeding one hundred degrees Fahrenheit constitutes an extreme temperature which adversely affects the health or welfare of the animal, or that ventilation is inadequate unless at least two windows of the vehicle are each left open a minimum of one inch. 
C.  Notwithstanding subsection B of this section, the prosecuting officer may utilize any evidence or set of conditions which demonstrates a violation of subsection A of this section, including the fact that the animal's body temperature at the time of the violation exceeded the normal body temperature established by veterinary medicine or science for the species. 
(Ord. 2171 § 9 (part), 2000: Ord. 1893 § 1 (part), 1986)  
Title 9 - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
Chapters:  
Chapter 9.02 - COUNTY OF SAN DIEGO HEALTH AND SANITATION AND LAND USE FEES 
 
9.02.010 - Adoption of health and sanitation and land use fees. 
The city council may from time to time adopt by resolution a schedule of health and sanitation and land use fees to maintain uniformity with the county of San Diego fee schedule. 
(Ord. 2016 § 1, 1991)  
Chapter 9.04 - FOOD REGULATIONS* 
 
9.04 010 - County regulations adopted. 
The city council adopts San Diego County Ordinance No. 2443 pertaining to the preparation and distribution of food by reference to a copy of said ordinance, which copy is on file at City Hall and by this reference made a part hereof, subject to the following additions, amendments and deletions. 
(Ord. 1067 § 1 (part), 1963)  
9.04.020 - Sections 1 and 2 amended. 
Section 1 and the preamble to Section 2 ending with the words "to read as follows:" are deleted. 
(Ord. 1067 § 1(a), 1963)  
9.04.030 - Section 61.100 amended—City substituted for county. 
Section 61.100 is amended to read "the City Council of the City of National City" in place of the words "the Board of Supervisors." 
(Ord. 1067 § 1(b), 1963)  
9.04.040 - Section 61.101(f) amended—Health officer. 
Section 61.101(f) is amended to read as follows: "'Health Officer' means the San Diego County Director of Public Health acting as the Health Officer of the City of National City and any regularly appointed sanitarian or employee of the County of San Diego Department of Public Health." 
(Ord. 1067 § 1(c), 1963)  
9.04.050 - Section 61.101(i) amended—Definitions. 
Section 61.101(i) is amended to read as follows: "'PROVIDED BY LAW' means authorized or required by this code, the rules of the San Diego County Board of Health, the California Restaurant Act, and other applicable City ordinances and State laws, and the rules or regulations of the State Department of Public Health." 
(Ord. 1067 § 1(d), 1963)  
9.04.060 - Section 61.103 amended—Designation as ordinance. 
Section 61.103 is amended to insert the words "Section 2 of this Ordinance" for the words "Section 11.116 of this code." 
(Ord. 1067 § 1(e), 1963).  
9.04.070 - Section 61.111 amended—Treasurer assigned health duties. 
Section 61.111 is amended by substituting the words "City Treasurer of the City of National City" for the words "Health Department" and by substituting "City Treasurer of the City of National City" for the words "Health Officer." 
(Ord. 1067 § 1(f), 1963)  
9.04.080 - Section 61.113 amended—Council substituted for county board. 
Section 61.113 shall be amended by substituting the words "City Council of the City of National City" for the words "Board of Supervisors." 
(Ord. 1067 § 1(g), 1963)  
9.04.087 - Section 61.120—Permit and grade card to be posted. 
Each health permit and/or alphabetical grade card issued shall be kept posted in a conspicuous place in the establishment for which the permit is issued. The health officer shall prescribe the location in or on the establishment where such permit shall be kept posted. Alphabetical grade cards shall be posted in the front window of the establishment so as to be clearly visible to patrons entering the establishment, or in a display case mounted on the outside of the front door, or in a display case mounted on the outside front wall of the establishment within five feet of the front door, or in some other location clearly visible to patrons entering the establishment which has been approved by the health officer. The alphabetical grade card shall be protected from damage by weather conditions and shall not be defaced, marred, or camouflaged or hidden so as to prevent the general public from observing it. 
(Ord. 1731 § 1, 1981)  
9.04.090 - Section 61.121 amended—City substituted for county. 
Section 61.121 shall be amended by substituting the words "City of National City" for the word "County." 
(Ord. 1067 § 1(h), 1963)  
9.04.100 - Section 61.123 amended—Designation as ordinance. 
Section 61.123 shall be amended by deleting the words "to Sections 11.116 and 11.117 of this code" and inserting therein the words "Section 2 of this ordinance." 
(Ord. 1067 § 1(i), 1963)  
9.04.110 - Section 61.126 amended—Council substituted for county board. 
Section 61.126 shall be amended by substituting the words "City Council of the City of National City" for the words "Board of Supervisors" wherever used in said section. 
(Ord. 1067 § 1(j), 1963)  
9.04.120 - Section 61.172 amended—Applicability. 
Section 61.172 shall be amended as follows: "The provisions of this division and of other National City ordinances, County ordinances and State laws and regulations relative to health and sanitation apply to food vending vehicles." 
(Ord. 1067 § 1(k), 1963)  
9.04.121 - Section 61.177 repealed. 
Section 61.177 is repealed. 
(Ord. 1881 § 2, 1986: Ord. 1872 § 2, 1985)  
9.04.125 - Sections 61.201 through 61.210 amended—Food handler regulations. 
Sections 61.201 through 61.210 are amended to read as follows: 
 "SECTION 61.201. FOOD HANDLER. For the purpose of this ordinance, the term 'FOOD HANDLER' shall mean any person engaged or employed in a business, occupation, or establishment for which a permit is required by Section 61.110 of this ordinance who handles food in such manner that some portion of his clothing or body or body discharge might come in contact with such food or with the utensils used in connection therewith. 
 "SECTION 61.202. DIRECTOR. For the purpose of this ordinance, the term 'DIRECTOR' shall mean the Director of Building and Housing or his duly appointed deputy or representative. 
 "SECTION 61.203. DEPARTMENT. For the purpose of this ordinance, the term 'DEPARTMENT' shall mean the Department of Building and Housing. 
 "SECTION 61.204. FOOD SERVICE MANAGER. For the purposes of this chapter, 'FOOD SERVICE MANAGER' shall mean the owner, operator, licensee, or any other person who supervises all or part of food service operations within a food service operations within a food service establishment and is responsible for the actions of employees under his or her charge. 
 "SECTION 61.205. FOOD HANDLER TRAINING. No person shall act as or be engaged as a food handler unless such person: (1) possesses a valid Food Handler Training Certificate as described in subdivision (a) of this Section, or (2) is working in an establishment under the supervision of a food service manager possessing a Food Service Manager Training Certificate as described in subdivision (b) of this Section, and possess a Food Handler Card as described in subdivision (c) of this Section; provided, however, that a person may act as or be engaged as a food handler under the supervision of such food service manager for up to ten (10) calendar days without a Food Handler Card. 
 (a) Food Handler Training Certificate. Food Handler Training Certificates or renewals thereof shall be issued by the Health Officer, or any other qualified person or agency as may be designated by the Health Officer, to Persons who, immediately preceding such issuance, have successfully completed a food sanitation training course having a duration of at least three (3) hours, taught by an instructor approved by the Health Officer, and having a course content approved by the Health Officer. In order to successfully complete said course, a person must pass a proficiency test, approved by the Health Officer, with at least a 70% grade. The course of instruction shall include at least the following subjects: 
 (1) Microorganisms; 
 (2) Sources of foodborne disease microorganisms; 
 (3) Foodborne diseases; 
 (4) The means by which food is contaminated by microorganisms and toxic substances; 
 (5) Methods for protection of food to prevent foodborne illnesses; 
 (6) Control of the spread of disease through food; 
 (7) Personal hygiene for food handlers; 
 (8) The role of utensils and equipment in the transmission of diseases; and 
 (9) Dishwashing procedures. 
 The Health Officer's designation of persons or agencies to issue Food Handler Training Certificates and the Health Officer's approval of instructors and course contents may be withdrawn by the Health Officer at any time. The Food Handler Training Certificate shall be valid for three (3) years from the date of issuance. 
 (b) Food Service Manager Training Certificate. A Food Service Manager Training Certificate shall be issued by the Health Officer, or by a person or agency authorized by the Health Officer, to any person who has (1) attended a food service manager's training course, having a duration of at least 16 hours, taught by an instructor approved by the Health Officer, and having a course content approved by the Health Officer, and (2) has passed a proficiency test, approved by the Health Officer, with at least a 70% grade. The course of instruction shall include at least the following subjects: 
 (1) Microbiology of foodborne disease; 
 (2) Methods of preventing foodborne disease; 
 (3) Personal sanitation practices; 
 (4) Warewashing and sanitizing; 
 (5) Housekeeping and waste disposal practices; 
 (6) Food purchasing, transportation, receiving and storage; 
 (7) Food preparation and use; 
 (8) Sanitation of kitchens; 
 (9) Dining service; 
 (10) Legal regulations of the food industry; and 
 (11) Sanitation and safety management. 
 A Food Service Manager Training Certificate may also be issued to persons with any one of the following combinations of academic preparation and work experience, providing they pass the proficiency test specified above with at least an 85% grade: 
 A) A baccalaureate degree with at least a minor in food service occupations, environmental sanitation, biological sciences, hospitality services or related subjects and at least two years of occupational experience in said fields; or 
 B) An associate degree or 60 semester units of course work in food service occupations, environmental sanitation, biological sciences, hospitality services or related subjects and at least four years of occupational experience in said fields; or 
 C) A high school diploma or its equivalent or evidence of successful completion of secondary education and at least six years of occupational experience in the food service field. 
 A Food Service Manager Training Certificate may be issued by the Health Officer to any person possessing formal education and practical experience in the application of food sanitation principles determined by the Health Officer to be equivalent to the formal education and practical experience to that of a registered sanitarian with ten (10) years experience in food sanitation. 
 The Health Officer's designation of persons or agencies to issue Food Service Manager Training Certificates and the Health Officer's approval of instructors course contents and proficiency tests may be withdrawn by the Health Officer at any time. The Food Service Manager Training Certificate shall not expire by passage of time. 
 (c) Food Handler Card. A Food Handler Card or a renewal thereof, in a form prescribed by the Health Officer, may be issued by a food service manager possessing a Food Service Manager Training Certificate to food handlers under the manager's supervision, provided said food handlers pass a test relating to fundamental principles of sanitary food services practices, with at least a 70% grade. Said test shall be prepared by the Health Officer based on information contained in an informational booklet on sanitary food practices, which shall also be prepared by the Health Officer and which shall be distributed at cost by the Health Officer. Test records and records of the duration of the food handler's employment, including the date that the food handler began to perform food handling services, shall be maintained on the premises where the food handler is performing such services. 
 The Food Handler Card shall be valid for three years from the date of issuance, or until the food handler's performance of food handling services at the establishment where the Card was issued ceases, or until the expiration of sixty (60) days from the date that the establishment ceases to have a food service manager possessing a Food Service Manager Training Certificate to supervise the food handler, whichever occurs the earliest. 
 "SECTION 61.206. EMPLOYMENT OF FOOD HANDLERS. No person who owns or operates a business, occupation or establishment for which a permit is required by Chapter 1 of Division 1 of this Title 6 shall permit or authorize any person to act as or be engaged as a food handler in said business, occupation or establishment unless such person is legally permitted to act as or be engaged as a food handler pursuant to Section 61.205. 
 "SECTION 61.207. TRANSMISSIBLE DISEASE. No person who has contracted or is afflicted with a disease or infection determined by the Director to be a danger to public health transmissible either directly or through food or drink to other persons, or who is known or suspected to be a carrier of organisms causing such disease, or who has come in contact with any person afflicted with such communicable disease or infection, shall act or be engaged or employed as a food handler. 
 "SECTION 61.208. TRANSMISSIBLE DISEASE—MEDICAL EXAMINATION—EXCLUSION. Whenever information that the possibility of transmission of disease determined by the Director to be a danger to public health exists in a food handler or in any business, occupation or establishment for which a permit is required by this ordinance is presented to the Director, he shall investigate conditions and take appropriate action. The Director may, after investigation, and for reasonable cause, require any of the following measures to be taken: 
 (a) The immediate exclusion by the Director of any food handler from the affected business, or establishment. 
 (b) The immediate closing of any affected business or establishment until, in the opinion of the Director, no further danger of the outbreak of disease exists. 
 (c) Medical examination of the owner, employee, and his co-employees, with such laboratory examination as may be indicated; or should such examination or examinations be refused, then the immediate exclusion of the refusing owner, employee or co-employee from that or any other food establishment operation, until a medical or laboratory examination shows that the person is not infected with, or a carrier of, any such disease in a communicable form. 
 "SECTION 61.210. FEES. The city of National City shall not be liable for any fee or charge made for any test, X-ray, or examination required by this ordinance." 
(Ord. 1733 § 1, 1981: Ord. 1639 § 2, 1978; Ord. 1490 § 3, 1975: Ord. 1067 §§ 61.201—61.210, 1963)  
9.04.130 - Sections 3 and 4 deleted. 
Section 3 and Section 4 of San Diego County Ordinance No. 2443 are deleted. 
(Ord. 1067 § 1(1), 1963)  
9.04.140 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Any violation of Sections 9.04.010 through 9.04.130 constitutes an infraction and is punishable as prescribed in Section 1.20.010. 
B.  Any person guilty of any separate offense under Section 9.04.010 is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of the preceding Section 9.04.010 was committed, existed or allowed to continue. 
(Ord. 1621, 1978; Ord. 1358 § 2 (part), 1973; Ord. 1067 § 2, 1963)  
9.04.150 - Amendments adopted. 
The city council adopts San Diego County Ordinance No. 2631 (new series) and Ordinance No. 2632 (new series), pertaining to amendments to the San Diego County Code, as the code codifies San Diego County Ordinance No. 2443, adoption being by reference to a copy of said ordinances which are on file in City Hall and by this reference are made a part hereof. 
(Ord. 1083 (part), 1963)  
9.04.160 - Amendment adopted. 
The city council adopts San Diego County Ordinance No. 2663 pertaining to amendments to the San Diego County Code, as the code codifies San Diego County Ordinance No. 2443, adoption being by reference to a copy of said ordinance which is on file in City Hall and by this reference is made a part hereof. 
(Ord. 1098 (part), 1964)  
9.04.170 - Wholesale food warehouses. 
The provisions of the County Code of Regulatory Ordinances concerning permitting and regulation of wholesale food warehouses, codified at sections 61.212 through 61.256 of the County Code, are incorporated into this code by reference. 
(Ord. 2222 § 3, 2003)  
Chapter 9.06 - FOOD VENDING VEHICLES 
 
9.06.010 - Food vending vehicles—Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
A.  "Prepared food vending vehicle" means a food vending vehicle from which any food or beverage product is sold, given away, displayed or offered for sale, at retail, other than an unprepared food vending vehicle. 
B.  "Unprepared food vending vehicle" means a food vending vehicle from which is sold, given away, displayed or offered for sale, at retail, any raw or unprepared food or food product including, but not limited to, fruits, vegetables, produce, meats, fish, poultry or seafood. 
C.  "Mobile food preparation unit" means any vehicle or portable food service unit upon which food is prepared for service, sale or distribution at retail. A mobile food preparation unit shall be considered a food vending vehicle for purposes of this chapter. 
D.  A food vending vehicle may have more than one designation pursuant to this section. A vehicle with multiple designations must comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and state law. 
(Ord. 1905 § 1 (part), 1987)  
9.06.020 - Food vending vehicles—Restrictions near school facilities. 
No person shall stop or park a food vending vehicle on a public street within five hundred feet of any school property boundary in the city between the hours of seven a.m. and four p.m. on regular school days. 
(Ord. 1905 § 1 (part), 1987)  
9.06.030 - Food vending vehicles—Parking and stopping regulations. 
A.  It is unlawful to stop or park a food vending vehicle on a public thoroughfare for the purpose of preparing, selling, giving away, displaying or offering for sale any food or beverage product except for a period of time sufficient to consummate an immediate sale or sales, not to exceed ten minutes at that location or at any immediately succeeding location which is within three hundred feet of the former location where the vendor completed the immediate last transaction. 
B.  It is unlawful to stop, park or cause any food vending vehicle to remain on any public property except pursuant to the order of a lawful authority or for the purpose of making emergency repairs to the vehicle; in no event shall any person sell or give away any food or beverage product from a food vending vehicle while on any public property. 
C.  It is unlawful to stop, park or cause a food vending vehicle to remain on any private property for the purpose of selling, giving away, displaying or offering for sale any food or beverage product to any person other than the owner of such property or his agents, customers or employees. 
(Ord. 2168 § 4, 1999: Ord. 1905 § 1 (part), 1987)  
9.06.040 - Application of regulations. 
The provisions of this chapter and of state laws and regulations relative to health and sanitation apply to food vending vehicles, including mobile food preparation units. 
(Ord. 1905 § 1 (part), 1987)  
9.06.050 - Refrigeration. 
No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, a food vending vehicle upon which are carried cold perishable foods unless it is furnished with mechanical refrigeration equipment, in good working order, sufficient to maintain perishable food and beverage products at a temperature not in excess of forty-five degrees Fahrenheit, except that frozen perishable foods may be refrigerated with dry ice. 
(Ord. 1905 § 1 (part), 1987)  
9.06.060 - Certificate and identification. 
No person shall operate or cause to be operated a food vending vehicle that does not display a valid certificate of inspection, or that does not display on each exterior side of the vehicle, in letters not less than four inches high, the name of the owner or the fictitious name under which he operates, the business address and telephone number of the owner, and the distinctive identifying number or symbol assigned to the vehicle by the county department of health services. Such lettering shall be permanently affixed to the vehicle by painting, decal or other method approved by the department of health services. The name displayed on the sides of the vehicle shall correspond to the name that appears on the operator's city business license. 
(Ord. 1905 § 1 (part), 1987)  
9.06.070 - Nontransferable permits. 
Each driver, and in the case of mobile food preparation units, each cook, shall obtain a nontransferable permit from the finance department. Such permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in or on the food vending vehicle during business hours. Application for driver's permits shall be made upon forms to be furnished by the finance department. The applicant shall file with his application two recent photographs (two inches by two inches in size), one to be filed with the application, and one to be permanently attached to his permit. Each applicant shall pay a nonrefundable fee of thirty dollars upon applying for a permit. Such permit shall be in addition to the business license required by Title 6 of this code. 
(Ord. 1905 § 1 (part), 1987)  
9.06.080 - Food vending vehicles—Cleanliness required—Inspection—Certification. 
The interior and the exterior of every food vending vehicle and all equipment therein shall have smooth, washable surfaces and shall be maintained in good repair and in a sanitary manner. Each food vending vehicle, other than mobile food preparation units, shall be inspected at least semi-annually by the health officer. Food vending vehicles shall be loaded and ready for operation at the time of inspection. A certificate of inspection, valid for six months, shall be issued to food vending vehicles conforming to the requirements of this code. The certificate of inspection shall specify the food products which may be sold. 
(Ord. 1905 § 1 (part), 1987)  
9.06.090 - Unprepared food vending vehicles—Regulations. 
No person shall operate or cause to be operated an unprepared food vending vehicle without complying with all of the following regulations: 
A.  All tools, implements and receptacles shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
B.  Sufficient fly-tight containers, of metal or some other approved substance, shall be provided for the disposal of trimming and refuse and shall be emptied and washed daily. 
C.  No fish, poultry or other animal shall be cleaned in a food vending vehicle nor shall the entrails of any fish, poultry or other animal be there removed. No fish, poultry, meat or meat products shall be cut, processed or otherwise prepared in a food vending vehicle. 
D.  Scales and weighing devices shall be protected from dust, dirt, flies and other vermin and contaminants. 
E.  Every unprepared food vending vehicle shall be inspected at least semi-annually on dates scheduled by the health officer or more often if the health officer so requires. The vending vehicle shall be fully loaded and ready for operation at the time of such inspection. The health officer shall issue a certificate of inspection if his inspection discloses that the vehicle conforms to the requirements of this code and other applicable laws. The certificate of inspection shall expire six months from and after the date of its issue, and shall specify the particular food and beverage products authorized to be sold or otherwise distributed from the vehicle. 
F.  Every unprepared food vending vehicle shall be screened or otherwise enclosed in a manner approved by the health officer. 
G.  Every unprepared food vending vehicle shall establish a headquarters which shall be used for cleaning the vehicle, and storage of food products to be sold or distributed from the vehicle. 
(Ord. 1905 § 1 (part), 1987)  
9.06.100 - Prepared food vending vehicles—Regulations. 
No person shall operate or cause to be operated a prepared food vending vehicle without complying with all of the following requirements: 
A.  Such person shall establish a service room which meets all of the requirements of the health officer. The service room shall be used for the preparation and/or temporary storage of food and beverage products prior to the delivery thereof to a food vending vehicle. Prepared food vending vehicles shall be stocked only at and with food and beverages products prepared or stored at the service room. No food or beverage product shall be sold or otherwise distributed from a prepared food vending vehicle unless such product was prepared in a service room, a mobile food preparation unit complying with this chapter, a food establishment, for either of which a valid permit is held, or in some other sanitary location appropriate for such preparation which is regularly inspected by some recognized health department inspection service approved by the health officer. Food or beverage products not prepared in such service room, mobile food preparation unit, or establishment shall be stored at a service room prior to delivery to the food vending vehicle. 
B.  All prepared food, not including coffee or hot water, sold, given away, bartered, or distributed from a food vending vehicle, other than a mobile food preparation unit, shall be packaged at a service room or other fixed location approved by the health officer. 
C.  All readily perishable foods, as defined in Section 28648.5, California Health and Safety Code, shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  No such product shall be sold more than seventy-two hours after preparation. 
2.  All such products, except those prepared in a mobile food preparation unit, at the time of preparation, shall be clearly marked with the last date the food may be sold. 
3.  Dairy products may not be sold beyond the quality assurance date on the package. However, readily perishable foods which are frozen at the time of preparation may be sold beyond the seventy-two-hour interval, provided handling of such frozen food is approved by the health officer. The date of heating such frozen foods must be affixed to the package at the time of heating and such package may not be sold after said date. 
D.  Every prepared food vending vehicle shall be inspected, on dates scheduled by the health officer, as often as he deems such inspections to be necessary. The vending vehicle shall be fully loaded and ready for operation at the time of such inspection. The health officer shall issue a certificate of inspection if his inspection discloses that the vehicle conforms to the requirements of this code. 
E.  All foods found not to be in conformance with the provisions of this section shall be quarantined by the health officer. Foods under quarantine shall be disposed of by the permittee in a manner approved by the health officer. 
(Ord. 1905 § 1 (part), 1987)  
9.06.110 - Mobile food preparation units—Regulations. 
In addition to the regulations applicable to mobile food preparation units and commissaries servicing mobile food preparation units set forth in Articles 10 and 10.1 of Title 17 of the California Administrative Code, mobile food preparation facilities and commissaries servicing such units, and operation of such units shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  Mechanically refrigerated display cases shall be provided for all perishable foods on display for sale in said mobile food preparation units. 
B.  Vehicle ambient air temperature shall be maintained in each work area to provide reasonable comfort consistent with standards of the restaurant industry for the nature of the process and the work performed. If excessive heat or humidity is created, the owner or operator of the mobile food preparation unit shall make all feasible means to reduce such excessive heat or humidity to a degree providing reasonable comfort. 
C.  Mobile food preparation units shall be equipped with adequate seats with backrests for all employees to be transported in such units. Said seats shall be properly secured in place. Seats shall be not less than fifteen inches or more than nineteen inches above the floor, at least ten inches deep, and at least eighteen inches wide. The backrests shall extend to a height at least thirty-six inches above the floor. All persons being transported in a mobile food preparation unit shall be seated in said seats while the unit is in motion. 
D.  Each mobile food preparation until shall be equipped with a fully charged fire extinguisher in good condition. Drivers shall be advised of the location of the type of extinguisher used and instructed in its operation. 
E.  All cutting tools or tools with sharp edges carried in a mobile food preparation unit shall be placed in covered boxes or containers while the unit is in motion, and all other tools and cooking equipment shall be secured to the body of the vehicle while the unit is in motion. Tools with cutting edges protected by scabbards or similar guards shall be considered as being in containers. 
F.  An alternate means of exit, other than the main exit door, shall be provided in the exterior wall and in the roof of the vehicle with unobstructed passages to the outside. Such passage shall be at least twenty-four inches by twenty- four inches. The alternative means of exit shall have an interior latching mechanism which shall be operated by hand without special tools or key. Such exits shall be labeled "Safety Exit" in contrasting colors with letters at least one-inch high. 
G.  All loads carried in a mobile food preparation unit shall be secured against dangerous displacement either by proper piling or securing in a manner as to prevent shifting, toppling or otherwise becoming unstable. 
H.  No cooking or food preparation shall be done while the mobile food preparation unit is in motion. 
I.  A headquarters shall be established for all mobile food preparation units, and said units shall be stored at such headquarters when not in use. 
J.  The storage area shall be equipped with an electrical outlet to provide auxiliary power for refrigeration units on each mobile preparation unit. 
K.  The headquarters parking area for mobile food preparation units shall be paved with a paving material such as concrete or asphalt. The surface of the paving shall slope to drain and shall not pond water. Such surface shall be kept in good repair. The storage area shall contain a liquid waste dump station, and there shall be installed a concrete apron surrounding the waste receptor for a distance of ten feet in each horizontal direction sloping to the drain. 
L.  Wastewater shall not be permitted to flow into the street from the headquarter's parking area. 
M.  An approved waste dump station shall be provided at each headquarters. Mobile food preparation units shall dispose of liquid waste only at the approved waste dump station. 
N.  Lights shall be provided for the parking area to provide at least two footcandles of illumination when measured thirty inches above the pavement. 
O.  Mobile food preparation units which do not properly control food temperature, which lack running water, which have a defective liquid waste collection tank or which otherwise are unable to operate in a sanitary manner so as to pose an immediate danger to the public health may be removed from operation by order of the health officer or his designated representative. 
P.  The health officer shall be granted access to inspect mobile food preparation units during operating hours and at the headquarters during hours of loading, food preparation, and cleaning. 
Q.  Operators of mobile food preparation units shall provide the health officer with the itinerary for each unit and shall notify the health officer of any changes within twenty-four hours. 
R.  All mobile food preparation units shall bear an insignia of approval or other proof of approval issued by the state to indicate compliance with all applicable laws and regulations of the state. 
S.  All mobile food preparation units shall be inspected at least four times per year by the health officer. Mobile food preparation units shall be loaded and ready for operation at the time of the inspection. A certificate of inspection, valid for three months, shall be issued to mobile food preparation units conforming to the requirements of this code. The certificate of inspection shall specify the food products which may be sold. 
T.  The provisions of the San Diego County Code of Regulatory Ordinances concerning permanent and mobile food facilities, at Title 6, Division 1 of the County Code, are incorporated into this Code by reference. 
U.  All persons and businesses required to obtain a health-related permit or related service from the County of San Diego, Department of Environmental Health (DEH) pursuant to the Code shall pay the county the fee established in the County Code for that permit or service, including delinquent payment fees. 
(Ord. 1905 § 1 (part), 1987) 
(Ord. No. 2012-2376, §§ 2, 3, 10-16-2012)  
9.06.115 - Ice cream trucks—Regulations. 
For purposes of this section, "ice cream truck" means any motor vehicle requiring a license from the California Department of Motor Vehicles from which is sold, given away, displayed or offered for sale, at retail, any frozen dairy or water-based food products, in addition to other prepackaged food products. In addition to the provisions of this chapter applicable to prepared food vending vehicles (as defined in Section 9.06.010(A)), ice cream trucks shall be subject to the following provisions: 
A.  Place of Operation—Stopping. 
1.  Sales from ice cream trucks shall be limited to streets that have speed limits of thirty miles per hour or less. 
2.  No sales shall be made while an ice cream truck is parked within seventy-five feet of any intersection with any public street or streets as measured along the traveled way. 
3.  No sales shall be made from an ice cream truck which is within two hundred feet of another ice cream truck which has already stopped to vend. 
4.  An ice cream truck's standard warning flashers shall be in operation immediately upon the truck stopping to vend and cease operation as the truck begins to move after vending. 
B.  Hours of Operation. Sales from ice cream trucks shall be limited to the hours of ten a.m. to seven p.m. or one-half hour after sunset, whichever occurs first. 
C.  Noise Restrictions. 
1.  No person shall use, play or employ any sound, outcry, amplifier, loudspeaker, or any other instrument or device for the production of sound from an ice cream truck when the ice cream truck is stationary. 
2.  No person shall use, play or employ any sound, outcry, amplifier, loudspeaker, or any other instrument or device for the production of sound from an ice cream truck after seven p.m. or one-half hour after sunset, whichever occurs first. 
3.  No person shall use, play or employ any sound, outcry, amplifier, loudspeaker, or any other instrument or device for the production of sound from an ice cream truck in such a manner as to create a violation of any of the provisions of Title 12, Noise Control. 
D.  Restrictions on Riders. No one other than one driver and one additional person shall be allowed to ride on an ice cream truck that is in operation. The additional person may be: 
1.  An employee of the ice cream truck business owner, if said employee is an individual other than the driver; 
2.  The ice cream truck business owner if the owner is an individual other than the driver; or 
3.  A trainee. 
E.  Vehicle Inspection—Certification. 
1.  All ice cream trucks shall be inspected by the city engineer or his/her designee, who shall notify the finance department of the results of the inspection. 
2.  Upon successful completion of the ice cream truck inspection, the ice cream truck business owner shall apply to the finance department for certification. It is unlawful for an ice cream truck business owner who does not have a current, valid certification issued by the finance director or his/her designee to operate an ice cream truck on city streets. 
3.  The ice cream truck business owner shall biennially present each ice cream truck for inspection by the city engineer or his/her designee, and certification by the finance director or his/her designee. 
4.  At or prior to the time of the inspection, the ice cream truck business operator shall present payment of the certification fees as set forth by the schedule of fees established by city council resolution. 
5.  The ice cream truck business operator shall maintain each ice cream truck in such condition that: 
a.  All doors, windows, hood and trunk shall open and close securely; 
b.  The inside of the ice cream truck shall be clean and free of litter and trash; 
c.  There is a trash receptacle that shall be made accessible to the public when sales occur in which patrons can place package wrappers and trash; 
d.  The exterior of the ice cream truck shall be clean and in good repair, and not have any peeling, dents, rust, scratches or missing components which are discernible at a distance of five feet or more from the truck; 
e.  Advertising decals and price lists shall be placed only on the vending side of ice cream trucks and shall use a maximum area of twenty-four square feet. 
6.  The ice cream truck business owner shall have and maintain in clean operating condition on each ice cream truck, the following safety equipment: 
a.  Signs painted or mounted on the front and back of each truck using black four-inch-tall letters on a yellow background with a black one-inch border around each sign. The sign on the front and back of each truck shall read "CHILDREN CROSSING" and be eight inches high by forty-eight inches wide. An additional sign or signs shall be painted or mounted on the rear of each truck above the first sign and shall read "WARNING" in English and Spanish using the same size letter and paint requirements. 
b.  Standard warning flashers. 
c.  Any other safety equipment required by the California Vehicle Code. 
7.  The finance director or his/her designee shall affix a suitable certificate on each certified truck, identifying the truck as having successfully passed vehicle inspection. 
8.  Each business owner shall maintain an identification number, provided by the finance director or his/her designee, painted on the sides and back of each ice cream truck. The number shall be of such color, size and placement so that the identification number can be easily read at a distance of ten feet. 
(Ord. 2127, 1996)  
9.06.120 - Restriction on vehicle use. 
Food vending vehicles shall be used for no purpose other than those purposes permitted by this chapter, unless the health officer has approved in writing some other proposed use of such vehicle. 
(Ord. 1905 § 1 (part), 1987)  
9.06.130 - Authority to arrest.* 
The health officer and any officer or employee designated by him is hereby authorized to arrest a person without a warrant whenever he has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a misdemeanor in his presence which is in violation of any statute, ordinance or regulation relating to the operation of mobile food preparation units which the health officer or such officer or employee has the duty to enforce, including but not limited to provisions of the State of California Health and Safety Code, provisions of the California Administrative Code, and all city ordinances relating to mobile food preparation units. In any case in which a person is arrested pursuant hereto and the person arrested does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, the public officer or employee making the arrest shall prepare a written notice to appear and release the person on his promise to appear, as prescribed by Chapter 5C (commencing with Section 853.6) of the Penal Code. The provisions of said Chapter 5C shall thereafter apply with reference to any proceeding based upon the issuance of the written notice to appear. Authority to arrest is granted in accordance with Penal Code Section 836.5. 
(Ord. 1905 § 1 (part), 1987) 
(Ord. No. 2019-2458, § 3, 5-21-2019) 
* This section shall not apply to activities permitted under Chapter 13.30, Vending on city sidewalks and pedestrian pathways.  
9.06.140 - Responsibility for violations. 
The owners, managers or operators of any food vending vehicle are responsible for the violation of any provisions of this chapter by their servants, agents or employees. 
(Ord. 1905 § 1 (part) 1987)  
Chapter 9.07 - FOOD CATERERS AND CATERING EQUIPMENT RENTALS 
 
9.07.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this article, the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
A.  "Caterer" means a business which prepares food for a catering function for events such as, but not limited to, picnics, weddings, banquets, parties, gatherings. 
B.  "Catering vehicle" means a vehicle upon which food, beverages and related service equipment are transported related to a catering function. 
C.  "Catering function" means any event where a caterer provides food for a person or persons at other than an existing health regulated establishment. A catering function shall not include those functions that are conducted by persons engaged or employed in youth organizations, churches, church societies, private clubs or other nonprofit associations of a religious, philanthropic, civic improvement, youth development, social, political, or educational nature which purchase food, food products, or beverages, for service without charge to their members or to the general public at fund-raising events, for consumption on or off the premises at which the food, food products, or beverages are served or sold, if the service or sale of such food, food products or beverages does not constitute a primary purpose or function of the club or association, and if no employee or member is assigned full-time to care for or operate equipment used in such an arrangement. 
D.  "Catering equipment rental establishment" means an establishment that provides food service utensils such as dishes, tableware, pots and pans to caterers or to the public but does not provide catering services. 
E.  "Department" means the San Diego Department of Health Services. 
(Ord. 1996 (part), 1990)  
9.07.020 - Application of legislation. 
The provisions of Division I, Title 6, of the San Diego County Code of Regulatory Ordinances and the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law (CURFFL) relative to food handler training and the preparation and distribution of food are hereby made applicable to caterers and caterer operations. 
(Ord. 1996 (part), 1990)  
9.07.030 - Health permits and fees. 
Persons operating as caterers and catering equipment rental establishments are considered to be operating a health regulated establishment and are subject to public health permit requirements as specified in the San Diego County Code of Regulatory Ordinances. Such persons shall pay the permit fees prescribed for restaurants in Section 9.04.170 of this code and shall be subject to penalties for delinquent fee payment as set forth in Section 65.104 and 65.105 of the San Diego County Code of Regulatory Ordinances. 
(Ord. 1996 (part), 1990)  
9.07.040 - Notification of catering events. 
When requested by the deputy director of environmental health services, caterers shall notify the department of the time, date and location of each catering function in a manner specified by the department. 
(Ord. 1996 (part), 1990)  
9.07.050 - Potentially hazardous foods. 
All potentially hazardous foods as defined in Section 27531 of the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law that are stored, held, transported or served by a caterer must be protected from contamination and kept at temperatures as required by the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law. 
(Ord. 1996 (part), 1990)  
9.07.060 - Toilet facilities. 
Adequate toilet and handwashing facilities, as determined by the deputy director of environmental health services, must be reasonably available in the vicinity of any location where food is prepared or served. 
(Ord. 1996 (part), 1990)  
9.07.070 - Catering vehicles. 
No person or company shall operate or cause to be operated a catering vehicle without complying with the following: 
A.  Such person or company shall have a valid health permit as required by Section 61.192 of the San Diego County Code of Regulatory Ordinances. 
B.  Foods and food containers shall be carried in compartments with cleanable interior surfaces. 
C.  Vehicles shall be maintained in a clean condition. 
(Ord. 1996 (part), 1990)  
9.07.080 - Catering equipment rental establishment. 
No person or company shall operate or cause to be operated, a catering equipment rental establishment without complying with the following: 
A.  All food service equipment shall be stored in a building that meets the requirements of the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law. 
B.  All food service equipment such as dishes, glasses, tableware, pots and pans shall be cleaned and sanitized by methods prescribed in the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law. 
(Ord. 1996 (part), 1990)  
Chapter 9.08 - SLAUGHTERHOUSES 
 
9.08.010 - Prohibited area. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to slaughter any animal, or to erect, maintain or use, or cause to be erected, maintained or used, any house, shed or other building as a slaughterhouse, or to dress or clean any slaughtered animal within that portion of the city described as follows: 
All that portion of the city lying north of the northerly line of 20th Street produced westerly to an intersection with the line of ordinary high tide in the bay of San Diego, and east of the westerly line of National Avenue. 
(Ord. 605 § 1, 1931)  
9.08.020 - Violation—Each day constitutes offense. 
Each day in which any building is maintained or used as a slaughterhouse within that portion of the city described in Section 9.08.010 is a separate violation of this chapter and punishable as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. 605 § 2, 1931)  
9.08.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is, upon conviction, guilty of an infraction and punishable as prescribed in Section 1.20.010. 
(Ord. 1621, 1978; Ord. 1358 § 2 (part), 1973: Ord. 605 § 3, 1931)  
9.08.040 - Violation—Declared nuisance. 
The slaughtering of animals or the maintenance of any slaughterhouse within that portion of the city described in Section 9.08.010 is declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 605 § 4, 1931)  
Chapter 9.12 - ABATEMENT OF WEEDS AND OTHER FIRE HAZARDS 
 
9.12.010 - Public nuisance declared—In general. 
Any of the following conditions are declared to constitute a public nuisance: 
A.  When the fire chief or his/her designee determines that there exists in any building or on any premises combustible, hazardous or explosive materials or dangerous accumulations of rubbish; or unnecessary accumulations of wastepaper, boxes, shavings or any highly flammable materials which are so situated as to endanger life or property; or finds obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows that reasonably tend to interfere with the operations of the fire department or the egress of the occupants of such building or premises; or finds that the effectiveness of any exit door, attic separation or any fire separation wall is reduced; or finds that any provision of the Uniform Fire Code is being violated. 
B.  When the fire chief or his/her designee deems any chimney, smokestack, stove, oven, incinerator, furnace or other heating device, electric fixture or any appurtenance thereto, or anything regulated under a nationally recognized standard in or upon any building, structure or premises not specifically mentioned in the Uniform Fire Code, to be defective or unsafe so as to create a hazard. 
C.  When the fire chief or his/her designee finds any condition which in his/her judgment increases or may cause an increase of the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than that customarily recognized as normal by persons in the public service regularly engaged in preventing, suppressing or extinguishing fire or any thing or act which may obstruct, delay, hinder or interfere with the operations of the fire department or the egress of occupants in the event of fire. 
(Ord. 2083 § 1 (part), 1994)  
9.12.020 - Public nuisance declared—Weeds and other flammable materials. 
All weeds growing or located upon streets, sidewalks or private property are declared to be a public nuisance. For purposes of this chapter, "weeds" shall include the following: 
A.  Weeds which bear seeds of a downy or wingy nature; 
B.  Sagebrush, chaparral, and any other brush or weeds which attain such large growth as to become, when dry, a fire menace to adjacent improved property; 
C.  Weeds which are otherwise noxious or dangerous; 
D.  Poison oak and poison ivy when the conditions of growth are such as to constitute a menace to the public health; 
E.  Dry grass, stubble, brush, litter, or other flammable material which endangers the public safety by creating a fire hazard in a portion of the city which has been zoned for single and multiple residence purposes. 
(Ord. 2083 § 1 (part), 1994)  
9.12.030 - Nuisance—Abatement. 
If it is determined by the fire chief or his/her designee that a public nuisance, as herein defined, exists on any lot or premises, or upon any sidewalk, parking area or street adjacent to such lot or premises, an abatement notice may be issued to the responsible person to abate the public nuisance in accordance with Section 1.36.030 of this code. Upon issuance of the abatement notice, the procedures for abatement of public nuisances and recovery of costs therefor set forth in Chapter 1.36 of this code shall be followed. 
(Ord. 2083 § 1 (part), 1994)  
9.12.040 - Nuisance—Penalty. 
The owner, occupant, or agent of any lot or premises within the city who permits or allows the existence of a public nuisance as defined in this chapter, upon any lot or premises owned, occupied, or controlled by said person, or who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof is punishable as prescribed by Section 1.20.010. 
(Ord. 2083 § 1 (part), 1994)  
Chapter 9.16 - GARBAGE 
 
9.16.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used, they shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to such respective terms in this section. 
A.  "Commercial unit" includes each building and space primarily used for distributing and selling goods, wares and merchandise. 
B.  "Garbage" means all refuse and waste, fruit, vegetable and animal matter, prepared and intended for human consumption, and not so used. 
C.  "Manufacturing unit" includes each building and space primarily used for producing and making goods, wares and merchandise. 
D.  "Multiple residential unit" includes: 
1.  Each building having two or more spaces primarily used as a separate family dwelling; or 
2.  Two or more residential units situated on one lot. 
E.  "Person" means person, firm or corporation. 
F.  "Residential unit" includes each building, and space primarily used as a dwelling. 
G.  "Rubbish" means refuse and waste material, whether combustible or noncombustible, not included within the definition of garbage as herein defined, including but not limited to paper, rags, leaves, glass, cans, ashes, tree and vine trimmings. It shall not include plaster, rock, sand, dirt, automobile frames or fenders, or waste material pertaining to building operations, construction or repair, water heaters or furniture. 
(Ord. 1038 § 2, 1962)  
9.16.020 - Collection—Contract. 
At such times as the city council from time to time determines, it shall award an exclusive contract to collect, convey, transport, and dispose of garbage and rubbish within the city for a period not to exceed ten years. The contract shall contain such terms, conditions and provisions as the city council deems appropriate to insure that rubbish and garbage are collected from the householders, businesses and other persons in the city, and appropriately disposed of. Any contract awarded shall be secured by a faithful performance bond in an amount not less than twenty-five thousand dollars. 
(Ord. 1038 § 3, 1962)  
9.16.030 - Collection—Terms—Generally. 
The terms and conditions by which rubbish and garbage may be removed from residential, multiple residential, commercial and manufacturing units, shall from time to time be fixed by the city council by resolution duly passed and adopted. These terms and conditions may include, but are not limited to, provisions as to the types and sizes of garbage and rubbish containers, and method, hours and place of collection of garbage and rubbish. The city council, within its discretion, may establish separate and different terms and conditions for residential units, for multiple residential units, for commercial units and for manufacturing units. 
(Ord. 1038 § 4, 1962)  
9.16.040 - Violations designated. 
It is unlawful for any person: 
A.  To keep or permit to accumulate any garbage or rubbish on any premises under the control or in the possession of such person; or 
B.  To throw or deposit, or cause to be thrown or deposited, any garbage or rubbish or refuse or trash or offal or human or animal excreta on or into any street, lane, alley, public place, or property, building to another; or 
C.  To bury or burn, or cause to be buried or burned, any garbage or rubbish, on property owned by the person, or in any public street, alley, public place, vacant property or in or on any premises within the city; or 
D.  Other than the owner or occupant of the premises, or the person to whom a contract is awarded for the collection of garbage and rubbish, pursuant to Section 9.16.020 above or the employee of such contractor, to take or empty any garbage or rubbish container, or to remove any such container from the location where the same was placed by or on behalf of the owner or occupant, or to remove the contents from any such container; or 
E.  Other than the person awarded a contract for the collection of garbage and rubbish pursuant to Section 9.16.020 above to engage in the business of collecting, conveying, or transporting rubbish or garbage. 
(Ord. 1181 1/2 (part), 1967; Ord. 1038 § 5, 1962)  
9.16.050 - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as prescribed in Section 1.20.010. 
(Ord. 1621, 1978; Ord. 1358 § 2 (part), 1973: Ord. 1038 § 6, 1962)  
Chapter 9.20 - NUISANCES 
 
9.20.010 - Fish cannery. 
A.  The city council finds, determines, and declares that the operation of a fish cannery, and its relating accessory uses, would be a public nuisance and the same is hereby forbidden within the limits of the city. 
B.  The term "fish cannery" as used in this section means any process by which fish, or parts thereof, is converted from its natural state into any food product, by-product, or fertilizer; and the term also includes all the related accessory processes as normally associated with fish canneries. 
(Ord. 1215 (part), 1969)  
Chapter 9.24 - HARBOR REGULATIONS 
 
9.24.010 - Dumping generally—Obstructions—Permission. 
No substance that will sink or form an obstruction to navigation shall be deposited in the water or on the shore of San Diego Harbor without first obtaining permission, in writing, from the city manager. 
(Ord. 877 § 1, 1955)  
9.24.020 - Dumping certain materials prohibited. 
No person, firm, association or corporation shall discharge or deposit, or shall cause or suffer to be discharged or deposited, or to pass, in or into the waters of the bay of San Diego, any coal tar or refuse or residuary of coal, petroleum, asphalt, bitumen, or other carbonaceous material or substance. 
(Ord. 877 § 2, 1955)  
9.24.030 - Inflammable liquids—Dumping prohibited. 
It is unlawful to throw, discharge or deposit, or cause, suffer or procure to be thrown, discharged or deposited, either from out of any ship, barge or other floating craft of any kind, or from the shore, wharf, manufacturing establishment or mill of any kind, any tar, oil or inflammable liquid or refuse matter of any kind or description whatever into the harbor of San Diego, and it is unlawful to discharge or cause, suffer or procure to be deposited, materials of any kind in any place, or on the banks of the harbor of San Diego where the same is liable to be washed into the harbor, either by ordinary or high tides, or by storm, floods or otherwise, whereby navigation may be impeded or obstructed. Provided, that nothing herein extends to or prohibits the operation in connection with the improvement of the harbor or construction of public works considered necessary and proper by the city council. 
(Ord. 877 § 3, 1955)  
9.24.040 - Obstructions—Removal. 
In case of any vessel, boat, watercraft, raft or other obstruction sinking or grounding, or being unnecessarily delayed in the harbor of San Diego, in such manner as to stop, interfere with or endanger navigation, or otherwise unnecessarily obstruct the harbor or tideland approaches thereto, the city manager has the right to take immediate possession of such vessel, boat, watercraft, raft or other obstruction so far as to remove it, and to immediately clear the harbor or tideland approaches thereto of the obstruction, using his best judgment to prevent any unnecessary damage to such craft or obstruction aforesaid, and no one shall interfere with or prevent such removal. 
Any sunken or abandoned vessels, boats, watercraft, rafts, wharfs, buildings or other obstructions shall be subject to be removed, destroyed, sold or otherwise disposed of by the city council at its discretion and at the expense of the owner or owners and without liability for any damage to the owner or owners. 
The city manager may, in his discretion, give notice in writing to the owner or owners of any such craft or obstruction, requiring them to remove it. Provided, that the expense of removing any such craft or obstruction as aforesaid is a charge against such craft and/or obstruction or contents thereof, and if the owner of the same fails or refuses to reimburse the city for such expense within thirty days after notification, then the city manager may secure bids for the removal thereof, and may sell the aforesaid craft, obstruction and/or contents, or any part thereof that may not have been destroyed in removal, and the proceeds of such sale, or so much thereof as may be necessary to reimburse the city for the expense of such removal, shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(Ord. 877 § 4, 1955)  
9.24.050 - Obstructions—Voluntary creation unlawful—Owner responsibility. 
It is unlawful to tie up or anchor vessels or other craft in the harbor of San Diego in such manner as to prevent or obstruct the passage of other vessels or craft, or to voluntarily sink, or cause to be sunk, vessels or other craft in the waters of the harbor; or to float loose timbers, logs or piles in the harbor in such manner as to obstruct, impede or endanger navigation; and whenever a vessel or other craft is wrecked or sunk in the harbor accidentally or otherwise, it shall be the duty of the owner of such sunken craft to immediately mark it with a buoy or beacon during the day and a lighted lantern by night, and to maintain such mark until the sunken craft is removed or abandoned. 
The neglect or failure of such owner so to do is unlawful; and it shall be the duty of such owner of such sunken craft to commence the immediate removal of the same, and to prosecute the removal diligently; and failure to do so is considered as an abandonment of such craft, and shall subject the same to removal by the city council. 
(Ord. 877 § 5, 1955)  
9.24.060 - Violation—Penalty. 
Anyone who violates, or knowingly aids or abets a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, is guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof is punishable as provided in Section 1.20.010. 
(Ord. 1621, 1978; Ord. 1358 § 2 (part), 1973: Ord. 877 § 6, 1955)  
Chapter 9.28 - TRAILER PARKS* 
* Cross Reference: For licensing of trailer parks, see Title 6. 
 
9.28.010 - Restrictions—Generally. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person owning or operating an auto and trailer park, to use or cause or permit to be used for occupancy: 
1.  Any trailer coach from which any tire or wheel has been removed, except for the purpose of making emergency repairs; 
2.  Any trailer coach to which are attached any rigid water, gas or sewer pipes; provided, however, that approved metal tubing not to exceed one-half inch inside diameter may be used for water and gas. 
3.  Any trailer coach which is permanently attached with underpinning or foundation to the ground; 
4.  Any trailer coach which does not conform to the requirements of the California State Motor Vehicle Code governing the use of trailers on public highways; 
5.  Any trailer coach which is in an insanitary condition; 
6.  Any trailer coach which is structurally unsound and does not protect its inhabitants against the elements. 
B.  No buildings or structures shall be permitted on any trailer site; provided, however, that an awning of fire resistant material, as approved by the fire chief of the city shall be permitted that is not enclosed or subject to enclosure on one-half of one side vertically and further provided that such semi-enclosure shall not exceed seventy square feet in area. 
(Ord. 893 § 12, 1955)  
9.28.020 - Renting prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person owning or operating an auto and trailer park to rent as lessor or hold out for rent any trailer coach in an auto and trailer park. 
(Ord. 893 § 13, 1955)  
9.28.030 - Tents prohibited. 
No tents may be erected or occupied in an auto trailer park. 
(Ord. 893 § 14, 1955)  
9.28.040 - Parking—Generally. 
It is unlawful to use a trailer for living or sleeping purposes except when parked within a licensed trailer park. 
(Ord. 893 § 15, 1955)  
9.28.050 - Parking—City streets. 
It is unlawful to camp overnight or to park a trailer coach overnight upon any portion of the right-of-way of any public street or alley. 
This provision shall not apply where a trailer coach is parked for the purpose of making emergency repairs. 
(Ord. 893 § 16, 1955)  
9.28.060 - Trailer sites—Specifications. 
A.  Each trailer site in an auto and trailer park shall not be less than one thousand square feet in area and shall be not less than twenty-five feet in width. The corners of said area shall be clearly and distinctly marked. Each trailer site shall be numbered or otherwise marked for identifications purposes. 
B.  A lighted bulletin board, indicating the location of each trailer space, must be displayed at or near the office. 
C.  No trailer coach shall be located closer than six feet from any building or another trailer coach. 
D.  Each trailer coach and each building shall not be located closer than four feet from the boundary line of the trailer park. 
E.  Each trailer site shall front upon a driveway not less than thirty feet wide, except that where off-street parking facilities are provided, the driveway shall be not less than twenty-five feet wide, and in such case adequate signs shall be posted and maintained indicating that parking is forbidden in such driveways. All driveways shall have clear and unobstructed access to a public thoroughfare. Each trailer shall be parked on each site with the hitch fronting toward this driveway and no stationary fencing or structures shall be permitted in front of or attached to the trailer. 
In addition to the above requirements, it shall be required that adequate off-street parking facilities be provided elsewhere in the trailer park for visitors in the ratio of one off-street parking space for every ten trailer spaces in said park. 
F.  An auto and trailer park shall not accommodate any trailer coach when there are no available trailer sites within the park. 
(Ord. 983 § 17, 1955)  
9.28.070 - Toilet facilities—Generally. 
A.  There shall be not less than two water closets in a separate compartment for each sex for the first fifteen trailer sites or fractional part thereof. There shall be one additional water closet for each sex in a separate compartment for every ten additional trailer sites or fractional part thereof. Entrance to separate compartments for men and women shall be not less than ten feet apart. 
Twenty-five percent of the required water closets for men may be substituted by approved urinals or approved equivalent. One shell or lip urinal or twenty-four inches of urinal trough may be computed as one water closet. 
B.  Toilet facilities shall not be further than two hundred feet from each trailer site. 
C.  Each toilet shall be for the exclusive use of the occupants of the trailer sites in the auto and trailer park. 
D.  Every water compartment in any building in an auto and trailer park shall be at least thirty inches in clear width. 
E.  The public toilets shall be maintained readily accessible to the tenants at all times. 
F.  In every auto and trailer park, water closets for men shall be distinctly marked "Men"; and water closets for women shall be distinctly marked "Women." In addition, the location of water closets shall be plainly indicated by signs. 
G.  The floor of every water closet compartment shall be constructed and shall be maintained in a waterproof condition by the use of cement, concrete, or other approved waterproof material. The waterproof material shall be applied upward on the interior walls of the water closet compartment to a height of not less than twelve inches above the floor. 
(Ord. 893 § 18, 1955)  
9.28.080 - Toilet facilities—In trailers. 
It is unlawful for any person to use, or permit the use of, any toilet in any trailer coach within an auto and trailer park, unless such toilet and trailer park meet the requirements of Title 8, Art. 3, Chapter 9 of the California Administrative Code as now set forth therein, or as the same may be amended from time to time. The permitted use of toilet and bathing facilities within the trailer coach shall not reduce the requirements of toilet and bath facilities required herein. 
(Ord. 893 § 19, 1955)  
9.28.090 - Bathing facilities. 
A.  In every auto and trailer park shower baths or other bathing facilities with hot and cold running water shall be installed for each sex in separate compartments for every fifteen or fractional part of fifteen trailer sites. Every compartment shall be provided with a self-closing door, constructed of a material which will not absorb water, or otherwise equipped with a waterproof draw curtain. Shower baths or other bathing facilities provided herein shall not be farther than two hundred feet from each trailer site. Bathing facilities shall be accessible at all times. 
B.  The floor of every shower bath compartment shall be constructed and shall be maintained in a waterproof condition by the use of cement, concrete or other approved waterproof material. The walls of every shower bath compartment to a height of not less than six feet above the floor shall be constructed of ceramic or metal tile or sheetmetal or equivalent material. 
C.  Wooden or cloth mats or grids shall not be used in bathing compartments. 
(Ord. 893 § 20, 1955)  
9.28.100 - Toilet and shower facilities—Buildings. 
Every water closet compartment or compartment containing bathing facilities shall be: 
A.  Cleaned daily and disinfected with a hypochloride solution or equivalent; 
B.  Maintained free from obnoxious odors, flies, mosquitoes, or other insects and the interiors shall be kept well painted. All facilities shall be maintained in good repair; 
C.  Provided with one or more windows having an aggregate area of not less than six square feet. However, if the room contains more than one water closet, bath or urinal, the total window area shall be equivalent to three square feet for each water closet, bath or urinal, but need not exceed one-fourth of the superficial floor area of the room. Fifty percent of the required window area shall be openable; 
D.  Windows and doors shall be protected with fly-tight screening; 
E.  All toilet and shower buildings shall be well illuminated both day and night; 
F.  There shall be constructed in every trailer park a laundry compartment with not less than two laundry trays supplied with hot and cold water; 
G.  The floors and at least twelve inches of the walls above the floor shall be constructed of approved waterproof masonry composition; 
H.  Each laundry compartment shall have window area equal to at least one-eighth of the floor area, but in no case shall it be less than nine square feet. Fifty percent of the required window area shall be openable; 
I.  In every auto and trailer park there shall be set aside a space convenient to the laundry facilities for the occupants of the trailer sites to dry clothes; 
J.  There shall be installed in every auto and trailer park one or more slop sinks equipped with running water, which shall be located at each public utility building; 
K.  There shall be not less than two lavatories with hot and cold running water for each sex installed in every building in an auto and trailer park containing public toilets. 
(Ord. 893 § 21, 1955)  
9.28.110 - Water supply. 
A.  There shall be in every auto and trailer park an adequate supply of pure water for all the requirements of the trailer park; the water shall be obtainable from faucets installed at each trailer site. Water distribution and pipe sizes shall be designed in accordance with the National Bureau of Standards, BMS 79. Each independent trailer shall be considered as six fixture units. 
B.  No drinking vessels or cups for common use are permissible in any auto and trailer park. 
C.  Drinking fountains, if installed, shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and shall be of a type approved by the enforcement agency. 
(Ord. 893 § 22, 1955)  
9.28.120 - Garbage disposal. 
A.  In every auto and trailer park a sufficient number of rubbish containers and metal garbage cans with covers, appropriately labeled, shall be of a size adequate to contain the refuse produced by the trailer park. 
B.  All garbage, waste and rubbish in every auto and trailer park shall be removed from the premises and disposed of without creating a nuisance. 
C.  A fly proof building, or a fly proof portion of a building, equipped with a sloping concrete floor, a four inch drain, and running water shall be provided for the storage of garbage and trash containers. 
(Ord. 893 § 23, 1955)  
9.28.130 - Sewage disposal. 
It is unlawful to permit any waste water or material from sinks or other plumbing fixtures in a public toilet or bath building or in a trailer coach to be deposited upon the surface of the ground, and all such fixtures must be connected to a public sanitary sewer system. For the purposes of designing sewage disposal systems, each trailer coach shall be considered as six fixture units. 
(Ord. 893 § 24, 1955)  
9.28.140 - Trailer sites—Maintenance. 
The area or tract of land upon which an auto and trailer park is situated and each trailer site shall be: 
A.  Adequately drained and graded; 
B.  Driveways shall be surfaced with two inches of road mix pavement or better and the surfacing shall be maintained in good repair; 
C.  All areas, other than landscaped areas or driveways, shall be covered or treated with an oil seal surface or better; 
D.  Maintained free from dust; 
E.  Maintained clean and free from accumulation of refuse, garbage, rubbish or debris; 
F.  The trailer site and the space directly beneath each trailer coach shall be maintained clean and free from refuse, rubbish or other impediments; 
G.  Public address systems or loudspeakers shall not be used between the hours of six p.m. and eight a.m. 
(Ord. 893 § 25, 1955)  
9.28.150 - Liquefied petroleum gases. 
The location, installation, marking, filling, maintenance and use of LPG tanks and associated equipment shall be in accordance with the industrial safety orders of the California State Division of Industrial Safety as affects LPG. 
Each trailer coach shall be limited to not more than two tanks of a capacity of six gallons each and said tanks shall be substantially fastened to the front portion of the trailer coach. 
(Ord. 893 § 26, 1955)  
9.28.160 - Electrical installations. 
All auto and trailer parks shall install and provide an electrical service and distribution system as follows: 
A.  Each trailer site shall be provided with an appliance outlet receptacle rated at not less than thirty amperes, installed on a separate branch circuit of not smaller than No. 12 A. W. G. wire, and protected by a nonadjustable, nontamperable over current protective device rated at not more than fifteen amperes. 
B.  Each appliance outlet shall be located so that not more than twenty-five feet of flexible type "S" cord need be used to connect a trailer to such outlet. 
C.  All electrical equipment, conductors and devices shall be installed in rigid metal conduit of an approved type and design for the particular location and use, except as follows: 
1.  Exposed wires for meter loops which are protected from accidental contact and mechanical injury and are accessible only to authorized persons; 
2.  Multi-conductor cables of a type listed or approved for direct burial in the earth or ground provided that all such cables located less than one foot below ground level, shall be protected by suitable kick pipes; all splices and connections to such cables shall be made in boxes or fittings approved for that purpose and location. 
D.  For the purpose of determining the conductor size for service, feed, subfeed, and branch circuits, each trailer site shall be computed as requiring not less than ten amperes or 120 volts; provided, however, that 120/240 volt single phase systems may be used for more than one trailer site. 
E.  All metal parts of all trailers located in an auto and trailer park and connected to an electrical appliance outlet shall be effectively grounded; such grounding conductor shall be permanently connected to a continuous water supply system and of a size not less than that required by the California State Electrical Safety Orders. 
F.  No trailer shall be connected to an electrical appliance outlet unless the electrical wiring in or about said trailer is in good condition and of a type which conforms to accepted standards of safety. 
G.  All work and materials used in any of the electrical installations provided for in this section shall conform to the requirements set forth in the Electrical Safety Orders, Division of Industrial Safety, Department of Industrial Relations, state of California, the electrical ordinances of the city and the rules and regulations of the public service department of the city, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of said city. 
(Ord. 893 § 27, 1955)  
9.28.170 - Registry. 
Every person who owns or operates an auto and trailer park shall keep a register in which shall be entered: 
A.  The name and address of each guest who is the owner or operator of an automobile, and the name and address of each member of his party for which accommodations are afforded or for which space is rented and the identification space of the trailer site the guest occupies; 
B.  The make, type and license number of the automobile and trailer, the name of the registered owner of the trailer and the state in which such vehicle or vehicles are registered and the year of registration; 
C.  The registry shall be made available to the police department or any of the enforcement officers designated in this chapter, on demand. 
(Ord. 893 § 28, 1955)  
9.28.180 - Artificial light. 
In every auto and trailer park there shall be installed and kept burning from sunset to sunrise sufficient artificial light to adequately illuminate all trailer park roadways, walkways and areas around service buildings. 
(Ord. 893 § 29, 1955)  
9.28.190 - Animals—Dogs. 
A.  Dogs and animals shall not be permitted to run at large in any auto and trailer park. 
B.  Poultry and other barnyard animals shall not be permitted in any auto and trailer park. 
(Ord. 893 § 30, 1955)  
9.28.200 - Caretaker. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate, occupy or maintain, or cause or permit to be operated, occupied or maintained, any auto and trailer park unless there is a caretaker on duty in or about the trailer park at all times. 
(Ord. 893 § 31, 1955)  
9.28.210 - Applicability—Existing parks. 
No provision of this chapter shall be construed to require a change in the size of existing trailer sites or a structural addition, structural alteration or a structural change in or on an existing building except the requirement of Section 9.28.170B. and Section 9.28.230A., B. and C. 
(Ord. 893 § 32, 1955)  
9.28.220 - Owner—Operator—Responsibility. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or operating a trailer park in the city to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 893 § 33, 1955)  
9.28.230 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or disregarding any lawful order of the enforcement agencies or findings of the city council with respect to said trailer park, or contributing in any way to the violation of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof may be punished as prescribed in Section 1.20.010. Every person, firm or corporation violating or contributing in any way to the violation of any provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day during which such violation continues, and is punishable therefor as herein provided. 
(Ord. 1621, 1978; Ord. 1358 § 2 (part), 1973; Ord. 893 § 34, 1955)  
Chapter 9.32 - ADVERTISING DISPLAYS BORDERING FREEWAYS 
 
9.32.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows: 
A.  "Advertising display" refers to advertising structures and to signs. 
B.  "Advertising structure" refers to a structure of any kind or character erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes on which any poster, bill, printing, painting or other advertisement of any kind whatsoever may be placed, including statuary. 
C.  "Freeway" means a highway in respect to which the owners of abutting lands have no right to easement of access to or from their abutting lands or in respect to which such owners have only limited or restricted right or easement of access, and which is declared to be such in compliance with the Streets and Highway Code of the state. 
D.  "Landscaped freeway" means a section or sections of a freeway which is now, or hereafter may be, improved by the planting, at least on one side of the freeway right-of-way, of lawns, trees, shrubs, flowers, or other ornamental vegetation which requires reasonable maintenance. 
Planting for the purpose of soil erosion control, traffic safety requirements, reduction of fire hazards, or traffic noise abatement, shall not change the character of a freeway to a landscaped freeway. 
E.  "Sign" refers to any card, cloth, metal, painted or wooden sign of any character, placed for outdoor advertising purposes, on or to the ground, or any tree, wall, bush, rock, fence, building, structure, or thing either publicly or privately owned, other than an advertising structure. 
F.  Neither "advertising structure" nor "sign," as used in this chapter, includes: 
1.  Official notices issued by a court or public body or officer; 
2.  Notices posted by any public officer in performance of a public duty, or by any person in giving legal notice; 
3.  Directional, warning, or information signs or structures required by or authorized by law or by federal, state or municipal authority. 
G.  "To place," and any of its variants as applied to advertising displays includes the maintaining and the erecting, constructing, posting, painting, printing, tacking, nailing, gluing, sticking, carving, or otherwise fastening, affixing or making visible, any advertising display on or to the ground, or any tree, bush, rock, fence, post, wall, building, structure, or thing. 
H.  "Visible" means capable of being seen (whether or not legible) without visual aid by a person of normal visual acuity. 
(Ord. 1140 § 2, 1966)  
9.32.020 - Advertising display—Near freeway. 
No advertising displays shall be placed or maintained on property within six hundred sixty feet of a freeway, regardless of the district or zone in which it is located, if: 
A.  Such sign is designed to have or has the advertising thereon maintained primarily to be viewed from a freeway; or 
B.  If such advertising displays, because of their location, size, nature or type, constitute or tend to constitute a hazard to the safe and efficient operation of vehicles upon a freeway, or which create a condition which endangers the safety of persons or property thereon. 
(Ord. 1140 § 3, 1966)  
9.32.040 - Advertising display—Removal. 
Any advertising structure or sign which is now, or hereafter may be, in violation of the provisions of Section 9.32.020 shall be removed within three years from the effective date of this chapter or within three years from the date when the project for the landscaping of a section or sections of a freeway shall have been completed or accepted, and the character of said section or sections have been changed from a freeway to a landscaped freeway, whichever is later. 
(Ord. 1140 § 5, 1966)  
9.32.050 - Violation—Nuisance declared—Penalty. 
A.  In the event any person, firm or corporation should place any advertising display in violation of the provisions of this chapter, such display is hereby declared a public nuisance and the city attorney shall upon order of the city council bring and prosecute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin any such person, firm or corporation from continuing such sign in place. 
B.  Every person as principal, agent or employee violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof is punishable as prescribed in Section 1.20.010. Such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person and is punishable as herein provided. 
The remedies provided herein are cumulative and not exclusive. 
(Ord. 1621, 1978; Ord. 1358 § 2 (part), 1973; Ord. 1140 § 6, 1966)  
Chapter 9.36 - REGULATION OF SMOKING IN ENCLOSED PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT* 
* Prior ordinance history: Ord. 1822. 
 
9.36.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to implement the provisions of Section 6404.5 of the California Labor code, regulating smoking of tobacco products in enclosed places of employment. 
(Ord. 2092 (part), 1995)  
9.36.020 - Enforcement. 
The county of San Diego department of health services is designated as the enforcement authority within the city for purposes of enforcing Section 6404.5 of the California Labor Code. 
(Ord. 2092 (part), 1995)  
Chapter 9.37 - PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN OPEN AIR DINING AREAS 
 
9.37.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Enclosed" means any covered or partially covered space having more than fifty percent of its perimeter area walled in or otherwise closed to the outside, such as, a covered porch with more than two walls. 
B.  "Non-enclosed" means an open air area, typically outdoors, that does not meet the definition of "enclosed". 
C.  "Open air dining area" means any non-enclosed area located on private or public property made available to or customarily used by the general public that is designed, established, or regularly used for consuming food and/or beverages, or where food and/or beverages are served whether or not for compensation. This includes, but is not limited to restaurants, hotels, bar standing and seating areas, patios, and coffee shops. 
D.  "Smoking" means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product intended for inhalation, whether natural or synthetic, in any manner or in any form. "Smoking" includes the use of an electronic smoking device that creates an aerosol or vapor, in any manner or in any form, or the use of any oral smoking device for the purpose of circumventing the prohibition of smoking. 
E.  "Tobacco product" means any of the following: 
1.  A product containing, made, or derived from tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, or snuff. 
2.  An electronic device that delivers nicotine or other vaporized liquids to the person inhaling from the device, including, but not limited to, an electronic cigarette, cigar, pipe, or hookah. 
3.  Any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product, whether or not sold separately. 
F.  "Tobacco product" does not include a product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product or for other therapeutic purposes where the product is marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2009-2318, 5-19-2009; Ord. No. 2018-2452, §§ 2, 3, 12-4-2018)  
9.37.020 - Smoking in open air dining areas—Prohibited. 
Smoking is prohibited in all open air dining areas located on private or public property, including the public right-of-way. In addition, smoking is prohibited within twenty feet of an open air dining area, except while actively passing on the way to another destination. 
(Ord. No. 2009-2318, 5-19-2009)  
9.37.030 - Enforcement. 
This chapter may be enforced by any police officer, code conformance officer, building inspector, business license inspector, or fire inspector. In addition, the city manager may designate persons from any of the city's departments as having the authority to enforce this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-2318, 5-19-2009)  
9.37.040 - Severability. 
The city council declares that the invalidity of any section or portion of this ordinance or the chapter or sections of the chapter thereby adopted shall not affect the validity of any other remaining section or portion; that the council would have adopted each of those remaining portions, notwithstanding any later declared invalidity. If any provision determined invalid under the preceding sentence can be judicially interpreted in a way that could harmonize it with the remaining provisions, then it may be so judicially interpreted and, as interpreted, be applied so as to give full purpose, meaning and effect to the remaining provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-2318, 5-19-2009)  
Chapter 9.38 - RESTRICTING THE SALE, DISPLAY AND PROMOTION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS OR CIGARETTES TO MINORS 
 
9.38.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of the city council to enact regulations further restricting the sale or display of tobacco products and cigarettes in the city to minors, beyond that provided for by state law. Accordingly, the city council enacts the following regulations as not preempted by the Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act, 15 U.S Code Section 1332, et seq. 
(Ord. 2223 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 2172 § 1 (part), 2000)  
9.38.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter: 
"Advertising display" means a sign, sign-board, billboard, poster, or banner that is temporarily or permanently placed within a building or displayed in the window(s) of a commercial establishment to advertise or promote products. It does not include printed material on the container of a product sold at retail. 
"Cigarette," as used in this chapter and as defined by 15 U.S. Code Section 1332, means: (A) any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or in any substance not containing tobacco; and (B) any roll of tobacco wrapped in any substance containing tobacco which, because of its appearance, the type of tobacco used in the filler, or its packaging and labeling, is likely to be offered to, or purchased by, consumers as a cigarette described in subparagraph A of this definition. 
"Playground" means any outdoor premises or grounds owned or operated by the city, a public or private school, childcare center, or youth or recreational center, that contains any play or athletic equipment used or intended to be used by minors. 
"Recreation center or facility" means any recreation center or facility under the control, direction or management of the city. 
"School" means any public or private elementary or secondary school, attendance at which satisfies the compulsory education laws of the state of California. 
"Self-service display" means an open display of tobacco products to which the public has access without the intervention of an employee. 
"Tobacco advertising display" means an advertising display that concerns tobacco products. 
"Tobacco product" means any substance or product other than cigarettes containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, and dipping tobacco. 
"Tobacco retailer" or "tobacco retail store" means any person or business entity that sells any tobacco product or cigarettes and includes an employee of that person or business entity. Any retail establishment selling tobacco products or cigarettes incidental to other merchandise qualifies within this definition. 
"Vendor-assisted" means that only a store employee has access to a particular product and assists a customer by supplying the product, and the customer does not take possession of the product until it is purchased. 
(Ord. 2223 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 2172 § 1 (part), 2000)  
9.38.030 - Measure of distance. 
The distance between any tobacco retail store and any school, playground, recreation center of facility, childcare center, or library, shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the exterior of the tobacco retail store to the closest property line of the school, playground, recreation center or facility, childcare center, or library. 
(Ord. 2223 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 2172 § 1 (part), 2000)  
9.38.040 - Restrictions on location of tobacco products and tobacco advertising displays. 
A.  It is unlawful for any tobacco retailer to place, maintain, or cause to be placed or maintained any tobacco product or tobacco advertising display within two feet of any candy, snack, or nonalcoholic beverage display inside a tobacco retail store located within one thousand feet of any school, playground, recreation center or facility, childcare center or library. 
B.  Except as allowed in Section 9.38.040(A), it is unlawful for any person to advertise tobacco products within one thousand feet of any school, playground, recreation center or facility, childcare center or library. 
(Ord. 2223 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 2172 § 1 (part), 2000)  
9.38.050 - Exceptions to location of tobacco products and tobacco advertising displays inside retail establishments. 
A.  Section 9.38.040 does not apply to commercial establishments where access to the premises by persons under twenty-one years of age is prohibited by law. 
B.  Section 9.38.040A does not apply within any establishment to displays containing tobacco products which are not accessible and visible to patrons, or to displays located above, behind or below a sales counter and which are not accessible to patrons. Any display containing tobacco products shall not be used as an "advertising display" as defined in Section 9.38.020. 
(Ord. 2223 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 2172 § 1 (part), 2000) 
(Ord. No. 2018-2452, § 4, 12-4-2018)  
9.38.060 - Self-service sale and distribution of tobacco products—Prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any tobacco retailer to sell, permit to be sold, offer for sale, or display for purposes of sale, by means of self-service displays or by any means other than vendor-assisted sales, any tobacco products or cigarettes. 
(Ord. 2223 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 2172 § 1 (part), 2000)  
9.38.070 - Restrictions on distribution of free tobacco samples, promotional items or cigarettes to minors. 
A.  It is unlawful for tobacco retailer to distribute free tobacco products or promotional items, except in enclosed areas where minors are not permitted. 
B.  It is unlawful for any tobacco retailer to permit or allow a minor to be within six feet of any area or display where cigarettes are distributed free or at reduced cost as part of a promotion. 
(Ord. 2223 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 2172 § 1 (part), 2000)  
9.38.080 - Posting of signs regarding tobacco products and cigarette sales to minors. 
A.  Every tobacco retailer shall post conspicuously in their place of business at each point of purchase a notice stating that the sale of tobacco products and cigarettes to persons under twenty-one years of age is prohibited by law and subject to penalties, except for United States Armed Forces active duty personnel with military ID who are at least eighteen years of age. The notice shall also state that photo identification is required to purchase tobacco products and cigarettes. The letters of the sign shall be at least one-half inch in height. 
B.  Any sign meeting the content requirements of California Business and Professional Code Section 22952(b) and regulations promulgated thereunder, and the posting requirements of California Penal Code Section 308(c), satisfies subsection "A" of this section. 
(Ord. 2223 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 2172 § 1 (part), 2000) 
(Ord. No. 2018-2452, § 5, 12-4-2018)  
9.38.090 - Extensions for compliance. 
A.  Any business that needs to make modifications to its business premises or advertising practices in order to comply with Sections 9.38.040, 9.38.060, or 9.38.080 of this chapter must comply within sixty calendar days after June 30, 2003. 
B.  Any business owner may apply to the city manager, through the planning director, for a reasonable extension of time within which to comply with Sections 9.38.040, 9.38.060 or 9.38.080 of this chapter, provided that the application for extension is submitted on or before the last day of the sixty-day compliance period. 
C.  An extension may be granted only for good cause for a maximum of one year from the effective date. "Good cause" means that the extension is necessary to prevent the business from suffering unreasonable financial hardship, or to prevent unreasonable disruption in business operations. 
(Ord. 2223 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 2172 § 1 (part), 2000)  
9.38.100 - Enforcement. 
A.  Violations of this chapter shall be prosecuted as infractions for the first offense, and may be prosecuted as misdemeanors for subsequent offenses, subject to the penalties provided in Section 1.20.010 of this code. In addition, injunctive relief, civil penalties or administrative remedies provided in Title 1 of this code, may be sought or imposed for violations. 
B.  This chapter may be enforced by any police officer, building inspector, code conformance officer, business license inspector or fire inspector. 
(Ord. 2223 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 2172 § 1 (part), 2000)  
Chapter 9.39 - SALE OR DISTRIBUTION OF SALVIA DIVINORUM OR SALVINORIN A TO PEOPLE OVER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE 
 
9.39.010 - Definitions. 
"Salvia Divinorum" is a species of the sage family of plants and contains hallucinogenic ingredients. "Salvinorin A", also called Divinorin A, has been identified to be the active constituent of Salvia Divinorum that is responsible for the hallucinogenic effects of the herb. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2337, § 1, 4-20-2010)  
9.39.020 - Prohibited. 
Every person who sells, dispenses, distributes, furnishes, administers, gives, or offers to sell, dispense, distribute, furnish, administer, or give Salvia Divinorum or Salvinorin A, or any substance or material containing Salvia Divinorum or Salvinorin A, to any person over eighteen years of age, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2337, § 1, 4-20-2010)  
9.39.030 - Violations. 
A violation of any provision of this chapter or a failure to comply with any mandatory requirements of this chapter is subject to prosecution in accordance with Title 1 of this Code, and may be enforced through injunctive relief or other relief available by law. Such violation is punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not to exceed six months, or by a one thousand dollar fine, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2337, § 1, 4-20-2010)  
Chapter 9.40 - DISCLOSURE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND REGULATION OF HAZARDOUS WASTE ESTABLISHMENTS AND ADOPTION OF THE CERTIFIED UNIFIED PROGRAM AGENCY, HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INVENTORY AND RESPONSE PLAN 
 
9.40.010 - Adoption of county ordinance requiring the disclosure of hazardous materials. 
Chapter 8 (commencing with Section 68.801) of Division 8 of Title 6 of the San Diego County Code of Regulatory Ordinances, known as the Disclosure of Hazardous Materials Ordinance, is hereby adopted as an ordinance of the city of National City, with any amendments and modifications of that division as have been or are duly adopted by the county of San Diego, unless local modifications are enacted by the city of National City, pursuant to law. 
(Ord. 1860 (part), 1985)  
9.40.020 - Adoption of county ordinance regulating hazardous waste establishments. 
Chapter 9 of Title 6 of the San Diego County Code, commencing with Section 68.901, known as the Hazardous Waste Regulatory Ordinance, is hereby adopted as an ordinance of the city of National City, together with any amendments and modifications of that division as have been or are duly adopted by the county of San Diego, unless local modifications are enacted by the city of National City, pursuant to law. 
(Ord. 1860 (part), 1985)  
9.40.030 - Permit fee. 
Any person, association, partnership or corporation required to obtain a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall make an application to the county of San Diego, department of health services. An annual, nonrefundable fee, the exact amount of which shall be determined by the county board of supervisors and kept on record by the county department of health services, shall accompany the submission of each application to the department of health services, to defray the cost to the county for administering and providing services pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 1860 (part), 1985)  
9.40.040 - Adoption of the San Diego County Ordinance relating to the Certified Unified Program Agency, Hazardous Materials Inventory and Response Plan. 
Chapter 11 of Division 8 of Title 6 of the San Diego County Code, commencing with Section 68.1101, known as the "Certified Unified Program Agency, Hazardous Materials Inventory and Response Plan," is hereby adopted as an ordinance of the city of National City, together with any amendments and modifications of that division as have been, are or shall be duly adopted by the county of San Diego, unless local modifications are enacted by the city of National City. Copies of the code adopted by reference shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 2183 § 1 (part), 2001)  
9.40.050 - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the director of environmental health, or designee, of the county of San Diego. 
(Ord. 2183 § 1 (part), 2001)  
9.40.060 - Penalties. 
Section 68.1114 of the County Code of Regulatory Ordinance is adopted and is set out in full, reading as follows: 
In addition to penalties provided in state law, the following criminal, civil and administrative civil penalties apply to violations of this Chapter. 
(a) Penalty for Misdemeanor. Unless otherwise specified by this Chapter, a misdemeanor is punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000), imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b) Civil Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter is liable for a civil penalty of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000) for each day, or part thereof, such violation occurs. Any person who knowingly violates any provision of this Chapter, after reasonable notice of the violation is liable for a civil penalty of not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000) for each day, or part thereof, that such violation occurs. The County Counsel or District Attorney is authorized to bring a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction to recover such civil penalties for the County. 
(c) Continuing Violation. Each and every day a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. The person committing or permitting such offenses may be charged with a separate offense for each such violation and punished accordingly 
(Ord. 2183 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 9.44 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE WARNING SIGNS 
 
9.44.010 - Purpose. 
The Surgeon General of the United States has advised women who are pregnant, or considering pregnancy, not to drink alcoholic beverages. Recent research indicates that alcohol consumption during pregnancy, especially in the early months, can harm the fetus, and result in birth defects including mental retardation, facial abnormalities and other defects involving heart and bone structure. In order to serve the public health, safety and welfare, the purpose of this chapter is to educate the public by requiring warning signs to be placed at all locations where alcoholic beverages are sold to the public. 
(Ord. 1916 (part), 1987)  
9.44.020 - Duty to post signs or notices. 
Any person or entity who owns, operates, manages, leases or rents premises offering wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages for sale, or dispensing for consideration to the public, shall cause a sign or notice to be permanently posted or displayed on the premises as provided in this chapter. The sign or notice shall read as follows: 
PREGNANCY AND ALCOHOL DO NOT —DRINKING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, INCLUDING WINE AND BEER, DURING PREGNANCY CAN CAUSE BIRTH DEFECTS. 
Except as specified in Section 9.44.030, or in rules and regulations adopted by the San Diego County department of health services, a sign or notice as required herein shall not be smaller than eight and one-half inches wide by five and one-half inches long, nor shall any lettering thereon be less than three-eighths inch in height. 
(Ord. 1916 (part), 1987)  
9.44.030 - Placement. 
A sign or notice required by Section 9.44.020 shall be placed as follows: 
A.  Where the sale or dispensing of wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages to the public is primarily intended for consumption off the premises, at least one sign shall be so placed as to assure that it is conspicuously displayed so as to be readable at all points of purchase. 
B.  Where the sale of wine, beer, or other alcoholic beverages to the public is primarily intended for consumption on the premises, at least one sign shall be placed to assure that it is conspicuously displayed so as to be readable in each public restroom. 
(Ord. 1905 § 1 (part), 1987)  
9.44.040 - Language. 
In the event a substantial number of the public patronizing a premises offering for sale or dispensing wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages uses a language other than English as a primary language, an additional sign or notice as is required by Section 9.44.020 shall be worded in the primary language or languages involved. 
(Ord. 916 (part), 1987)  
9.44.050 - Enforcement—County department of health services. 
A.  The deputy director of environmental health services of the San Diego County department of health services shall be responsible for the enforcement of compliance with this chapter. The San Diego County department of health services shall have the authority to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the implementation of this chapter, including rules and regulations for alternative signs and placement of required signs. 
B.  The San Diego County department of health services shall make warning signs available to vendors of alcoholic beverages. Persons or entities may, however, at their own expense, prepare and post signs meeting the requirements of this chapter. In no event shall the prescribed language of the warning sign be altered. 
(Ord. 1916 (part), 1987)  
Chapter 9.48 - CERTIFIED UNIFIED PROGRAM AGENCY, MEDICAL WASTES 
 
9.48.010 - Adoption of the San Diego County Ordinance relating to the Certified Unified Program Agency, Medical Wastes. 
Chapter 12 of Division 8 of Title 6 of the San Diego County Code, commencing with Section 68.1201, known as the "Certified Unified Program Agency, Medical Wastes," is adopted as an ordinance of the city of National City, together with any amendments and modifications of that division as have been, are or shall be duly adopted by the county of San Diego, unless local modifications are enacted by the city of National City. Copies of the code adopted by reference shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 2183 § 2 (part), 2001)  
9.48.020 - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the director of environmental health, or designee, of the county of San Diego. 
(Ord. 2183 § 2 (part), 2001)  
9.48.030 - Criminal penalty. 
Section 68.1208 of the County Code of Regulatory Ordinances is adopted and is set out in full, reading as follows: 
Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the County jail not exceeding one year, or a fine not exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000), or both. 
(Ord. 2183 § 2 (part), 2001)  
9.48.040 - Civil penalties. 
Section 68.1209 of the County Code of Regulatory Ordinances is adopted and is set out in full, reading as follows: 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000) for each such violation. 
(Ord. 2183 § 2 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 9.52 - MANDATORY RECYCLING PROGRAM 
 
9.52.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used, they shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to such respective terms in this section: 
"Cardboard" means post-consumer waste paper grade corrugated cardboard (#11), kraft (brown) paper bags or solid fiber boxes which have served their packaging purposes and are discarded and can later be reclaimed for collection and recovery for recycling. 
"Commercial recyclables" means recyclables from the two commercial subcategories of office buildings (of more than 20,000 sq. ft.), as identified in Section 9.52.050. 
"Commercial solid waste" means solid waste originating from stores, offices and other commercial sources, but does not include construction and demolition waste. 
"Commercial unit" includes each building and space primarily used for distributing and selling goods, wares, merchandise and services. 
"Construction waste" means the demolition, dredging, grubbing, and the rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition activities on housing, commercial or governmental building and any other structure and pavement. 
"Curbside collection" means the collection of recyclables from the residential waste stream from curb or alleyway. 
"Designated recyclable materials" means materials that are recyclable and/or reusable within the following categories of residential, commercial (office and hospitality), and industrial as defined more specifically within each category as listed within this ordinance. 
"Garbage" means organic refuse and waste or fruit, vegetable and animal matter prepared and intended for human consumption, and not so used. 
"Glass bottles and jars" means food and beverage glass containers including container glass covered by the deposit law, and excluding household and kitchen containers such as drinking glasses, cups, and cooking and serving dishes. 
"Hospitality" means any establishment that offers dining services, food or beverage sales. 
Includes taverns, bars, cafeterias and restaurants, as well as motels, hotels, hospitals, schools, colleges and other establishments that have dining services or a restaurant or bar on their premises. 
"Industrial recyclables" means recyclables from industry/construction waste streams, as identified in Section 9.52.050. 
"Industrial solid waste" means solid waste originating from mechanized manufacturing facilities, factories, refineries, construction and demolition projects, publicly operated treatment works, and/or solid wastes placed in commercial collection bins. 
"Industrial unit" includes each building and space primarily used for producing and making, processing or warehousing goods, wares and merchandise including construction and demolition activity. 
"Landfill" means a disposal system by which solid waste is deposited and compacted before burial in a specially prepared area which provides for environmental monitoring and treatment. 
"Metal" means recoverable aluminum, tin and bi-metal materials such as used beverage containers, siding, and other recyclable manufactured metal items. 
"Multiple residential unit" includes: 
1.  Each building having two or more spaces primarily used as a separate family dwelling; or 
2.  Two or more residential units situated on one lot. 
"Newspaper" means materials printed on newsprint. 
"Odor threshold" means the lowest concentration of odorous matter that produces an olfactory response in normal human beings. 
Odor thresholds shall be determined in accordance with the American Society for Testing Materials Test Method D 1391-57 (reconfirmed to 1967) or in an equivalent manner acceptable to the CCO. 
"Office," for purposes of this chapter, shall mean any combination of offices or connected buildings of over twenty thousand square feet regardless of office affiliation, ownership or occupancy. Includes businesses used for retail, wholesale, professional services, legal services, financial services, medical services, schools, colleges and libraries. 
"Office paper" means waste paper grades of white and colored ledgers. Examples include forms, copy paper, stationery, and other papers that are generally associated with desk activity. 
"Plastic beverage bottles" means plastic containers used for containing milk, juice, soft drinks, or water intended for human consumption; to be distinguished from nonfood bottles such as those for containing motor oil, detergent, or other household products. 
"Recyclable plastic beverage containers" shall mean those bottles marked PETE (1) and HDPE (2) on bottom of plastic beverage containers. 
"Residential recyclables" means those specific recyclable materials from the residential waste stream, as identified in Section 9.52.050. 
"Residential unit" includes each building and space primarily used as a dwelling. 
"Rubbish" means refuse and waste material, whether combustible or noncombustible, not included within the definition of garbage as herein defined and not contained within the definition of recyclable, including but not limited to paper, rags, leaves, glass, cans, ashes, tree and vine trimmings. It shall not include plaster, rock, sand, dirt, automobile frames or fenders, or waste material pertaining to building operations, construction or repair. It shall not mean discarded water heaters or furniture. It shall not mean hazardous or toxic wastes. 
"Scavenging" means the uncontrolled and/or unauthorized removal of solid waste materials, recyclable or recoverable materials. 
"To segregate waste material" means any of the following: the placement of recyclables in separate containers; the binding of recyclable material separately from the other waste material; the physical separation of recyclables from other waste material. 
"White goods" means kitchen or other large appliances. 
"Wood wastes" means lumber and wood products but excludes painted wood, wood treated with chemicals, and pressure-treated wood. 
"Yard wastes" means leaves, grass, weeds and wood material from trees and shrubs. 
(Ord. 92-2029 (part), 1992)  
9.52.020 - Separation of recyclable materials. 
A.  Containers for designated recyclables shall be provided by the city's designated rubbish hauler to each of its customers, for collection of designated recyclables. 
B.  Containers provided to single-family and multifamily residences, commercial and industrial entities shall effectively segregate the designated recyclables for pickup. 
C.  Every owner or occupant in charge of any property where rubbish, garbage, or refuse is generated shall separate all recyclable materials from other garbage and combined refuse, and shall group together and place for collection such recyclable materials in the same manner as rubbish, garbage or refuse is placed for collection. Recyclable material that shall be grouped together and separated from other garbage and refuse shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 92-2029 (part), 1992)  
9.52.030 - Mandatory recycling implementation schedule. 
The following shall be the recycling implementation schedule within the city: 
		Effective Enforcement Date 
A. 	Residential single-family 	June 1, 1992 
B. 	Residential multifamily 	July 1, 1993 
C. 	Yard and wood waste 	April 1, 1993 
D. 	Commercial: office and hospitality 	July 1, 1993 
E. 	Industrial 	January 1, 1993 
 
(Ord. 92-2029 (part), 1992)  
9.52.040 - Mandatory recycling enforcement. 
A.  The city manager or designee who is assigned to duties which include the enforcement of solid waste regulations and laws is responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The city manager or designee shall have responsiblity for the enforcement of all provisions of this chapter. Violations of said provisions will be prosecuted in the same manner as other violations of the municipal code; provided however, that nothing herein provided shall prevent authorized designee(s) of the city manager from efforts to obtain voluntary compliance by way of warning, notice of violation or educational means. 
(Ord. 92-2029 (part), 1992)  
9.52.050 - Designated recyclable materials. 
The following are designated recyclables subject to this designation: 
A.  Residential Recyclables. 
1.  Newspapers, 
2.  Plastic beverage bottles, 
3.  Aluminum, 
4.  Tin and bi-metal cans, 
5.  White goods (appliances), 
6.  Glass bottles and jars; 
B.  Commercial Recyclables. 
1.  Office buildings of more than twenty thousand square feet: 
a.  Office paper, 
b.  Corrugated cardboard, 
c.  Newspapers, 
d.  Aluminum; 
2.  Hospitality industry, including all restaurants and taverns: 
a.  Plastic beverage bottles, 
b.  Glass jars and bottles, 
c.  White goods (appliances), 
d.  Aluminum, 
e.  Tin and bi-metal cans; 
C.  Industrial Recyclables. 
1.  Dirt, 
2.  Asphalt, 
3.  Sand, 
4.  Land clearing brush, 
5.  Concrete, 
6.  Rock; 
D.  Yard Waste. 
1.  Leaves, 
2.  Grass, 
3.  Weeds, 
4.  Wood materials from trees and shrubs. 
The above list may be modified to add or delete listed items from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 92-2029 (part), 1992)  
Chapter 9.54 - TATTOOING 
 
9.54.010 - Generally. 
It is in the public interest and welfare that any person engaging in the business of tattooing be required to meet certain minimal standards and that the business be regulated for the health and safety of the general public. 
(Ord. 2144 § 2 (part), 1998)  
9.54.020 - Adoption of regulations. 
A.  The city council adopts the provisions of Title 6, Division 6, Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 66.301) of the San Diego County Code of Regulatory Ordinances, as now in effect or as may hereafter be amended, as the regulatory provisions applicable to tattoo artists, tattoo parlors and mobile tattoo vehicles within the city of National City. A copy of those provisions is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to operate a tattoo parlor, mobile tattoo vehicle or as a tattoo artist in the city without a permit issued pursuant to the provisions adopted in Section 9.54.020(A). 
(Ord. 2144 § 2 (part), 1998)  
9.54.030 - Enforcement and administration. 
A.  The enforcement and administration of this chapter remains under the primary jurisdiction of the San Diego County health officer and violations may be cited as violations of the applicable provisions of the San Diego County Code of Regulatory Ordinances, or as a violation of Section 9.54.020(B) 
B.  The chief of police may exercise concurrent jurisdiction with the county health officer in administering this Chapter 9.54. 
(Ord. 2144 § 2 (part), 1998)  
9.54.040 - Regulatory fees. 
Applicants shall pay regulatory fees imposed by the county of San Diego for licensing, in addition to any business taxes required by Chapter 6.04. The finance director shall coordinate collection of such fees with the cognizant officers. 
(Ord. 2144 § 2 (part), 1998)  
Title 10 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND SAFETY 
Chapters:  
II. OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON  
Chapter 10.08 - REPLICA OR FACSIMILE FIREARMS 
 
10.08.010 - Replica or facsimile firearms—Brandishing prohibited. 
Except in self-defense, no person shall draw or exhibit a replica or facsimile of a firearm, or simulate a firearm in a rude, angry, or threatening manner, which produces or attempts to produce bodily injury, fear, or the reasonable apprehension of bodily injury or fear in another person. 
(Ord. 1938 (part), 1988)  
10.08.020 - Brandishing of replica or facsimile firearms in presence of certain officers. 
No person shall draw or exhibit a replica or facsimile of a firearm, or simulate a firearm in a rude, angry, or threatening manner, in the presence of a peace officer, firefighter, emergency medical technician, or paramedic engaged in the performance of his or her duties, and that person knows or has reason to know that such peace officer, firefighter, emergency medical technician, or paramedic is engaged in the performance of his or her duties. 
(Ord. 1938 (part), 1988)  
10.08.030 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Firearm" has the same meaning as the term "firearm" under the Dangerous Weapons Control Law of the State of California. 
B.  "Replica or facsimile of a firearm" means any device or object made of plastic, wood, metal, or any other material which is a replica, facsimile, or toy version of, or is otherwise recognizable as, a pistol, revolver, shotgun, sawed-off shotgun, rifle, machine gun, rocket launcher, or any other firearm. As used in this section, "replica or facsimile of a firearm" includes, but is not limited to, toy guns, movie props, hobby models (either in kit form or fully assembled), starter pistols, air guns, inoperative firearms, or any other device which might reasonable be perceived to be a real firearm. 
(Ord. 1938 (part), 1988)  
10.08.040 - Violation—Misdemeanor. 
Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars and imprisonment for a period not to exceed one year or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 1938 (part), 1988)  
Chapter 10.10 - TARGETED RESIDENTIAL PICKETING 
 
10.10.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Picketing" means the posting of a person or group for a demonstration or protest. 
B.  "Targeted residential picketing" means picketing which is focused on and takes place in front of, a particular residence. 
(Ord. 2073 § 1 (part), 1994)  
10.10.020 - Targeted residential picketing prohibited. 
It is unlawful for a person or group to engage in targeted residential picketing within the city. 
(Ord. 2073 § 1 (part), 1994)  
10.10.030 - Violation—Misdemeanor. 
Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars or imprisonment for a period not to exceed one year or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 2073 § 1 (part), 1994)  
III. OFFENSES AGAINST HEALTH AND SAFETY  
Chapter 10.14 - RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA 
 
10.14.010 - Definitions. 
A.  For purposes of this chapter, "marijuana" shall have the same meaning as the definition of that word in Section 11018 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
B.  "Commercial marijuana activity" includes the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transportation, distribution, delivery, or sale of marijuana and marijuana products. 
C.  "Cultivation of marijuana" shall mean the planting, growing, cultivating, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, trimming or processing of marijuana as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 26001. 
D.  "Delivery" means the commercial transfer of marijuana or marijuana products to a customer. Delivery also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer, or independently licensed, that enables customers to arrange for or facilitate the commercial transfer by a licensed retailer of marijuana or marijuana products as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 26001(h). 
E.  "Marijuana accessories" shall have the same meaning as Section 11018.2 of the Health and Safety Code. Any equipment, products, or materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, smoking, vaporizing, or containing marijuana, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana or marijuana products into the human body. 
F.  "Marijuana cultivation facility" means an entity licensed to cultivate, prepare, and package marijuana and sell marijuana to retail marijuana stores, to marijuana product manufacturing facilities, and to other marijuana cultivation facilities, but not to consumers. 
G.  "Marijuana establishment" means a marijuana cultivation facility, a marijuana testing facility, a marijuana product manufacturing facility, or a retail marijuana store. 
H.  "Marijuana product manufacturing facility" means an entity licensed to purchase marijuana; manufacture, prepare, and package marijuana products; and sell marijuana and marijuana products to other marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to retail marijuana stores, but not to consumers. 
I.  "Marijuana products" means concentrated marijuana products and marijuana products that are comprised of marijuana and other ingredients and are intended for use of consumptions, such as, but not limited to, edible products, ointments and tinctures and as otherwise defined in Section 11018.1 of the Health and Safety Code. 
J.  "Marijuana storage facility" means any entity or premises used for the storage of marijuana, marijuana products or marijuana accessories. 
K.  "Marijuana testing facility" means an entity licensed to analyze and certify the safety and potency of marijuana. 
L.  "Private residence" means a house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or other similar habitable dwelling as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.2(b)(5). 
M.  "Retail marijuana store" includes any entity licensed to purchase marijuana from marijuana cultivation facilities and marijuana and marijuana products from marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to sell marijuana and marijuana products to consumers; or any premises, whether licensed or unlicensed, where marijuana, marijuana products, or devices for the use of marijuana or marijuana products are offered, either individually or in any combination, for retail sale, including an establishment that delivers marijuana and marijuana products as part of a retail sale. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2414, § 2, 10-18-2016; Ord. No. 2016-2416, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
10.14.020 - Commercial marijuana activity—Prohibited. 
The licensing and/or operation of marijuana cultivation facilities, marijuana product manufacturing facilities, marijuana testing facilities, marijuana delivery businesses, marijuana storage facilities, retail marijuana stores, marijuana establishments, or any commercial marijuana activity is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2414, § 2, 10-18-2016; Ord. No. 2016-2416, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
10.14.030 - Cultivation of recreational marijuana for personal use. 
A.  Outdoor cultivation. The cultivation of marijuana outdoors is prohibited regardless of purpose. 
B.  Indoor cultivation. Not more than six plants may be cultivated, planted, harvested, dried, processed or possessed within a single private residence at one time per Health and Safety Code Section 11362.2(a). This provision on indoor cultivation shall only become effective if Proposition 64, the Control, Regulate, and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act ("AUMA") passes on November 8, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2414, § 2, 10-18-2016; Ord. No. 2016-2416, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
10.14.040 - Possession of recreational marijuana. 
A.  It is unlawful for a person under the age of twenty-one years to possess, transfer, transport or purchase marijuana, marijuana products, marijuana accessories. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to display, consume, sell, or use marijuana in or upon any public area, public park, or public building. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to purchase marijuana or marijuana products for consumption or possession by, or otherwise provide marijuana for consumption or possession by, or to sell marijuana to, any person under the age of twenty-one years. 
D.  This Section 10.14.040 shall only become effective if Proposition 64, the Control, Regulate, and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act ("AUMA") passes on November 8, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2414, § 2, 10-18-2016; Ord. No. 2016-2416, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
10.14.050 - Smoking of marijuana in public—Prohibited. 
A.  General prohibition. The smoking of marijuana is prohibited anywhere the smoking of tobacco is prohibited. 
B.  Smoking of marijuana shall be prohibited as stated in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.3. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2414, § 2, 10-18-2016; Ord. No. 2016-2416, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
10.14.060 - Penalties. 
A.  General penalty. In addition to any other penalties that may exist under state, federal, and local laws, a violation of any provision of this chapter or a failure to comply with any mandatory requirements of this chapter is subject to prosecution in accordance with Title 1 of the National City Municipal Code and may be enforced through injunctive relief or other relief available by law. Penalties for violations of the provisions of this chapter may result in a misdemeanor citation for each day in violation, punishable by a maximum of one year in jail and a one thousand dollar fine. 
B.  Public nuisance. The conduct of any activity or business in violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance and the city may, in addition to all other remedies set forth hereunder, commence an action or actions or proceedings, for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in a manner provided by the law; and may take such other steps and may apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such marijuana cultivation facility, marijuana product manufacturing facility, marijuana testing facility, marijuana delivery business, marijuana storage facility, retail marijuana store, marijuana establishment, or any commercial marijuana activity and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining such a business or establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Cost recovery. Administering departments are authorized to charge cost recovery fees for services provided under this chapter. Cost recovery fees may also be recovered for equipment and personnel expenses incurred. Said fees may be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2414, § 2, 10-18-2016; Ord. No. 2016-2416, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
10.14.070 - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the fire marshal, any police officer, any code compliance officer, and any other city official authorized to enforce any provision of the municipal code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2414, § 2, 10-18-2016; Ord. No. 2016-2416, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
10.14.080 - Non-exclusivity. 
Nothing in this chapter shall limit or preclude the enforcement of other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2414, § 2, 10-18-2016; Ord. No. 2016-2416, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
10.14.090 - Severability. 
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be separate and severable. The invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section, or portion of this chapter, or the invalidity of the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter, or the validity of its application to other persons or circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2414, § 2, 10-18-2016; Ord. No. 2016-2416, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
Chapter 10.15 - AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION 
 
10.15.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this section: 
A.  "Solicit, ask or beg" shall include using the spoken, written, or printed word, or bodily gestures, signs or other means with the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation of money or other thing of value or soliciting the sale of goods or services. 
B.  "Public place" shall mean a place to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, and includes, but is not limited to, any street, highway, sidewalk, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of amusement, park, playground, and any doorway, entrance, hallway, lobby and other portion of any business establishment, an apartment house or hotel not constituting a room or apartment designed for actual residence. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2338, § 1, 4-20-2010)  
10.15.020 - Aggressive solicitation prohibited. 
A.  No person shall solicit, ask or beg in an aggressive manner in any public place. 
B.  "Aggressive manner" shall mean any of the following: 
1.  Approaching or speaking to a person, or following a person before, during or after soliciting, asking or begging, if that conduct is intended or is likely to cause a reasonable person to (i) fear bodily harm to oneself or to another, damage to or loss of property, or (ii) otherwise be intimidated into giving money or other thing of value; 
2.  Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person or an occupied vehicle without that person's consent in the course of soliciting, asking or begging; 
3.  Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact; 
4.  Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person solicited either before, during, or after soliciting, asking or begging; 
5.  Persisting in closely following or approaching a person, after the person solicited has been solicited and informed the solicitor by words or conduct that such person does not want to be solicited or does not want to give money or any other thing of value to the solicitor; or 
6.  Using profane, offensive or abusive language which is inherently likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction, either before, during, or after solicitation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2338, § 1, 4-20-2010)  
10.15.030 - All solicitation prohibited at specified locations. 
A.  Banks and ATMs. No person shall solicit, ask or beg within fifteen feet of any entrance or exit of any bank, savings and loan association, credit union, or check cashing business during its business hours or within fifteen feet of any automated teller machine during the time it is available for customers' use. Provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility. Provided further that no person shall solicit, ask or beg within an automated teller machine facility where a reasonable person would or should know that he or she does not have the permission to do so from the owner or other person lawfully in possession of such facility. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to prohibit the lawful vending of goods and services within such areas. 
Definitions. For purposes of this section: 
1.  "Bank" means any member bank of the Federal Reserve System, and any bank, banking association, trust company, savings bank, or other banking institution organized or operated under the laws of the United States, and any bank the deposits of which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. 
2.  "Savings and loan association" means any federal savings and loan association and any "insured institution" as defined in Section 401 of the National Housing Act, as amended, and any federal credit union as defined in Section 2 of the Federal Credit Union Act. 
3.  "Credit union" means any federal credit union and any state-chartered credit union the accounts of which are insured by the administrator of the National Credit Union Administration. 
4.  "Check cashing business" means any person duly licensed as a check seller, bill payer, or pro-rater pursuant to Division 3 of the California Financial Code, commencing with section 12000. 
5.  "Automated teller machine" shall mean any electronic information processing device which accepts or dispenses cash in connection with a credit, deposit, or convenience account. 
6.  "Automated teller machine facility" shall mean the area comprised of one or more automated teller machines, and any adjacent space which is made available to banking customers after regular banking hours. 
B.  Exemptions. The provisions of subdivision A shall not apply to any unenclosed automated teller machine located within any building, structure or space whose primary purpose or function is unrelated to banking activities, including but not limited to supermarkets, airports and school buildings, provided that such automated teller machine shall be available for use only during the regular hours of operation of the building, structure or space in which such machine is located. 
C.  Parking lots. No person shall solicit, ask or beg in any public parking lot or structure any time after dark. "After dark" means any time from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise. 
1.  Exemptions. Subdivision C shall not apply to any of the following: 
a.  To solicitations related to business which is being conducted on the subject premises by the owner or lawful tenants; 
b.  To solicitations related to the lawful towing of a vehicle; or 
c.  To solicitations related to emergency repairs requested by the operator or other occupant of a vehicle. 
D.  Public transportation vehicles and stops. 
1.  "Public transportation vehicle" shall mean any vehicle, including a trailer bus, designed, used or maintained for carrying ten or more persons, including the driver; or a passenger vehicle designed for carrying fewer than ten persons, including the driver, and used to carry passengers for hire. 
2.  Any person who solicits, asks or begs in any public transportation vehicle, or within ten feet of any designated or posted public transportation vehicle stop, is guilty of a violation of this section if: 
a.  He or she remains there after being asked to leave by the owner, driver, or operator of a public transportation vehicle; the agent of the owner, driver or operator of a public transportation vehicle; the owner or manager of a public transportation facility; the agent of the owner or manager of a public transportation facility; a member of a security force employed by the public transportation facility; or by a peace officer, as defined in Chapter 4.5 of Title 3 of the California Penal Code (commencing with Pen. Code, §830); or 
b.  Within the immediately preceding thirty days, he or she engaged in a solicitation at that location and had been asked to leave by a person specified in subdivision (c)(3)(B)(i), above. 
c.  Subdivision C.2. shall not apply to a person who has been requested to leave enters the property within the designated period and solicits, asks, or begs with the express authorization of a person specified in subdivision C.2.a. 
E.  Restaurants. Any person who solicits, asks, or begs in any outdoor or indoor dining area of a restaurant or other establishment serving food for immediate consumption is guilty of a violation of this section if: 
1.  They remain there after being asked to leave by the owner, manager or supervisor of the restaurant or other food establishment; the agent of the owner, manager or supervisor of the restaurant; a member of a security force employed by the restaurant; or by a peace officer, as defined in Chapter 4.5 of Title 3 of the California Penal Code (commencing with Penal Code Section 830), acting at the request of any of the persons specified in this subdivision; or 
2.  Within the immediately preceding thirty days, he or she engaged in a solicitation at that location and had been asked to leave by a person specified in subdivision D.1., above. 
3.  Subdivision D shall not apply to a person who has been requested to leave enters the property within the designated period and solicits, asks, or begs with the express authorization of a person specified in subdivision D.1. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2338, § 1, 4-20-2010)  
10.15.040 - Penalty. 
A.  A violation of any provision of this chapter or a failure to comply with any mandatory requirements of this chapter is subject to prosecution in accordance with Title 1 of the National City Municipal Code and may be enforced through injunctive relief or other relief available by law. Penalties for violations of the provisions of this chapter may result in up to a misdemeanor citation for each day in violation, punishable by a maximum of one year in jail and a one thousand dollar fine. 
B.  Administering departments are authorized to charge cost recovery fees for services provided under this chapter. Cost recovery fees may also be recovered for equipment and personnel expenses incurred. Said fees may be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2338, § 1, 4-20-2010)  
10.15.050 - Severability. 
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be separate and severable. The invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section or portion of this chapter, or the invalidity of the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter, or the validity of its application to other persons or circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2338, § 1, 4-20-2010)  
10.15.060 - Non-exclusivity. 
Nothing in this chapter shall limit or preclude the enforcement of other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2338, § 1, 4-20-2010)  
Chapter 10.16 - FIREWORKS 
 
10.16.010 - Fireworks prohibited. 
It is unlawful to discharge, fire, use, possess or store any or all types and manner of fireworks including firecrackers, bombs, rockets, torpedoes, Roman candles, or any other type or manner of fireworks or substances designed or intended for pyrotechnic displays, in the city. 
(Ord. 1481 (part), 1975; Ord. 674 § 1, 1940)  
10.16.020 - Pistol-type devices—Firing unlawful. 
It is unlawful to fire any pistol, cane, cannon or appliances using blank cartridges or caps containing chlorate of potash mixture used for amusement or celebration purposes in the city. 
(Ord. 674 § 2, 1940)  
10.16.030 - Gunpowder and explosives—Sale prohibited. 
The sale or exhibition for wholesale or retail within the city is unlawful and is prohibited and the sale, use or possession of gunpowder or explosives; also combination of chlorate of potash, and sulphur, or similar compounds, is prohibited for celebration or amusement purposes. 
(Ord. 674 § 3, 1940)  
10.16.040 - Fireworks exhibition—Permit required. 
The city council upon application of any person, may issue a permit for the public display of fireworks under the direct supervision of a person examined and approved by the fire marshal. All such display or displays of fireworks shall be of such character and so located, discharged or fired, as, in the opinion of the city council shall not be hazardous to surrounding property or endanger any person or persons. 
(Ord. 674 § 4, 1940)  
10.16.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and is punishable as prescribed in Section 1.20.010. 
(Ord. 1621, 1978; Ord. 1358 § 2 (part), 1973: Ord. 674 § 5, 1940)  
10.16.060 - Religious ceremonies. 
Religious ceremonies shall be exempt from regulation or permit processes except as hereinafter provided. 
A.  Use of firecrackers allowed in religious ceremonies. State Fire Marshal Regulations shall be complied with as follows: 
1.  Firecrackers shall not exceed fifty milligrams of pyrotechnic composition. 
2.  Firecrackers shall be purchased, used and discharged by a licensed (Restricted Commercial, as defined in Title 19 of the California Administrative Code) pyrotechnic operator. 
3.  The religious organization shall secure a fireworks display permit from the fire department by providing the following information to the chief: 
a.  Name of organization sponsoring display; 
b.  Date and time of display; 
c.  Diagram of grounds where display will be held and exact location of display itself; 
d.  Certificate of insurance in an amount equal to three hundred thousand dollars personal injury and property damage; 
e.  Pyrotechnic operator's name and license number; 
f.  Storage area for fireworks before and during display. 
B.  Irrespective of Section 10.16.010, prohibiting fireworks, firecrackers may be used in religious ceremonies, subject to the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 1828, 1984)  
Chapter 10.17 - REGISTRATION OF RENTERS AT PUBLIC STORAGE FACILITIES 
 
10.17.010 - Public storage facilities—Required information—Retention of information. 
The city council finds and determines that it is important, in the interest of public safety, to require renters at public storage facilities to provide personal identification information to the operators of such facilities, and for operators of public storage facilities to retain the personal identification information of the renters of such facilities, which information shall be available for reasonable inspection by a law enforcement officer. 
(Ord. 2276 (part), 2005)  
10.17.020 - Definitions. 
"Law enforcement officer" is described as any California peace officer, federal agent or federal criminal investigator. 
"Operators" is described in Section 4.32.020 of the Municipal Code. 
"Public storage facility" is defined as building(s) or grounds established for public use for the purpose of safekeeping articles and/or belongings. 
"Renter(s)" means an individual(s) who provides compensation to an operator for the use of any property, movable or fixed. 
(Ord. 2276 (part), 2005)  
10.17.030 - Regulations. 
A.  Every renter must furnish to the operator of public storage facility photo identification as part of the registration for the hire of storage units at that public storage facility by the renter, and must identify all authorized or proposed occupants of the storage unit hired to the operator. Photo identification consists of one of the following: a valid driver's license issued by the renter's state or county of residence; a federal or state government or military identification card from the United States of America; a passport; or any other form of identification on which the renter's photograph and current address appears. If because of physical disability, a renter is unable to furnish a governmentally issued form of photographic identification, an operator is authorized to accept any commercially reasonable form of identification that will serve to identify that renter. 
B.  The operator of the public storage facility shall maintain a record of the following identification produced by the renter: 
1.  Name of renter, address, date of birth, driver's license number and state of county of issue; 
2.  Name of each person who is authorized or invited by the renter to place belongings (occupy) in the rented storage unit during the term of hire. 
C.  An operator shall retain any records required under this section for one year after the date the renter vacates the storage unit; the operator may destroy them after that time. 
D.  An operator shall notify any renter who refuses to produce identification that it is unlawful to fail or refuse to provide proper identification or the identity of occupants to any operator of a public storage facility as a precondition to the registration process. 
(Ord. 2276 (part), 2005)  
10.17.040 - Administration. 
An operator may post a notice advising renters that a renter is liable for any storage unit charges or damage to the storage unit during the term of hire, whether caused by the renter or other authorized occupant, or both, until the storage unit is vacated by the renter and all authorized occupants and the keys are returned to the operator. The notice may also provide that the renter may be held liable for charges or damages caused by an occupant who was not identified by the renter but occupied the storage unit with the renter's permission. 
(Ord. 2276 (part), 2005)  
10.17.050 - Violations. 
A.  It is unlawful for a renter to refuse to provide identification to an operator or fail to identify to the operator all occupants who will be authorized or invited by the renter to occupy the storage unit by the hired renter. 
B.  It is unlawful for an operator of a public storage facility to fail to require a renter to provide photo identification; fail to retain the information required by Section 10.17.030 of this chapter, or to refuse to provide such information upon request of a law enforcement officer conducting an investigation. Provided, however, that any duty required under Section 10.17.030 of this chapter terminates after one year, following the date the renter vacates the storage unit. 
(Ord. 2276 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 10.19 - SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE OF PUBLIC NUISANCE VEHICLES 
 
10.19.010 - Public nuisance vehicles. 
A.  Any vehicle described in subsection B of this section is declared to be a public nuisance, and that vehicle shall be enjoined, abated or forfeited as provided in this chapter. Any person and his or her servant, agent or employee who owns, leases, conducts or maintains any vehicle (hereinafter referred to as "vehicle") used for any of the purposes or acts set forth in this section is guilty of and responsible for maintaining a public nuisance. 
B.  The following are declared public nuisance vehicles: 
1.  Any vehicle used to solicit, procure or engage in an act of prostitution; 
2.  Any vehicle used to illegally sell or transport or attempt to illegally sell or transport any controlled substance; 
3.  Any vehicle that is used for purposes of illegal dumping, illegal grading or illegal excavation on public or private property; or 
4.  Any vehicle that is used by one or more members of a criminal street gang as an instrumentality of or in furtherance of "gang activity." 
(Ord. 2266 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 2255 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 2239 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 2218 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.19.015 - Definitions. 
Within this chapter, the following meanings shall apply: 
"Bulky item" means any discarded furniture, home or industrial appliance or any abandoned vehicle or a part of an abandoned vehicle. 
"Controlled substance" means a drug, substance or immediate precursor that is listed in any schedule in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058. 
"Driver" means any person who drives or is in physical control of a vehicle as defined in this section. 
"Gang activity" means activity conducted by one or more members of "a criminal street gang," as those terms are used or described in Penal Code Sections 186.22 through 186.28. 
"Hazardous waste" means any waste as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 25117. 
"Illegal dumping" means the wilful throwing, dropping, placing or depositing of a bulky item, hazardous waste or solid waste on public or private property not designated for that dumping or disposal purpose. "Illegal dumping" does not include the discarding, dropping, or scattering of small quantities of waste matter ordinarily carried on or about the person, including, but not limited to, beverage containers and closures, packaging, wrappers, wastepaper, newspapers, and magazines and including waste matter that escapes or is allowed to escape from a container, receptacle, or package. 
"Illegal excavation" or "illegal grading" refers to the moving of earth on or removal of earth from private or public property without a permit required by law or the National City Municipal Code. 
"Prostitution" means engaging in lewd or sexual conduct for money or other consideration. 
"Solid waste" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, indus-trial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, dewatered, treated or chemically fixed sewage sludge that is not hazardous waste, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes and other discarded solid and semisolid wastes. Solid waste does not include hazardous waste. 
"Vehicle," for purposes of this chapter, means any transportation device that is equipped with a motor, that is pulled by a transportation device with a motor, or requires the driver to have in his or her immediate possession a valid driver's license for the appropriate class of vehicle being driven without regard to whether it is required to be registered with the California Department of Motor Vehicles or the motor vehicle department of another jurisdiction. It includes, without limitation, automobiles, pickup trucks, dump trucks, tractor-trailers, earth movers, earth graders and bulldozers. 
(Ord. 2266 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 2255 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 2239 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.19.020 - Procedures regarding declaration of public nuisance by court or city attorney. 
A.  Upon proof that a vehicle was used for any of the purposes set forth in Section 10.19.010(B)(3) (illegal dumping, grading or excavation) or Section 10.19.010(B)(4) (illegal gang activity) of this chapter, the court upon application, or the city attorney upon compliance with the applicable sections of this chapter, may declare the vehicle a public nuisance and order that the vehicle be seized or impounded and, where applicable, forfeited and sold, and the proceeds distributed as set forth in Section 10.19.090 of this chapter. 
B.  Vehicles impounded or seized pursuant to Section 10.19.010(B)(2) (illegal drug-related activity) of this chapter, shall be seized and forfeited as provided by Health and Safety Code Sections 11469 to 11495. 
C.  Any public nuisance vehicle described in Section 10.19.010(B)(1) (illegal prostitution-related activity) of this chapter, may be impounded pursuant to a five year pilot program for a period not to exceed forty-eight hours upon the arrest or conviction of the operator of that vehicle. Only the provisions of Sections 10.19.040(B) and 10.19.050 of this chapter shall be applicable to this category of public nuisance vehicle, and the vehicle shall be subject to release from impound upon payment of any applicable impound fees or charges. 
D.  Nothing contained in this section shall preclude seizure, impoundment or forfeiture of a vehicle in accordance with Section 10.19.040(B) of this chapter or any other applicable law. 
(Ord. 2266 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 2255 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 2239 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 2218 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.19.030 - Right, title and interest in public nuisance vehicle. 
All right, title and interest in any vehicle described in Section 10.19.010 shall vest in the city upon commission of an act giving rise to the public nuisance declared under this chapter. It shall not be a prerequisite to proceedings under this chapter that an occupant or user of a vehicle first be convicted of an underlying offense or crime before a public nuisance justifying action under this chapter may be declared to exist. 
(Ord. 2266 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 2255 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 2239 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 2218 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.19.040 - Seizure. 
A.  Vehicles subject to seizure or forfeiture under this chapter may be seized by any peace officer upon process issued by any court having jurisdiction over the vehicle. 
B.  Seizure without process may be made when any of the following situations exist: 
1.  The seizure is incident to an arrest with or without a warrant, or a search under a search warrant; or 
2.  There is probable cause to believe that the vehicle was used in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2266 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 2255 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 2239 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 2218 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.19.050 - Receipts, notices and post-seizure hearings. 
A.  A receipt for any vehicle seized pursuant to this chapter shall be delivered to any person from whose possession the vehicle was seized, in accordance with Section 1412 of the Penal Code. 
B.  The National City police department shall determine the identity of each legal and registered owner whose right, title, interest or lien of a seized public nuisance vehicle is of record in the California Department of Motor Vehicles or other jurisdiction of vehicle registration, and shall send a notice within two business days following the seizure for any authorized claimant to request a post-seizure hearing to determine the validity of the seizure. Notice shall be sent to the address appearing in the records of the appropriate state motor vehicle registry. The request for a hearing must be received by the department within ten calendar days following the date of mailing of the notice. The post-seizure hearing shall be conducted within two business days following the day of receipt of the request for the hearing. The city may authorize any officer or employee to conduct the hearing, provided the hearing officer is not the same person who directed the seizure of the vehicle. Failure of a potential claimant to request or attend a scheduled hearing within the appropriate time frame shall satisfy the post-seizure requirement. If the vehicle is not subject to registration or is not registered, notice shall be provided to the operator or any person or entity with an apparent interest, such as may appear by inscribed or painted legend of ownership appearing on the vehicle; if no legend of ownership is apparent, a notice shall instead be published in a newspaper of general circulation describing the vehicle and an advice regarding the seizure and potential forfeiture. Failure of the department to provide notice when ownership information is not available, or failure by an interested party to actually receive notice, shall not invalidate any proceeding under this chapter. 
C.  Any person with an interest in a seized public nuisance vehicle shall also be notified that he or she may post a bond with the city attorney at any time to obtain release of the vehicle from impoundment pending ultimate disposition upon its status, and the vehicle shall be released from impound immediately upon payment of any applicable storage and impoundment charges. 
(Ord. 2266 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 2255 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 2239 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 2218 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.19.060 - Evidence. 
Any vehicle seized pursuant to Section 10.19.040(B) of this chapter, where appropriate, may be held for evidence. The city attorney shall have the authority to institute and maintain proceedings pursuant to the authority conferred by this chapter. Seizure and impoundment of a public nuisance vehicle as evidence neither requires nor precludes forfeiture proceedings under this chapter. When a public nuisance vehicle that is seized as evidence is in the custody of the district attorney or other public or governmental agency, the city attorney shall coordinate the request for custody of the vehicle as soon as needs or proceedings of the other agency no longer require its possession. 
(Ord. 2266 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 2255 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 2239 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 2218 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.19.070 - Forfeiture procedure. 
A.  Except as provided in this section, when the city attorney determines that a vehicle described in Section 10.19.010 of this chapter is subject to forfeiture, the city attorney shall file a petition for forfeiture with the Superior Court of San Diego County. 
B.  A petition for forfeiture under this subdivision shall be filed as soon as practicable, but in any case, within sixty calendar days following the seizure of the vehicle which is subject to forfeiture, or, if the vehicle is in the custody of another agency, within sixty calendar days following its release by that agency. 
C.  The city attorney shall, within ten calendar days following seizure, notify any interested party of the seizure of the vehicle and the intended forfeiture proceedings, and a statement that any interested party may also file a verified claim with the Superior Court of San Diego County to contest the seizure in accordance with Section 10.19.080 of this chapter. The notice shall be served by personal delivery or by registered mail upon each person who has an interest in the seized vehicle. Any interested party may post a bond with the city attorney at any time to obtain release of the vehicle from impoundment pending judicial or administrative disposition upon its status. 
D.  All notices shall set forth the time within which a claim of interest in the vehicle seized or subject to forfeiture is required to be filed pursuant to Section 10.19.090 of this chapter. 
E.  With respect to vehicles described in Section 10.19.010 of this chapter for which forfeiture is contested, the city shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used as set forth in Section 10.19.010. 
F.  The city attorney, pursuant to this subsection, may order the forfeiture of vehicles seized under this chapter. The city attorney shall provide notice of the proceedings under this subsection, including: 
1.  A description of the vehicle; 
2.  The date and place of seizure; 
3.  The violation of law alleged with respect to forfeiture of the vehicle; 
4.  The instructions for filing and serving a claim and posting a release bond with the city attorney pursuant to Section 10.19.090 of this chapter, and time limits for filing a claim. 
G.  If no claims are timely filed, the city attorney shall prepare a written declaration of forfeiture of the vehicle to the city and dispose of the vehicle in accordance with Section 10.19.100 of this chapter. A written declaration of forfeiture signed by the city attorney under this section shall be deemed to provide good and sufficient title to the forfeited vehicle. The city attorney ordering forfeiture pursuant to this section shall provide a copy of the declaration of forfeiture to any person who received notice of the forfeiture proceedings. 
H.  If a claim is timely filed, then the city attorney shall file a petition for forfeiture with the Superior Court pursuant to this section within thirty calendar days of the receipt of the claim. 
I.  Forfeiture proceedings shall not be applicable to any vehicle that was reported stolen prior to the act proscribed in Section 10.19.010 of this chapter, unless it shall appear that the report was false, that the identity of the registered owner cannot be reasonably ascertained or that the registered owner failed to redeem the vehicle within sixty calendar days after seizure. Otherwise, the registered or legal owner of a stolen vehicle may claim the vehicle upon payment of tow, storage and release charges, provided that the vehicle is not subject to any other holds prescribed by the Vehicle Code for traffic, parking or current registration violations. 
(Ord. 2266 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 2255 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 2239 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 2218 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.19.080 - Interest claim. 
A.  Any person claiming an interest in a vehicle seized pursuant to Section 10.19.010 of this chapter must, within ten calendar days from the date of the notice of seizure, file with the city attorney a claim, verified in accordance with Section 446 of the Code of Civil Procedure, stating his or her interest in the vehicle. 
B.  1.  If a verified claim is filed, the forfeiture proceeding shall be set within thirty calendar days after receipt of the claim for a court hearing as soon as shall be possible. 
2.  The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure shall apply to proceedings under this chapter unless otherwise inconsistent with the provisions or procedures set forth in this chapter; however, in proceedings under this chapter, there shall be no joinder of actions, no coordination of actions except for forfeiture proceedings, nor cross-complaints and the issues shall be limited strictly to the questions related to this chapter. 
C.  In lieu of forfeiture, the city attorney may allow an interested party to pay an amount not to exceed the fair market value of the vehicle seized in lieu of prosecuting the forfeiture proceeding, and reclaim the vehicle, except when the vehicle is seized under Section 10.19.010(B)(4) of this chapter, in which case it shall only be subject to judicial forfeiture proceedings. 
(Ord. 2266 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 2255 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 2239 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 2218 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.19.090 - Sale of vehicles. 
Vehicles seized pursuant to this chapter and forfeited to the city shall be sold, unless cash is paid as settlement in lieu of forfeiture of the vehicle under Section 10.19.080(C) of this chapter. The proceeds of sale or settlement shall be distributed and appropriated as follows: 
A.  To the office of the city attorney and the police department or other local law enforcement agency for all expenditures incurred in connection with the publication of the notices set forth in Section 10.19.080 of this chapter, and the sale of the vehicle, including expenditures for any necessary repairs, storage or transportation of any vehicle seized under this chapter; 
B.  To any bona fide innocent purchaser, conditional sales vendor, mortgagee or lien holder of the vehicle, if any, up to the amount of his or her interest in the vehicle, when the court or city attorney declaring the forfeiture orders a distribution to that person or entity; 
C.  The remaining funds shall be distributed as follows: 
1.  Fifty percent to the local law enforcement entities that participated in the seizure, distributed to reflect the proportionate contribution of each agency, 
2.  Fifty percent to the city's nuisance abatement fund, in accordance with Section 1.36.190 of this code. 
D.  All funds distributed to each local law enforcement agency pursuant to subsection C of this section shall not supplant any funds that would, in the absence of this subdivision, be made available to support the law enforcement and prosecutorial efforts of those agencies. For the purposes of this section, local governmental entity means any city, county, or city and county in this state. 
(Ord. 2266 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 2255 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 2239 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 2218 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.19.100 - Recovery of monetary loss or costs of abatement. 
Nothing in this chapter shall preclude an owner of a vehicle from recovering damages for the actual amount of loss from any person or entity who committed a wrongful act or acts giving rise to the seizure or forfeiture of the vehicle, nor shall forfeiture of that vehicle preclude the city from seeking restitution from all responsible parties for the actual costs of abatement of the underlying public nuisance for or within which the subject vehicle was used. 
(Ord. 2266 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 2255 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 2239 § 1 (part), 2004)  
Chapter 10.20 - PREMISES USED FOR ILLEGAL DRUG ACTIVITY, GANG ACTIVITY OR SALE OR DISPLAY OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA* 
* Prior ordinance history: Ord. 1990. 
 
10.20.010 - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this chapter: 
"Controlled substance" means any substance, precursor or analog, specified in Health and Safety Code Section 11000 et seq. 
"Drug dealing activity or purpose" means any activity involving the illegal possession or possession for sale, or the serving, or the storing, keeping, manufacturing or transferring, or giving away of illegal controlled substances in, upon or from the premises. 
"Drug paraphernalia," for purposes of this chapter, means any merchandise, equipment, products or materials described in Health and Safety Code Section 11364.5(d) which are designed for uses regulated by that section. Except as provided in Section 10.20.070, the definition shall include cigarette rolling papers. 
"Drug-related nuisance" means any activity commonly associated with illegal drug dealing, including but not limited to excessive noise, excessive traffic, steady foot traffic day and night to the premises, public use of illegal controlled substances, barricaded premises or the sighting of weapons, brought to the attention of the owner by occupants, persons within the community, employees of the city or law enforcement agencies. It shall include the sale or display of drug paraphernalia. 
"Gang activity" means activity described in Penal Code Sections 186.22, 186.26, or 186.28 that occurs on a "premise used by a criminal street gang," as those terms are used in Penal Code Sections 186.22 through 186.28. 
"Gang-related nuisance" means "gang activity" that is conducted at or from premises regulated by this chapter. 
"Occupant" means a resident, tenant, subtenant, lessee, guest or invitee, sublessee or any person not a trespasser, possessing, occupying or using premises. 
"Owner" means an owner of title or interest, landlord, lessor, sublessor, lessee, manager, representative or agent, employee or mortgagee, including any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity. 
"Premise(s) used by a criminal street gang" means a "premise" defined in Penal Code Section 186.22a. 
"Premises" means a building, place, room, space, enclosure, vessel or appurtenances thereof, including common areas, garage facilities, driveways, alleyways, stairwells and elevators. It includes residential, commercial and industrial property. 
"Responsible party" is as defined in Section 1.36.010, and includes an owner or occupant defined in this section. 
(Ord. 2253 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.20.020 - Prohibition. 
A.  No owner shall knowingly cause, permit, allow, aid or abet drug dealing activity or purpose, or a drug-related nuisance, gang activity or a gang-related nuisance, as defined in this chapter on premises owned or controlled by that owner. 
B.  No occupant shall knowingly commit an act or permit, allow, suffer or aid and abet another occupant of that premise to commit an act constituting a drug dealing activity or purpose, a drug-related nuisance, gang activity or a gang-related nuisance, as defined in this chapter, on premises occupied or controlled by that occupant. 
C.  Except as provided in Section 10.20.070, violation of this subsection constitutes the maintenance of a public nuisance and may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor. No prosecution may be instituted against an owner, occupant or other responsible party under this section until that party is first notified by the city attorney regarding the existence of the activity constituting the public nuisance in accordance with Section 10.20.030 and has failed to abate the nuisance. 
(Ord. 2253 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.20.030 - Notice of violation—Order. 
If the city attorney determines that any premises within the city are being used or maintained in violation of Section 10.20.020, the city attorney may order the owner or other responsible party of that premise to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
The order shall be given to the owner or other responsible party either by personal service or by a letter sent by both certified mail and first-class mail, the receipt of either shall constitute service of notice. 
The order shall include a description of the premises and information establishing that the premises are being used in violation of Section 10.20.020. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as authorizing the release of information which would violate an individual's right to privacy or any other applicable provision of law that precludes the release of public records. Nothing in this chapter shall authorize a search of any premises or seizure of any property by an owner under color of authority of the city or any employee or official thereof. 
(Ord. 2253 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.20.040 - Failure to comply with notice of violation. 
Within sixty days of receipt of the notice and order described in Section 10.20.030, an owner shall in good faith, if required by Section 10.20.030, give notice as required by law and bring an action to recover possession of and to evict an occupant or occupants from, premises described therein. 
If the owner fails to comply with this section, the city attorney may take civil or criminal action, or both, to enforce this chapter. 
Good faith compliance may be shown by the owner obtaining the voluntary surrender of the premises from the occupant, the owner commencing and prosecuting an unlawful detainer proceeding, or by the owner pursuing any other lawful means to obtain possession from the occupant. 
(Ord. 2253 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.20.050 - Declaration of public nuisance. 
In addition to any other enforcement action, the city attorney may declare an alleged violation of Section 10.20.020 or the activities described therein to constitute a public nuisance and may commence abatement of the conditions giving rise thereto in accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 11570 or Chapter 1.36 of this code. It shall not be a prerequisite that an owner or occupant be convicted of an underlying offense or crime before a public nuisance may be declared to exist. 
(Ord. 2253 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.20.060 - Construction. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to be interpreted in such a way as to create a principal-agent relationship between the city and the owner. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the owner from complying with this chapter by commencing and prosecuting unlawful detainer proceedings based on legal grounds other than drug or gang-related activity nor shall it preclude such proceedings because of a drug or gang-related nuisance. 
(Ord. 2253 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.20.070 - Sale or display of drug paraphernalia—Prohibited. 
A.  The sale or display of merchandise meeting the strict definition of "drug paraphernalia" is prohibited on all premises, excepting premises exempted by Health and Safety Code Section 11364.5(f). This section is regulatory only, and violation of this section shall be grounds for the revocation, suspension or denial of a permit or business license required for the lawful operation of a commercial or industrial business. The provisions and procedures of Section 1.12.030 and Chapter 1.42 are applicable to violations of this section. 
B.  This section shall not apply to cigarette rolling papers that are sold or displayed in connection with the sale of loose tobacco products. 
(Ord. 2253 § 1 (part), 2004)  
10.20.080 - Severability. 
If any section, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. It is hereby declared that this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, part, or portion thereof, would have been adopted or passed irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, sentences, clauses, phrases, parts, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 2253 § 1 (part), 2004)  
Chapter 10.21 - RETAIL SALE OR DISTRIBUTION OF NOVELTY LIGHTERS 
 
10.21.010 - Novelty lighters—Prohibitions—Inapplicability. 
Beginning on June 1, 2007, the retail sale, offer of retail sale, gift or distribution of any novelty lighter within the territorial jurisdiction of the city of National City is prohibited. This prohibition is inapplicable to: (1) novelty lighters which are only being actively transported through the city; or (2) novelty lighters located in a warehouse closed to the public for purposes of retail sales. 
(Ord. 2294 § 1 (part), 2007)  
10.21.020 - Definition. 
"Novelty lighter" means a lighter which is especially attractive to children ten years or younger due to a toy-like design or other features, such as buttons or devices that initiate visual effects, flashing lights, or musical sounds that might encourage a child to use the lighter. 
(Ord. 2294 § 1 (part), 2007)  
10.21.030 - Exceptions. 
The term novelty lighter excludes: (1) any lighter manufactured prior to 1980; and (2) any lighter which lacks fuel or a device necessary to produce combustion or a flame. 
(Ord. 2294 § 1 (part), 2007)  
10.21.040 - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the fire marshal, any police officer, any code conformance officer, and any other city official authorized to enforce any provision of the municipal code. 
(Ord. 2294 § 1 (part), 2007)  
10.21.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction therefor, shall be punished as prescribed in Section 1.20.010. 
(Ord. 2294 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 10.22 - SALES ACTIVITY AND SOLICITATION FROM OR AFFECTING VEHICLES, TRAFFIC, PUBLIC PROPERTY AND AREAS, AND COMMERCIAL PARKING AREAS* 
* Prior ordinance history: Ord. 2076. 
 
10.22.005 - Purpose and intent. 
The city council finds and determines that in order to protect the public health, welfare and safety, promote the orderly and safe flow of traffic, enhance pedestrian safety, and maintain community aesthetics, it is appropriate to regulate certain types of public vending and solicitation activities. The objective is to improve public safety and eliminate hazards to pedestrians and vehicles. The city council therefore enacts the regulations of this chapter in an organized, comprehensive, content-neutral "time, place, manner," fashion, in order to promote and obtain those goals and objectives. 
(Ord. 2168 § 5 (part), 1999)  
10.22.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following meanings shall apply: 
A.  "Solicit" or "solicitation" means an act by which the availability of goods, labor, services, money, merchandise or similar mediums of commerce, barter or exchange is made known to, or is requested of or from, other persons. It can include words, physical gestures, or passive or animated displays upon or through which a message is displayed. As defined herein, a solicitation shall be deemed complete when made whether or not an actual employment relationship is created, a transaction is completed or an exchange takes place. 
B.  "Employment" means and includes services, industry or labor performed by a person for wages or other compensation under any contract of hire, written, oral, express or implied. 
C.  "Merchandise" means any tangible object of nominal or value greater than one cent, including but not limited to food, goods, flowers, beverages or iced flavors, but excluding "newspapers" defined in subsection D of this section. 
D.  "Newspapers" means and includes any journal, newspaper of general or limited circulation, periodical, magazine or other multi-page printed material that is not a "handbill" or part of the graphics on a container. 
E.  "Pushcart" means any non-self-propelled wagon or platform on wheels, including a bicycle or tricycle, which is not required to be registered under the California Vehicle Code. 
F.  "Solicitor" or "attendant" means an employee or agent of a principal, or the principal, who solicits or sells as defined in this section. 
G.  "Handbill" means any material of paper or similar lightweight material typically of a single page used to advertise an event or sale, which is capable of being blown about by the elements if not securely fastened. 
H.  "Commercial parking area" means privately owned property designed or used primarily for the parking of vehicles, which adjoins one or more shopping centers, malls, or commercial establishments. It excludes the parking area of a "modest retail establishment." 
I.  "Shopping center," as defined in Section 18.04.596 and as used in this chapter, means a group of commercial establishments planned and developed, owned or managed as a unit, and related in location, size, and type of shops to the trade area which the unit serves with off-street parking and loading provided on the property. Typically, shopping centers may include but are not limited to a combination or complex of grocery, drug, mercantile, restaurant and similar shops and retail establishments which cater to the public at large. They can be characterized as a shopping area which members of the public at large may frequent, without an apparent specific purpose or intent to purchase specific goods or services from a predetermined supplier or purveyor. "Shopping center" excludes a "modest retail establishment." 
J.  "Modest retail establishment" means a commercial parcel of less than twenty thousand square feet in area which consists of and is used primarily for medical, dental, office, banking or similar professional suites and services or for specific retail services, and the parking areas of which are intended for and restricted to the tenants, employees and specific clientele of those businesses—and not the public at large. 
(Ord. 2168 § 5 (part), 1999)  
10.22.020 - Prohibition of solicitation, distribution or sales affecting vehicles in public right-of-way. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, while standing in any portion of the public right-of-way, including but not limited to public streets, sidewalks and driveways, to solicit or attempt to solicit from, or to sell, distribute or attempt to sell or distribute merchandise, newspapers or handbills to any person traveling in a vehicle along a public right-of-way. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person, while traveling as the occupant or driver of any vehicle, to solicit or attempt to solicit from, or to sell, buy, distribute or attempt to sell to or buy or distribute merchandise, handbills or newspapers from any person who is within the public right-of-way, including but not limited to a public street, sidewalk, or driveway. 
(Ord. 2168 § 5 (part), 1999)  
10.22.025 - Sale or distribution of newspapers upon public sidewalks, rights-of-way and public property—Regulated. 
A.  It is unlawful for an itinerant vendor to sell or distribute newspapers from any portion of a street or from the median separating opposing lanes of vehicular traffic. 
B.  The sale or distribution of newspapers to pedestrians by itinerant vendors upon public sidewalks, public property (other than streets or medians separating opposing lines of vehicular traffic) or public parks is not regulated or prohibited by this chapter. 
C.  Stationary newsracks that display only newspapers for sale may be located upon public sidewalks without a permit provided the following rules regarding placement are observed: 
1.  The newsrack contains the name, date of installation, address, and phone number of the person or entity responsible for its distribution, maintenance and refund of coinage; 
2.  The sponsoring entity provides a certificate of insurance to the city engineer certifying that the sponsor has a minimum one million dollars of comprehensive general liability insurance in effect covering the installation; 
3.  Dimensions, positioning and condition: 
a.  The newsrack does not exceed a maximum dimension of sixty inches in height, thirty inches in width and twenty-four inches in depth, 
b.  Newsracks may be placed next to each other, provided that no group containing more than five newsracks shall be placed along a curb, 
c.  The edges of the newsrack shall be designed to avoid injury or danger to sight disabled or wheelchair users, 
d.  The newsrack may be affixed to the sidewalk by means of removable mounting bolts or fasteners, 
e.  No newsrack will be chained, bolted, or otherwise attached to any fixture in the public right-of-way, 
f.  The newsrack is kept painted, free of graffiti, handbills, rust and corrosion and in an operable condition at all times; 
4.  Content: 
a.  Any newsrack containing printed material which openly displays "specific anatomical areas," as defined in Section 18.69.020, shall be covered with an opaque material (or blinder rack) to obscure public display of the specified anatomical areas, 
b.  Except when located in an area that excludes minors, any newsrack containing "harmful matter" defined by Penal Code Section 313 shall be attended by an adult, in order to prevent a sale or display to a minor in violation of Penal Code Section 313.1; 
5.  Location: 
a.  The newsrack is not located in front of any display window or the door of a building abutting a sidewalk, 
b.  No portion of the newsrack projects into a distance of eighteen inches measured from the edge of the curb line, nor less than six inches from any building, 
c.  The clear unobstructed path of travel on the adjacent sidewalk is not less than four feet measured horizontally, perpendicular to the curb line or street line, from the closest projecting edge of the newsrack to an opposing building, structure or utility cabinet or poles, 
d.  The newsrack is not within one hundred feet of any other newsrack on the same side of the street in the same block containing the same publication, 
e.  The newsrack is not located on one side of a sidewalk directly opposite another newsrack, 
f.  The newsrack is not within five feet of a disabled person's parking space (curb painted blue) in accordance with the California Vehicle Code Section 21458, 
g.  The newsrack is not within five feet of any marked crosswalk, or within ten feet of any curb return, 
h.  The newsrack is not within five feet of any driveway top curb opening, 
i.  The newsrack is not within five feet ahead of or fifteen feet to the rear of a bus-stop sign, or within five feet of the edge of a bus bench, 
j.  The newsrack is not within five feet of a fire hydrant, or within the intersections of sidewalks, 
k.  A newsrack may be mounted on a removable concrete slab on any portion of unimproved public right-of-way behind a sidewalk's furthest edge from the curb in order to observe the restriction of subsection 10.22.025(C)(5). The slab shall be of minimum dimensions of twenty-four by thirty inches horizontally and four inches in thickness. The slab must be removed when the newsrack is removed. 
D.  Newsracks that do not comply with subsection (C) of this section shall not be installed on public sidewalks or the adjoining parkway except upon the issuance of an encroachment permit by the city engineer, who will be the enforcement and administration authority for this section. The permit application form will be as developed by the city engineer. The permit fee will be as established in the National City fee schedule. No newsrack may be installed on other public property without an encroachment permit. An encroachment permit will not be issued if the proposed placement presents a fair risk of injury to persons or an adverse impact upon public convenience and safety, or if the placement hinders the reasonable use of the public right-of-way. 
E.  It is unlawful to remove a newsrack for more than seventy-two hours unless the sidewalk or curb is restored to original condition, and all mounting holes filled in or mounted bolts are ground flush to the sidewalk surface. 
F.  Newsracks that are installed without a permit and which do not comply with subsection (C) of this section are subject to summary removal and impound storage at the expense of the exhibitor. 
G.  The city manager or designate may relocate a newsrack temporarily when public work is necessary at the location. The costs of relocation and reinstallation shall be borne by the owner or permittee, which shall be a condition to the issuance of any encroachment permit or placement without a permit under this section. 
H.  Operators of existing newsracks shall be allowed a grace period of ninety days following adoption of this section in which to comply with the requirements of this section. 
I.  Allowing a newsrack to remain empty for a period of thirty consecutive days establishes a rebuttable presumption of abandonment and provides a basis for removal or revocation of the encroachment permit. The city engineer shall communicate to the newsrack operator in writing giving advance notice of action proposed under this section. 
J.  A permittee or applicant may appeal to the city manager any action taken by the city engineer in enforcement of this section by filing with the city manager a statement within two working days of such action setting forth grounds for the appeal. The city manager may affirm, overrule or modify the action of the city engineer. Notice of such action will be given to the applicant in person or in writing. Similarly, any action taken by the city manager may be appealed to the city council by filing a statement with the city clerk within five calendar days after receipt of the written notice. 
(Ord. 2168 § 5 (part), 1999)  
10.22.030 - Prohibition of solicitation in unauthorized locations within commercial parking areas. 
A.  It is unlawful to solicit or attempt to solicit within a commercial parking area, except within an area authorized by the property owner for solicitation. This section shall not be construed to apply to solicitation to perform employment or business for the owner or lawful tenants of the subject premises. 
B.  This section shall only apply to commercial parking areas where the following exists: 
1.  The owner of the commercial parking area has established a written policy which provides area(s) for lawful solicitation in locations which are accessible to the public and do not interfere with normal business operations of the commercial premises; 
2.  A copy of the policy has been submitted to the city manager to be maintained in city files; and 
3.  The owner of the commercial parking area has posted a notice in a conspicuous place at each entrance to the commercial parking area of not less than eighteen by twenty-four inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height and not to exceed in total area, six square feet. The notice shall be in substantially the following form: 
It is a misdemeanor to engage in the solicitation of employment, business or contributions of money or other property in areas of this commercial parking lot that are not approved for such activity by the property owner. 
C.  Where the commercial parking area is part of a modest retail establishment, the proscriptions of subsection A of this section shall apply without the need for compliance with the requirements of subsection B of this section. 
D.  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the owner of a commercial parking area from prohibiting the parking of vehicles for sale. 
(Ord. 2229 § 3 (part), 2003; Ord. 2168 § 5 (part), 1999)  
10.22.040 - Sale of merchandise upon public sidewalks, rights-of-ways and public property—Prohibited. 
A.  Except upon the issuance of a permit issued pursuant to Chapter 13.30, Chapter 15.60, or as provided in Section 10.22.040(B), it is unlawful to sell or display any merchandise upon or within a public sidewalk or right-of-way, any public park or any other public property. 
B.  The display of merchandise, whether with or without graphics or lettering, or both, by an organization or an attendant or solicitor on behalf of an organization as part of its first amendment protected expressive activity will not violate subsection A of this section as merchandise displayed for sale, provided all the following apply: 
1.  At least one sign with a minimum dimension of twelve by eighteen inches is prominently displayed at the center of the display site bearing language in English in letters of at least one-half inch in height that announces the following: 
All merchandise on display is available for a donation in an amount of the donor's choice. 
To be prominently displayed, the sign must be at an eye level of between a minimum of three feet to a maximum of six feet and be clearly visible in its entirety from the sidewalk or right-of-way from a distance of at least ten feet to any prospective donor or passerby. 
2.  All other signs at the site of display are restricted to a maximum size of twelve inches by eighteen inches each. 
C.  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for a solicitor or attendant to refuse to deliver merchandise to a donor who has made a voluntary contribution for merchandise which is displayed under subsection B of this section by an organization which has posted the sign required by subsection (B)(1) of this section. 
D.  It is unlawful to park a vehicle offered for sale upon unimproved public or private property. 
(Ord. 2229 § 3 (part), 2003; Ord. 2168 § 5 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 2019-2458, § 4, 5-21-2019)  
10.22.045 - Vending from vehicles on public streets or private property—Regulated. 
A.  It is unlawful to sell from or display merchandise for sale or lease upon vehicles upon public streets except when fully stopped upon the request of a customer, and then only for the period of time necessary to consummate a sale, not to exceed a total of ten minutes at that location or at any immediately succeeding location which is within three hundred feet of the former location where the vendor completed the immediate last transaction. 
B.  Except as provided in subsection C of this section, it is unlawful to stop or park any vehicle upon private property upon or from which merchandise is sold, displayed or offered for sale or lease where the sale or display of the merchandise itself would violate the zoning restrictions of Title 18 of this code applicable to the property without regard to the use of the vehicle as a means of display. 
C.  With the permission of the owner or lessee of developed private property, sales of merchandise from vehicles by a vendor properly licensed pursuant to Chapter 6.04 may be made to that owner's or lessee's tenants and employees. 
D.  The provisions of Chapter 9.06 pertaining to health and sanitation are applicable to the vending and display of food products, including ice cream, from vehicles. 
(Ord. 2168 § 5 (part), 1999)  
10.22.050 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-2458, § 5, adopted May 21, 2019, repealed § 10.22.050, which pertained to vending from pushcarts—regulated and derived from Ord. 2168 § 5 (part), 1999.  
10.22.060 - Door to door solicitors and sales—Regulated. 
It is unlawful for any person conducting business by commercial door to door solicitation or sales of merchandise to fail to observe the following requirements: 
A.  The original, if as a sole proprietor, or a photo copy if as an employee, of a current business tax license issued pursuant to Chapter 6.04 of this code shall be carried on the person. 
B.  Each employee shall carry a letter of identification from the employer authorizing the employee to represent the employer and possesses the photocopy described in subsection A of this section. 
C.  A photo identification card, such as a drivers license or other means of identification, shall be carried on the person for verification of subsections A and B of this section. 
D.  Entry upon private property that is clearly posted against trespassing, solicitation or peddling is prohibited. 
E.  Sales or display of merchandise upon public sidewalks is prohibited unless permitted pursuant to Chapter 13.30. 
F.  Sales of merchandise which requires refrigeration, including eggs, is prohibited. 
G.  Handbills must be placed so as to prevent being blown away by the elements as litter. 
H.  Vendors shall not remain on private property any longer than one minute, or the time actually necessary to consummate a sale of merchandise, whichever is greater. 
I.  Vendors must immediately leave private property upon request of the property owner or agent. 
(Ord. 2168 § 5 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 2019-2458, § 6, 5-21-2019)  
10.22.070 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction for a first offense with a fine not to exceed one hundred fifty dollars, or a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment, for a second or subsequent offense. 
(Ord. 2168 § 5 (part), 1999)  
10.22.080 - Enforcement. 
A.  Nonperishable merchandise vended or displayed in violation of this Chapter 10.22 is subject to impoundment as evidence, and a receipt shall be provided to the vendor following citation and impoundment. 
B.  The provisions of this Chapter 10.22 may be enforced by any police officer, any code conformance officer, or any other official authorized to enforce any other provision of the municipal code. 
(Ord. 2168 § 5 (part), 1999)  
Chapter 10.23 - PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION 
 
10.23.010 - Purpose. 
The city council finds that it is necessary to enact regulations governing the conduct of patrons on board public transportation vehicles within the city. Regulation is necessary to ensure the safety and accommodation of all passengers and freedom from hazard or unnecessary noise, smoke or distraction. 
(Ord. 2155 § 1 (part), 1999)  
10.23.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Public transportation vehicle" is any vehicle (including a bus) owned by or operated under contract with the city of National City, the National City Transit, or any other public agency. 
B.  "Alcoholic beverage" as defined by Business and Professions Code Section 23004 means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances. 
C.  "Revenue service" means the operation of a public transportation vehicle on a regularly scheduled fare-generating basis. 
(Ord. 2155 § 1 (part), 1999)  
10.23.030 - Smoking prohibited on public transportation vehicles. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor to smoke or carry a lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette on board a public transportation vehicle. 
(Ord. 2155 § 1 (part), 1999)  
10.23.040 - Consumption of alcoholic beverages—Prohibited. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor to consume an alcoholic beverage or to possess a container containing an alcoholic beverage, the seal of which has been broken or the contents partially removed, on board a public transportation vehicle. 
(Ord. 2155 § 1 (part), 1999)  
10.23.050 - Consumption of food or beverage—Prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful and an infraction to eat food or drink a nonalcoholic beverage while on board a public transportation vehicle. 
B.  This prohibition shall not apply when a public transportation vehicle is not in revenue service. 
(Ord. 2155 § 1 (part), 1999)  
10.23.060 - Playing of radios and other electronic sound producing equipment—Regulated. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection B of this section, it is unlawful and an infraction to play a radio, cassette or CD player or any similar electronic sound producing equipment on board a public transportation vehicle. 
B.  This prohibition shall not apply to equipment which is being operated and listened to by the operator through connection to a personal earphone, provided the emitted sound is not audible to any other person at a distance greater than six inches from any point of sound emission. 
(Ord. 2155 § 1 (part), 1999)  
10.23.070 - Accommodation of disabled patrons—Regulated. 
A.  It is unlawful and an infraction for an able-bodied patron of a public transportation vehicle, upon request of the driver or conductor, to fail to vacate a seat that is designated for and designed to accommodate a wheelchair or other disabled patron, when a patron requiring such accommodation has actually boarded a public transportation vehicle. 
B.  This section shall not be construed to create a duty upon the driver or conductor to require any patron to vacate the designated seat. The driver may refuse to operate the vehicle until the disabled patron is properly accommodated. 
C.  It shall be a defense to a violation of subsection A of this section that the violator was disabled within the meaning of the Americans with Disabilities Act, (Public Law 101-336, as codified in 42 U.S. Code Section 12101, et seq.) 
(Ord. 2155 § 1 (part), 1999)  
10.23.080 - Introduction of toxic, volatile, combustible, explosive, pyrotechnic or hazardous materials—Prohibited. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor to knowingly introduce any toxic, volatile, combustible, explosive, pyrotechnic or hazardous materials or substance on board a public transportation vehicle. 
(Ord. 2155 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Chapter 10.24 - LOITERING FOR DRUG ACTIVITIES 
 
10.24.010 - Acts prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to loiter in, on or near any thoroughfare or place open to the public or near any public or private place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of engaging in drug-related activity defined as offenses in Chapters 6 and 6.5 of Division 10 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 2079 (part), 1994)  
10.24.020 - Circumstances manifesting drug-related activity. 
Among circumstances that may be considered in determining whether a person manifests the purpose of engaging in drug-related activity are that the person: 
A.  Is a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller. For purpose of this chapter, a "known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller" is: 
1.  A person who, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, has been convicted in any court within California of any violation involving the use, possession or sale of any of the substances referred to in Chapters 6 and 6.5 of Division 10 of the California Health and Safety Code, or 
2.  A person who has been convicted of any violation of Chapters 6 and 6.5 of Division 10 of the California Health and Safety Code or substantially similar laws of any political subdivision of California or of any other state, or 
3.  A person who displays physical characteristics of drug intoxication or usage, such as "needle tracks," or 
4.  A person who possesses drug paraphernalia as defined in Section 11364.5 of the California Health and Safety Code, or 
B.  Is currently subject to an order prohibiting his or her presence in a high drug activity geographic area; or 
C.  Behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable suspicion that he or she is about to engage in or is then engaged in an unlawful drug-related activity, including, for example, acting as a "lookout"; or 
D.  Is physically identified by an officer as a member of a "gang" or association which has as its purpose illegal drug activity; or 
E.  Transfers small objects or packages for currency in a furtive fashion; or 
F.  Takes flight upon the appearance of a police officer; or 
G.  Tries to conceal himself or herself or any object which reasonably could be involved in an unlawful drug-related activity; or 
H.  Is in an area that is known for unlawful drug use and trafficking; or 
I.  Is on or in premises that have been reported to law enforcement as a place suspected of unlawful drug activity; or 
J.  Is in or within six feet of any vehicle registered to a known unlawful drug user, possessor, seller, or person for whom there is an outstanding warrant for a crime involving drug-related activity. 
(Ord. 2079 (part), 1994)  
10.24.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 2079 (part), 1994)  
Chapter 10.25 - PUBLIC PAY TELEPHONE REGULATIONS 
 
10.25.010 - Public pay telephones as public nuisances. 
Any public pay telephone which is used as an instrumentality for, or contributes substantially by its presence to, any of the following activities is declared to be a public nuisance: 
A.  Selling or giving away controlled substances, as defined in Division 10 of the California Health and Safety Code; or 
B.  Consuming alcoholic beverages on outdoor public or private property, except where outdoor consumption of alcoholic beverages is specifically authorized pursuant to a license issued by the department of alcoholic beverage control; or 
C.  Prostitution; or 
D.  Loitering for a criminal purpose on public or private property; or 
E.  Making excessive noise. 
(Ord. 2087 (part), 1994; Ord. 2084 (part), 1994)  
10.25.020 - Abatement generally. 
A.  Whenever the chief of police determines that any public pay telephone constitutes a public nuisance within the meaning of Section 10.25.010, the chief of police may commence proceedings to abate the nuisance. The abatement proceedings shall be governed by the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.36 of this code. 
B.  The city shall not commence any proceedings to abate a public pay telephone constituting a public nuisance unless the chief of police first has notified the public pay telephone owner and local public pay telephone trade associations, such as the San Diego Payphone Owners Association, and has made a reasonable effort to work with the property owner upon whose property the public pay telephone is located or the public pay telephone owner, or both, to eliminate the activities constituting a public nuisance by voluntary measures, such as: 
1.  Blocking incoming calls; 
2.  Removing the telephone number and ringer on the pay phone; 
3.  Shutting off the key pad after the initial number is dialed to eliminate "beeper" use; 
4.  Making the telephone inoperative for designated time periods; 
5.  Removing hand sets; 
6.  Adding lighting; 
7.  Changing the type of enclosure of the telephone; or 
8.  Removing any or all of the telephones. 
(Ord. 2087 (part), 1994; Ord. 2084 (part), 1994)  
10.25.030 - Replacement prohibited. 
A.  If any public pay telephone constitutes a public nuisance because it is used for one or more of the activities set forth in Section 10.25.010, the nuisance abatement proceedings provided for in Chapter 1.36 of this code shall be followed. 
B.  The abatement notice issued pursuant to the nuisance abatement proceedings shall specify that abatement will require removal of the public pay telephone, and shall specify that it is unlawful for any public pay telephone owner to install a replacement public pay telephone on the same parcel or on any contiguous parcel owned by the same property owner for a period of up to one year from the date of removal. 
(Ord. 2087 (part), 1994; Ord. 2084 (part), 1994)  
10.25.040 - Exemptions. 
Public pay telephones located inside any building open to the public are exempt from the regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2087 (part), 1994; Ord. 2084 (part), 1994)  
10.25.050 - List of abated locations. 
The chief of police shall maintain, and make available upon request, a list of locations where installation of public pay telephones is prohibited. 
(Ord. 2087 (part), 1994; Ord. 2084 (part), 1994)  
10.25.060 - Telephone booths or enclosures. 
All telephone booths and enclosures shall be properly maintained and kept free of graffiti, litter and debris, and shall not be permitted to fall into a state of disrepair. 
(Ord. 2125, 1996)  
10.25.070 - Applicability of business tax. 
Each public pay telephone operator or owner operating and maintaining a public pay telephone in the city is conducting business in the city and is subject to and required to pay a business tax in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 6.04 of this code. The city finance officer shall issue to operators in compliance with those provisions appropriate decals for placement on complying equipment. Instruments not in compliance are subject to the enforcement provisions of Chapter 6.04 for administration and collection of taxes. 
(Ord. 2143, 1998)  
IV. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY  
Chapter 10.26 - GAMBLING 
 
10.26.010 - Participation unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person or persons within the limits of the city to deal, play, carry on, open or cause to be opened or carried on, or to conduct either as owner or employee, whether for hire or not, any game of poker, stud horse poker, tan, fan-tan, faro, monte, roulette, lansquenet, rouge et noire, rondo, chuck-aluck props, percentage game, or any other game played with cards, dice or any other device, when the same is played for money, checks, notes or any other representation of value, or to permit any house or other building to be used for playing or carrying on any such games. 
(Ord. 7 § 19, 1887)  
10.26.020 - Presence unlawful. 
It is declared to be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to knowingly be present at the opening, dealing or playing of any game of faro, monte, roulette, lansquenet, rouge et noire, rondo, chuck-aluck props, banking or percentage, poker, stud horse poker, tan or fan-tan, or any other game played with cards, dice or other device, for checks, notes, or other representatives of money, or where there are kept on exhibition any cards, dice or other device to be used in dealing, playing, conducting or carrying on any such game, or after having entered such house, room, or place to knowingly remain therein while any such game is being dealt, played, or carried on; provided that this section shall not apply to any officer who shall visit, resort to, enter or be present in any such house or place in the discharge of his duty. 
(Ord. 7 § 20, 1887)  
10.26.030 - Devices—Possession unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person to have in his possession, or under his control any table, mat, cloth, wheel, ball or cup, or any other device or thing to be used in playing or carrying on roulette, rouge et noire, rondo, tan or fan-tan. 
(Ord. 7 § 21, 1887)  
10.26.040 - Establishment—Guarding unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person to watch, guard, or stand in front of or about the entrance to any room, premises where any of the games mentioned in this chapter are carried on, with intent to give notice or alarm to the person or persons in such house or room or premises, or to act as doorkeeper, or as an employee in any capacity in, upon or about any premises used for any such games. 
(Ord. 7 § 22, 1887)  
10.26.050 - Banking game defined. 
A "banking game," within the meaning of this chapter, is any game of chance played with cards, dice, or any other device which is dealt, played, conducted or carried on by a person who has or claims to have a fund to be staked against all bets which may be offered on such game. 
(Ord. 7 § 23, 1887)  
10.26.060 - Percentage game defined. 
A "percentage game," within the meaning of this chapter, is any game of chance played with cards, dice, or any other device in which the person who deals, plays, conducts or carries on the same, or who owns, possesses or controls the devices with which the same is played, receives from the persons betting on such game, or any of such persons, or receives out of the money, checks or other representatives of value bet on said game any sum of money for the use of the gaming devices, or for the privilege of betting on such game or for the services of such person in dealing, conducting, or carrying on such game. 
(Ord. 7 § 24, 1887)  
10.26.070 - Cardrooms prohibited—Misdemeanor. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to establish, open, keep, carry on, maintain, or assist in carry on or maintaining any cardroom, premises or place in the city where any card table or other apparatus or place intended, designed, used or designated to be used for the playing of card games is kept for hire. Any person violating this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. Every act in violation of this section is, for each day of its continuance, a separate misdemeanor. 
B.  As used in Section 10.26.070(A), the term "for hire" means the payment or transfer of money or thing of any value to the owner, lessee or an employee or any other person in actual or apparent control of a premises for the purpose of the payor, transferor or a third party on behalf of the payor or transferor being allowed to play cards. 
(Ord. 2204 § 2, 2002)  
Chapter 10.27 - BINGO 
 
10.27.010 - Bingo authorized. 
This chapter is renumbered from Chapter 6.42 and thereby readopted and recodified into Title 10 as Chapter 10.27 pursuant to Section 19 of Article IV of the California Constitution in order to make the game of bingo lawful under the terms and conditions in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2204 § 3 (part), 2002)  
10.27.020 - Definitions. 
Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. 
A.  "Bingo" means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card that conform to numbers or symbols selected at random. 
B.  "Eligible organization" means an organization exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Sections 23701(a), 23701(b), 23701(d), 23701(e), 23701(f), 23701(g), and 23701(1) of the Revenue and Taxation Code and mobile home park associations and senior citizens organizations. 
C.  "Minor" means any person under the age of eighteen years. 
(Ord. 2204 § 3 (part), 2002)  
10.27.030 - License required. 
It is unlawful for any person to conduct any bingo game in the city unless such person is both a member of, and acting on behalf of, an eligible organization, as described in subsection B of Section 10.27.020, and has been issued a license as provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. 2204 § 3 (part), 2002)  
10.27.040 - Application. 
Application for license shall be made to the city finance officer on prescribed forms, and filed not less than ten days prior to the proposed date of the bingo game or games. Such application form shall require from the applicant at least the following: 
A.  A list of all members who will operate the bingo game, including full names of each member, date of birth, place of birth, physical description and driver's license number; 
B.  The date(s) and place(s) of the proposed bingo game or games; 
C.  Proof that the organization is an eligible organization, as defined by this chapter, and; 
D.  Certification that the proceeds from the game(s) will only be used for charitable purposes. 
(Ord. 2204 § 3 (part), 2002)  
10.27.050 - Fee for license. 
The fee for an annual bingo license and each annual renewal shall be fifty dollars. The appropriate fee shall accompany the submission of each application. If an application for a license is denied, one-half of any license fee paid shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(Ord. 2204 § 3 (part), 2002)  
10.27.060 - Application investigation. 
Upon receipt of an application for a license, the city finance officer is responsible for routing copies of such application to any appropriate office necessary to carry out a proper investigation of the applicant. 
The chief of police and every other officer and/or department to which an application is referred shall investigate the truth of the matters set forth in the application, the character of the applicant, and may examine the premises to be used for the bingo game. 
Upon approval of any application for a bingo license, the city finance officer shall issue the license. 
(Ord. 2204 § 3 (part), 2002)  
10.27.070 - License not transferable. 
Each license issued hereunder shall be issued to a specific person on behalf of a specific eligible organization to conduct a bingo game at a specific location and shall not be transferable from one person to another nor from one location to another. 
(Ord. 2204 § 3 (part), 2002)  
10.27.080 - Limitations. 
An applicant shall prove that the organization is an eligible organization. An eligible organization shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, which property is used by that organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by the organization be used or leased exclusively by such organization. Proceeds from the game(s) shall only be used for charitable purposes. 
(Ord. 2204 § 3 (part), 2002)  
10.27.090 - Inspection. 
Any peace officer of the city shall have free access to inspect any bingo game licensed under this chapter. The licensee shall have the bingo license and the lists of approved staff available for inspection at all times during any bingo game. 
(Ord. 2204 § 3 (part), 2002)  
10.27.100 - Denial, suspension or revocation of permit. 
The city finance officer may deny an application, or may suspend or revoke an issued permit if the licensee has: 
A.  Knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in connection with the application; or 
B.  Violated any of the provisions of this Chapter 10.27. 
The city finance officer shall issue a written notice of decision to the licensee or applicant within five business days following the action. Notice is effective when personally delivered or mailed to the address shown on the application or license. 
(Ord. 2204 § 3 (part), 2002)  
10.27.110 - Appeals. 
Appeals from action taken by the finance officer under Section 10.27.100 and the procedures on appeal shall conform to the provisions of Section 10.70.060 
(Ord. 2204 § 3 (part), 2002)  
10.27.120 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game authorized by this chapter. 
B.  Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as set forth in Section 1.20.010. 
C.  All sanctions provided in this chapter shall be cumulative with and not exclusive of any civil or administrative remedy or penalty. 
(Ord. 2204 § 3 (part), 2002)  
Chapter 10.30 - REGULATION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC VENUES AND PLACES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ordinances 753, 1013, 1249, 2012 and 2093. 
 
10.30.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of the city council to enact regulations governing the consumption, use or possession of alcoholic beverages and open containers in those areas that are not expressly regulated by the Business and Professions Code or Vehicle Code, and which are thereby permissible for local regulation. The city council finds and determines that such local regulation is both reasonable and necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare in those venues that impact the local citizenry. 
(Ord. 2186 § 2 (part), 2001)  
10.30.020 - Definitions. 
Within this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Alcoholic beverages", as defined by Business and Professions Code Section 23004, means and includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume, and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances. 
"Highway" is as defined by Vehicle Code Section 360, and means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. A "highway" includes a street. 
"Open alcoholic beverage container" means and includes any can, bottle or other receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage, which has been opened, or the seal of which has been broken or removed, or the contents of which have been partially removed. 
(Ord. 2186 § 2 (part), 2001)  
10.30.030 - Consumption or possession of open alcoholic beverage containers—Prohibited in parks and adjacent public places. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person in any city park or in any adjacent city-owned public place to consume any alcoholic beverage or to possess an open alcoholic beverage container. 
B.  The city manager shall cause signs to be posted at each pedestrian and vehicle entrance of a city park advising of this prohibition. Installation of signage shall not be a prerequisite to enforcement or prosecution. 
(Ord. 2186 § 2 (part), 2001)  
10.30.040 - Exception—City buildings within city parks. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 10.30.030, the city council may allow the sale or use of alcoholic beverages in a city-owned building located within a public park in conjunction with an application for a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 15.60. City-owned buildings which are operated or leased by a third party, pursuant to a written agreement approved by the city council, may be allowed to serve or sell alcohol according to the terms as set forth in that written agreement, and shall not be required to obtain a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 15.60. 
(Ord. 2186 § 2 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2017-2436, 5-2-2017)  
10.30.050 - Consumption or possession generally—Unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, plaza, public parking lot, private parking lot open to the public or any undeveloped area within the city limits to consume any alcoholic beverage or to possess an open alcoholic beverage container without a permit duly issued by the city manager. 
(Ord. 2186 § 2 (part), 2001)  
10.30.060 - Consumption or possession in vehicles—Unlawful. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person inside any vehicle not on a highway within the city limits to consume any alcoholic beverage or to possess an open alcoholic beverage container. 
B.  Subsection A shall not apply to an open alcoholic beverage container that is securely locked within a car trunk or locked exterior compartment of any other vehicle. 
C.  The provisions of this section are intended to apply only on private property with public access; public parking lots; private parking lots open to the public; or on undeveloped areas within the city limits. 
(Ord. 2186 § 2 (part), 2001)  
10.30.070 - Required signage at licensed premises. 
A.  The owner, operator or proprietor of any premises licensed by the Alcoholic Beverage Commission for the on-premises or off-premises sale of alcoholic beverages shall post signs in compliance with the requirements and specifications of subsection B of this section on each exterior wall of the licensed premises that faces a vehicle parking lot, to read as follows: 
WARNING 
It is unlawful to drink an alcoholic 
beverage or to possess an open alcoholic beverage 
container in public or in a public parking lot. 
NCMC 10.30.050 and 10.30.060. 
B.  The sign required by subsection A of this section shall be a minimum of eighteen inches in width and twenty-four inches in height, with black lettering at least one inch in height against a white background. One sign shall be posted for each fifty-foot portion of each facing wall. The bottom of the sign shall be at least five feet above the surface of the parking area. The chief of police may allow a variance from the height and separation requirements when necessary due to site conditions. 
C.  The sign required by subsection B of this section is exempt from the sign regulations of Title 18 of the National City Municipal Code. 
D.  Any ABC licensee who posts a sign under the provisions of Business and Professions Code Section 25612.5(C) shall be exempt from the provisions of subsection A of this section. 
(Ord. 2186 § 2 (part), 2001)  
10.30.080 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violation of Sections 10.30.030, 10.30.050 or 10.30.060 is a misdemeanor. Violation of any other mandatory provision of this chapter is an infraction for a first violation, or for a second violation occurring within thirty days of the first violation; otherwise, a second or subsequent violation shall be charged as a misdemeanor. Any violation shall carry the penalty prescribed by Section 1.20.010 of this code. 
(Ord. 2186 § 2 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 10.32 - IMPERSONATING MEMBER OF THE OPPOSITE SEX 
 
10.32.010 - Impersonation unlawful. 
It is unlawful to be in a public place, or in a place open to public view, in apparel, and/or make up customarily worn by the opposite sex, and 
A.  Solicit or receive any gratuitous service of an alcoholic beverage; or, 
B.  Represent oneself to be a member of the opposite sex to a police officer; or, 
C.  Enter a restroom marked and reserved for members of the opposite sex; or, 
D.  Enter and remain on any premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages under the Business and Professional Code of the state; or, 
E.  Practice any form of deception on another person, of the same or opposite sex, based upon membership in one gender of sex or the other; or, 
F.  Loiter in, on, or near any place where juveniles normally congregate, such as public and private schools, and playgrounds, and parks; or, 
G.  Solicit or engage in any social relationship based upon membership in one gender of sex or the other; or, 
H.  Do any act as a purported member of the opposite sex which would or does in fact result in a breach of the peace. 
(Ord. 1137 (part), 1966)  
Chapter 10.34 - OBSCENE MATTER 
 
10.34.010 - Owner responsibility. 
The owners and/or occupant of any real property upon which is located a building, wall, fence, sign board or other structure is responsible to obliterate or otherwise cover up any vulgar, obscene, lewd, offensive and objectionable words, phrases, symbols and signs thereon which are open to public view. 
(Ord. 1195 § 1, 1968)  
10.34.020 - Notice. 
The city manager shall give written notice to the owner and/or occupants of any real property mentioned in Section 10.34.010 according to the records of the county assessor on his last assessment role. 
(Ord. 1195 § 2, 1968)  
10.34.030 - Removal—Time limit. 
Any owners and/or occupants receiving notice from the city manager that there is located on property he owns or occupies vulgar, obscene, lewd, offensive or objectionable words, phrases, symbols and signs shall cover, obliterate or remove the same within ten days of receiving said notice. 
(Ord. 1195 § 3, 1968)  
10.34.040 - Appeals. 
Any person notified that he should remove or obliterate any vulgar, obscene, lewd, offensive and objectionable words, phrases, symbols and signs who disputes the judgment of the city manager that the vulgar, obscene, lewd, offensive and objectionable words, phrases, symbols and signs are offensive to the public health, safety, welfare or morals may appeal the decision of the city manager to the city council who shall hear his appeal within twenty days of receipt thereof. The city council within ten days after a public hearing of an appeal under this section shall either affirm or deny the appeal. If an appeal under this section is denied the owner or occupant shall remove the offending material within ten days. 
(Ord. 1195 § 4, 1968)  
10.34.050 - Free speech. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to restrict the exercise of the right of free speech protected by the Constitution of the United States and of the state. 
(Ord. 1195 § 5, 1968)  
10.34.060 - Penalty. 
Violation of this chapter is an infraction punishable as prescribed in Section 1.20.010. 
(Ord. 1621, 1978; Ord. 1358 § 2 (part), 1973: Ord. 1195 § 6, 1968)  
Chapter 10.36 - URINATING OR DEFECATING IN PUBLIC 
 
10.36.010 - Prohibited generally. 
No person shall urinate or defecate in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, plaza, park, beach, public building or public maintained facility, or in any place open to the public or exposed to public view. This section shall not apply to urination or defecation which is done in any restroom or other facility designed for the disposal of human waste. 
(Ord. 1651 § 1, 1978)  
10.36.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1.20.010, any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed thirty days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 1651 § 2, 1978)  
Chapter 10.40 - REGISTRATION OF TRANSIENTS AT HOTELS AND MOTELS 
 
10.40.010 - Transient registration at hotels. 
The city council finds and determines that it is important for the control of vice and prostitution to require transient residents of hotels to furnish identification and for operators to have evidence of identification available for reasonable inspection by a peace officer. 
(Ord. 2132 (part), 1997)  
10.40.020 - Definitions. 
The terms "operator," "transient" and "hotel" are defined in Section 4.32.020 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2132 (part), 1997)  
10.40.030 - Regulations. 
A.  Every transient must furnish to an operator of a hotel photo identification as part of the registration process for the hire of lodgings at that hotel by the transient, and must identify all authorized or proposed occupants of the lodging hired to the operator. Photo identification consists of one of the following: a valid driver's license issued by the transient's state or county of residence; a federal or state government or military identification card; a passport; or any other form of identification on which the transient's photograph and current address appears. If, because of physical disability, a transient is unable to furnish a governmentally issued form of photographic identification, an operator is authorized to accept any commercially reasonable form of identification that will serve to identify that transient. 
B.  The operator of the hotel shall maintain a record of the following identification produced by the transient, if the transient is paying by means other than credit card. Notwithstanding use of a credit card, the transient will comply with subsection A of this section. 
1.  Name of transient, address, date of birth, driver's license number and state or country of issue; 
2.  Name of each person who is authorized or invited by the transient to occupy the room during the term of hire. 
An operator shall retain any records required under this subsection for sixty days after the date the transient vacates the lodging and may destroy them after that time. 
C.  An operator shall notify any transient who refuses to produce identification that is unlawful to fail or refuse to provide proper identification or the identity of occupants to any operator of a hotel as a precondition to the registration process. 
(Ord. 2132 (part), 1997)  
10.40.040 - Administration. 
A.  An operator may post a notice advising transients that a transient is liable for any room charges or damage to the room during the term of hire, whether caused by the transient or other authorized occupant, or both, until the room is vacated by the transient and all authorized occupants and the keys are returned to the operator. The notice may also provide that the transient may be held liable for charges or damage caused by an occupant who was not identified by the transient but occupied the room with the transient's permission. 
B.  The duties imposed on an operator by this chapter shall not be interpreted or applied so as to violate or cause a violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (P.L. 101-336). 
(Ord. 2132 (part), 1997)  
10.40.050 - Violations. 
A.  It is unlawful for a transient to refuse to provide identification to an operator or to fail to identify to the operator all occupants who will be authorized or invited by the transient to occupy the lodgings hired by the transient. 
B.  It is unlawful for an operator of a hotel to fail to require a transient to provide photo identification; to fail to retain the information required by Section 10.40.030(B); or to refuse to provide such information upon request of a peace officer conducting an investigation. Provided, however, that any duty required under Section 10.40.030(B) terminates on and after the sixty-first day following the date the transient vacates the lodging. 
(Ord. 2132 (part), 1997)  
Chapter 10.42 - RESPONSIBLE BEVERAGE SALES AND SERVICES 
 
10.42.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this section, the following definitions apply: 
"Manager" means a person, regardless of the job title or description, who has discretionary powers to organize, direct, carry on or control the operations of an on-sale establishment, including a restaurant or bar. Authority to engage in one or more of the following functions is prima facie evidence that a person is a manager of an on-sale establishment: 
1.  Hires or terminates employees; 
2.  Contracts for the purchase of furniture, equipment or supplies, except for the occasional replenishment of stock; 
3.  Distributes funds of the business, except for the receipt of regularly replaced items of stock; 
4.  Makes or participates in making policy decisions regarding operations of the licensed business. 
"On-sale establishment" means a facility providing the sale and service of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises (on-sale), including restaurant dining areas where food service is the primary function and bars, in which the sale and consumption of alcohol on the premises is the primary function. "Bar" means and includes those facilities located within a hotel, motel or other similar transient occupancy establishment. 
"Responsible beverage service training course" means a training program recognized by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control for on-sale management and on-sale professional services. 
(Ord. 2287 § 1 (part), 2006)  
10.42.020 - Manager and server training. 
A.  No on-sale establishment may serve or sell alcoholic beverages unless a manager who has completed a responsible beverage service training course is on the premises. 
B.  Every manager of an on-sale establishment must complete a responsible beverage service training course within ninety days of hire, or by December 31st of the year of hire, whichever is later. 
C.  Every person who serves or sells alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises of an on-sale establishment shall complete a responsible beverage service training course within ninety days of hire, or by December 31st of the year of hire, whichever is later. 
D.  A list of all persons who have completed the training required by this section shall be maintained on the premises of the on-sale establishment and, together with the proof of such completion, shall be provided to any police or other enforcement officer for inspection and copying promptly upon request. 
(Ord. 2287 § 1 (part), 2006)  
10.42.030 - Abatement of nonconforming on-sale establishments. 
All on-sale establishments in existence on the date of the effective enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter must comply with the provisions of this chapter no later than January 1, 2007. 
(Ord. 2287 § 1 (part), 2006)  
10.42.040 - Violations. 
A.  A violation of any provision of this chapter or a failure to comply with any mandatory requirements of this chapter is subject to prosecution in accordance with Title 1 of the National City Municipal Code and may be enforced through injunctive relief or other relief available by law. Penalties for violations of the provisions of this chapter may result in up to a misdemeanor citation for each day in violation, punishable by a maximum of one year in jail and a one thousand dollar fine. 
B.  Administering departments will be authorized to charge cost recovery fees for services provided under this chapter. Cost recovery may also be recovered for equipment and personnel expenses incurred. All penalties and related costs shall be credited to "Responsible Beverage Service and Sales Regulation Fund." The fund shall be used exclusively with the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2287 § 1 (part), 2006)  
V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE  
Chapter 10.43 - ALCOHOL, MARIJUANA, AND OTHER CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES OFFENSES BY MINORS AND JUVENILES, AND REIMBURSEMENT FROM RESPONSIBLE PERSONS FOR THE COST OF ENFORCEMENT SERVICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-2459, § 1, adopted June 4, 2019, changed the title of Chapter 10.43 from "Alcohol and Illegal Drug Offenses by Minors and Juveniles, and Reimbursement from Responsible Persons for the Cost of Enforcement Services" to read as herein set out. 
 
10.43.010 - Definitions. 
"Alcohol" means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
"Alcoholic beverage" is as defined by Business and Professions Code Section 23004. 
"Controlled substances or illegal drugs" shall include all narcotics, drugs, or substances, whose possession and use are regulated under the Controlled Substances Act. Such term does not include any drug or substance for which the individual found to have consumed such substance has a valid prescription issued by a licensed medial practitioner authorized to issue such a prescription. 
"Enforcement services" includes the salaries and benefits of law enforcement, fire, code enforcement personnel, or other emergency response providers for the amount of time actually spent in responding to, or in remaining at, or otherwise dealing with the party, gathering, or event and the administrative costs attributable to the incident; the actual cost of any medical treatment to injured law enforcement, fire, code enforcement personnel, or other emergency response personnel; and the cost of repairing any damaged city equipment or property; and the cost arising from the use of any damaged equipment in responding to, remaining at, or leaving the party, gathering, or event. 
"Guardian" means (1) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or (2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court. 
"Juvenile" means any person under eighteen years of age. 
"Marijuana," for purposes of this chapter, shall have the same meaning as the definition of that word in Section 11018 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
"Minor" means any person under twenty-one years of age. 
"Parent" means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person. 
"Party, gathering, or event" means a party or gathering of two or more persons at or on a residence or other private property or premises, who have assembled or are assembling for a party, social occasion or social activity. 
"Residence or premises" means a hotel or motel room, home, yard, apartment, condominium, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or for a party or other social function, whether private property or public place, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation. 
"Responsible person" includes, but is not limited to: (1) The person(s) who owns, rents, leases, or otherwise has control of the premises where the party, gathering or event takes place; (2) the person(s) in charge of the premises including the landlord of another person responsible for the gathering; or (3) any persons(s) who host, organize, supervise, permit, officiate, conduct or control the gathering or any other persons accepting responsibility for such a gathering. If a person responsible for the event is a juvenile, then the parents or guardians of that juvenile and the juvenile will be jointly and severally liable for the costs incurred for enforcement services pursuant to this chapter. To incur liability for enforcement services imposed by this chapter, the responsible person for the gathering need not be present at such gathering resulting in the response giving rise to the imposition of enforcement services. This chapter therefore imposes vicarious as well as direct liability upon a responsible person. 
A "social host" is an adult who permits a party, gathering, or event where one or more minors consume one or more alcoholic beverages, marijuana or other controlled substances on property owned or controlled by an adult. 
(Ord. 2235 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. No. 2019-2459, § 1, 6-4-2019)  
10.43.020 - Consumption of alcoholic beverages, marijuana, or other controlled substances by minors prohibited in public places, places open to public, or places not open to public. 
Except as permitted by state law, no minor shall: 
A.  Consume at any public place or any places open to the public any alcoholic beverage, marijuana or other controlled substance; or 
B.  Consume at any place not open to the public any alcoholic beverage, marijuana, or other controlled substance, unless in connection with the consumption of the alcoholic beverage that minor is being supervised by his or her parent or legal guardian. 
(Ord. 2235 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. No. 2019-2459, § 1, 6-4-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-2459, § 1, adopted June 4, 2019, changed the title of Section 10.43.020 from "Unsupervised consumption of alcohol by minor on private property" to read as herein set out.  
10.43.030 - Hosting, allowing a gathering where minors consuming alcoholic beverages, marijuana and other controlled substances prohibited. 
A.  Except as permitted by Article 1, Section 4, of the California Constitution, it is unlawful for any person having control of any premises who knows or should reasonably know that he or she has hosted, permitted, or allowed a gathering to take place at said premises, where at least one minor consumes an alcoholic beverage, marijuana or other controlled substance wherever the person having control of the premises either knows a minor has consumed an alcoholic beverage, marijuana or other controlled substance or reasonably should have known that a minor consumed an alcoholic beverage, marijuana or other controlled substance by a minor. 
B.  It is the duty of any person having control of any premises, who knows or should know that he or she has hosted, permitted, or allowed a gathering at said premises to take all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages, marijuana, or other controlled substances by any minor at the gathering. Reasonable steps include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Controlling access to alcoholic beverages, marijuana, or other controlled substances at the gathering; 
(2)  Controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages, marijuana or other controlled substances present at the gathering; 
(3)  Verifying the age of the persons attending the gathering by inspecting drivers licenses or other government-issued identification cards to ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic beverages, marijuana or other controlled substances while at the gathering; and 
(4)  Supervising the activities of minors at the gathering. 
C.  Whenever a person having control of a residence or premises is present at the residence or premises at the time that a minor possesses or consumes any alcoholic beverage or controlled substance thereon, it shall be prima facie evidence that such person had the knowledge or should have had the knowledge specified in this section. 
D.  A person who hosts, permits, or allows a gathering shall be deemed to have actual or constructive knowledge that a minor has consumed or possessed alcoholic beverages, marijuana, or controlled substances if the person has not taken all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages, marijuana or controlled substances by a minor or as set forth in this section. 
E.  This section shall not apply to conduct involving the administration of alcohol to or use of an alcoholic beverage by a minor child which occurs exclusively under the supervision of his or her parent or legal guardian, or to the consumption of an alcoholic beverage at any place regulated by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
(Ord. 2235 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. No. 2019-2459, § 1, 6-4-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-2459, § 1, adopted June 4, 2019, changed the title of Section 10.43.030 from "Serving of alcohol and/or controlled substances to minors at parties, gatherings or events on private property" to read as herein set out.  
10.43.040 - Enforcement services at a party, gathering, or event on private property. 
When any party, gathering or event occurs on private property as described in Section 10.43.030 and a police officer, fire or code enforcement personnel, or other emergency response providers at the scene determines that there is a threat or detriment to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, the person(s) responsible for the party, gathering or event shall be liable for the actual cost of enforcement services provided during a response by the police, fire, code enforcement personnel, or other emergency response providers. 
(Ord. 2235 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. No. 2019-2459, § 1, 6-4-2019)  
10.43.050 - Reimbursement for cost of law enforcement services. 
The actual cost of the enforcement services described in Section 10.43.040 shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person responsible for the event and, if that person is a juvenile, their parents or guardians. Any person owing such debt after demand has been refused shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the city for recovery of the same. 
(Ord. 2235 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. No. 2019-2459, § 1, 6-4-2019)  
10.43.060 - Reservation of legal options. 
The city of National City reserves its right to seek reimbursement for actual costs of enforcement services through other legal remedies or procedures. The procedure provided for in this chapter is in addition to any other statute, ordinance, or law, civil or criminal. This chapter in no way limits the statutory authority of peace officers or private citizens to make arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by this article. 
(Ord. 2235 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. No. 2019-2459, § 1, 6-4-2019)  
10.43.070 - Violations. 
A.  General Penalty. All means of enforcement authorized under this code may be used to address violations of this chapter, including, but not limited to: criminal actions, civil penalties, nuisance abatement, civil actions including injunctive relief, and administrative citations. Violations of this chapter may be charged as a misdemeanor in accordance with National City Municipal Code Chapter 1.20 and shall be punishable to the fullest extent of the law including a one thousand dollar fine and/or six months of jail. 
B.  Public Nuisance. A violation of the chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be enjoined civilly or administratively. In addition, it is unlawful and a misdemeanor to maintain a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 2235 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. No. 2019-2459, § 1, 6-4-2019)  
Chapter 10.44 - DISTURBING THE PEACE 
 
10.44.010 - Prohibited. 
It is unlawful for three or more persons to congregate or assemble on any public thoroughfare, or on any street or crossing, or public square or alley, or in or about any theater, building, public hall, or church, in the city, and make a disturbance or in any way interfere with the free and peaceful use of such street, square, alley, building, hall, or church or the approaches thereto. 
(Ord. 7 § 12, 1887)  
Chapter 10.45 - SECURITY AND FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
10.45.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "National City security alarm ordinance." 
(Ord. 2150 § 1 (part), 1998)  
10.45.020 - Purpose and intent. 
The city council finds and declares that: 
A.  Inadequately regulated and maintained security and fire alarm systems present a growing danger to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city; 
B.  The volume and frequency of nuisance false alarms generated through inadequate maintenance are conditions which have persisted so as to become hazardous and causing a serious drain upon limited police and fire services and equipment needed at other locations; 
C.  The unnecessary waste of tax dollars through responses to nuisance false alarms must be reduced; 
D.  Every residence and business property is entitled to the safety and protection afforded by local law enforcement; 
E.  The necessity for the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted is declared to be a matter of public policy in the pursuance of security and promoting the public health, safety and welfare of the city and its residents, by encouraging proper maintenance and use of security alarm systems. 
(Ord. 2150 § 1 (part), 1998)  
10.45.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be construed as set forth in this section unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
A.  "Alarm agent" means and includes any person who is self-employed or employed directly or indirectly by an alarm business operator whose duties include, but are not limited to: selling, maintaining, installing, monitoring, demonstrating or causing others to respond to an alarm in or on any building, place or premises. This definition shall not apply to local safety officers as defined in Government Code Section 20019.4. 
B.  "Alarm business operator" means and includes any business operated for any consideration whatsoever, engaged in the installation, maintenance, alteration or servicing of alarm systems or which responds to such alarm systems. 
"Alarm business operator," however, shall not include a business that merely sells from a fixed location or manufactures alarm systems, unless such business also services, installs, monitors or responds to alarm systems at the protected premises. 
C.  "Alarm system" is any device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry or fire on the premises or for alerting others of a fire or the commission of an unlawful act, or both, and when activated emits an audible or silent signal or message through which the police or fire department are called to respond after telephonic or electronic communication through a central dispatch or communications station. It excludes those devices which emit a signal within the protected premises only, which are not connected to any central station, and which are supervised by the proprietor of the premises where located, otherwise known as a proprietary alarm. Auxiliary devices installed by a telephone company to protect its systems which might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an alarm system are not included in the definition. 
D.  "Alarm user" means any person who owns, leases, rents, uses or makes available for use by its agents, lessees, employees, representatives or immediate family an alarm system in the city. 
E.  "Audible alarm" means an alarm system designed to emit an audible sound outside of the protected premises to alert persons of a fire or an unauthorized entry on the premises or of the commission of an unlawful act. 
F.  "Business" means any nonresidential use. 
G.  "Direct-dial device" means a device which is connected to a telephone line and upon activation of the alarm system automatically dials a predetermined telephone number and transmits a message or signal indicating a need for emergency response. 
H.  "False alarm" means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, accident, misoperation, malfunction, misuse, or the negligence of either the alarm user, operator or agent, or any of their employees or agents. False alarms shall not include alarms caused by acts of God, the malfunction of telephone or electrical lines, circuits or other causes which are beyond the control of the alarm user, operator or agent. 
I.  "Fee schedule" means the National City fee schedule adopted by the city council. 
J.  "Issuing officer" shall mean the chief of police or fire chief. 
K.  "Person" shall mean a natural person, firm, corporation, association, partnership, individual, organization, or company. It excludes a governmental political unit. 
L.  "Residential" means premises used as dwelling units, which includes apartments and lodging houses. 
(Ord. 2150 § 1 (part), 1998)  
10.45.040 - Alarm business operator—Alarm agent—Registration. 
A.  After September 1, 1998, it is unlawful for any person, partnership, corporation or firm to own, manage, conduct or carry on an alarm business within the city without first having registered with the police department; provided, however, such registration shall not be required for any business which only sells or leases the alarm systems from a fixed location unless such business services, installs, monitors or responds to alarm systems at the protected premises. Registration shall be accomplished by furnishing such information as may be required by the police department, including but not limited to the full name of the business, the number of the license issued by the state Director of Consumer Affairs for the alarm business, and the name and business address of the manager of operations for the area which includes the city. The police department will coordinate this information with the fire department pertaining to systems with a single fire function or a dual fire and unauthorized entry function. 
B.  Alarm Agents. After September 1, 1998, it is unlawful for any person, including the owner of an alarm business, to act as an alarm agent within the city without first having registered its, his or her name and filed with the chief of police a copy of the alarm agent registration card issued by the state Director of Consumer Affairs pursuant to the provisions of Section 7590, et seq. of the California Business and Professions Code; provided, however, nothing in this chapter shall require a person to so register in order to install, service, repair, alter, replace, or move an alarm system on the premises owned or occupied by that person, and further provided, nothing herein shall require a person to so register who is merely a salesperson for any business not required to obtain an alarm business permit under the provisions of this section if such salesperson does not engage in any other activities related to alarm systems apart from selling. 
(Ord. 2150 § 1 (part), 1998)  
10.45.050 - Alarm user's permit. 
A.  After September 1, 1998, it is unlawful to install, or cause to be installed, use, maintain, or possess an alarm system on any business or residence owned by or under the possession or control of such person within the city without first having obtained an alarm user's permit from the issuing officer. The issuing officer shall prescribe the form of the application and request such information as is necessary to evaluate and act upon the permit application. Except as provided in Section 10.45.050(F), every twenty-four months, a nonrefundable fee of twenty dollars for residential permits and forty dollars for business permits shall accompany each application. The application fee may thereafter be amended, from time to time, by resolution of the city council. The police department will coordinate the permit processing with the fire department as necessary. 
B.  The permit application required under subsection A of this Section 10.45.050 shall provide the following information: 
1.  The number of alarm systems and specific purpose for which the alarm system installed; 
2.  The alarm user's name; 
3.  The address of the premises in or upon which the alarm system has been or will be installed; 
4.  The alarms user's telephone number; 
5.  The alarm business operator or operators selling, installing, monitoring, inspecting, responding to and/or maintaining the alarm system; and 
6.  The name and telephone number of at least two persons who can be reached at any time, day or night and who are authorized to respond to an alarm signal and who can open the premises in which the system is installed. 
C.  An alarm permit shall be valid for twenty-four months. A separate permit shall be obtained for each separate business or separate place of business, and a new permit is required for any change of ownership or change of type of permit. 
D.  Where an alarm system is in operation prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the alarm user shall be responsible for contacting the issuing officer and obtaining a permit within ninety days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
E.  If an alarm business or agent also uses an alarm system to protect its premises, it shall obtain a user permit as required in this section. 
F.  Upon application, a permit will be issued without charge to any single-family residential alarm system user where an occupant of that structure is older than seventy years of age. However, all other provisions of this Chapter 10.45 shall be applicable to that alarm system or user. 
(Ord. 2150 § 1 (part), 1998)  
10.45.060 - Correction of information. 
Whenever any change occurs relating to the written information required by Section 10.45.050, the permit holder or designee shall give written notice of such change to the issuing officer within five working days. 
(Ord. 2150 § 1 (part), 1998)  
10.45.070 - Alarm system inspections. 
All alarm systems and appurtenant equipment installed on any premises shall meet or exceed the minimum standards established by this Chapter 10.45. The city reserves the right to inspect all alarm systems, subject to all applicable laws including Code of Civil Procedure Section 1822.50 et seq. 
(Ord. 2150 § 1 (part), 1998)  
10.45.080 - Alarm system standards and regulations. 
A.  Alarm Deactivation—Audible Alarms. Audible residential alarms used for unauthorized entry notification shall be equipped with an automatic shutoff mechanism capable of terminating the audible annunciator after activation within a maximum of fifteen minutes. Audible commercial alarm systems used for unauthorized entry notification shall be equipped with an automatic shutoff mechanism capable of terminating the audible annunciator after activation within a maximum of thirty minutes. An alarm system or portion used for fire detection and notification shall not be subject to this restriction, since such systems must be manually acknowledged. 
B.  Maintenance Notification. The alarm user, and the alarm business operator or agent performing maintenance work for an alarm user, shall contact the police department communication center (telephone: 336-4411) prior to any service, test, repair, maintenance, alteration, or installation of an alarm system which might produce a false alarm. Any alarm activated during the servicing, testing, repair, maintenance, alteration, or installation of an alarm system where such prior notice has been given shall not constitute a false alarm. 
C.  Power Supply. Alarm systems for fire detection and notification shall be supplied with an uninterruptable power supply such that the failure or interruption of normal utility electricity will not activate the alarm system. The power supply must be capable of at least twenty-four hours of operation. 
D.  Repairs. When any false alarm caused by a malfunction of an alarm system has occurred, the alarm user shall cause the alarm system to be repaired to eliminate the malfunction. The alarm system annunciator shall be disconnected while repairs are made. 
E.  Permit Number. Every alarm system user whose alarm system is monitored by an alarm response company shall provide that company with their alarm system permit number, once it is issued by the issuing officer. When such responding company calls the police department communication center to report activation of an alarm system it monitors, the permit number shall be provided to the dispatcher for a log entry. 
(Ord. 2150 § 1 (part), 1998)  
10.45.090 - Purpose of alarm system. 
It is unlawful to use an alarm system other than for purposes specifically stated in the application required by Section 10.45.050(B). 
(Ord. 2150 § 1 (part), 1998)  
10.45.100 - Direct-dial telephone device. 
It is unlawful for any person to equip an alarm system with either a direct-dial device or any direct-line equipment which, when activated, will automatically dial a telephone number in or signal directly any office of the police or fire departments. 
(Ord. 2150 § 1 (part), 1998)  
10.45.110 - Alarm business and alarm agent responsibility. 
It is unlawful for an alarm business operator or an alarm agent, or both, to fail to inform their respective alarm system users of the provisions of this chapter. An alarm business operator may obtain the necessary permits for the alarm user. 
(Ord. 2150 § 1 (part), 1998)  
10.45.120 - Repairs. 
For every audible alarm system, the owner shall post the names and telephone numbers of persons to be notified to render repairs or service twenty-four hours a day. 
(Ord. 2150 § 1 (part), 1998)  
10.45.130 - Administrative provisions—False alarm administrative penalty and cost recovery fees. 
A.  When any emergency alarms, messages, signals, or notices are received by the police or fire department showing that an alarm user or an alarm agent or business operator performing maintenance or repair has failed to meet any of the requirements of this chapter, the issuing officer is authorized to require the user of that alarm system to disconnect the system until it complies with the requirements of this Chapter 10.45. 
B.  After September 1, 1998, any person having an alarm system, whether or not licensed under a permit pursuant to this Chapter 10.45, or any alarm agent or business operator who maintains an alarm system and fails to notify the police communications center (telephone 336-4411) in accordance with Section 10.45.080(B), and which results in a police or fire response in which the alarm proves to be a false alarm, shall pay the administrative penalty prescribed below, in addition to any cost recovery fees authorized for equipment and personnel, for each false alarm, message or signal in excess of two activations in any twelve month period. A police response results under this section when the officer or mobile unit arrives on scene at the protected premise; a fire response results when a fire apparatus has been dispatched as a result of alarm transmission. 
False Alarm 	Penalty 
3rd false alarm 	$ 50.00 
4th false alarm 	75.00 
5th false alarm 	100.00 
6th false alarm 	150.00 
7 or more false alarms 	200.00 
 
C.  The finance director shall issue a monthly bill for unpaid administrative penalties accrued during any monthly billing period and any prior periods. Such bill, unless appealed as prescribed in this Section 10.45.130, shall be due and payable within thirty days of the billing date. 
D.  A late fee of fifteen percent of the false alarm administrative penalty shall be added to the unpaid balance of any assessments required by this section not paid within thirty days following the date the penalty becomes final. 
E.  The permit holder may appeal an administrative penalty by depositing the administrative penalty and filing an appeal pursuant to Section 10.45.160. 
1.  Unless appealed, the administrative penalty becomes final on the suspense date specified in the notice. 
2.  If appealed, the administrative penalty becomes final on the date of service of the decision on appeal, and the party is thereafter limited by Government Code Section 53069.4(b) to a period of twenty days following the date the administrative penalty became final to seeking judicial review before a municipal court. 
F.  Administering departments are authorized to charge cost recovery fees for services provided under this chapter. Cost recovery fees may also be recovered for equipment and personnel expenses incurred in response to false alarms. All administrative penalties, application fees and related cost recovery fees shall be credited to a "Security and Fire Alarm Regulation Fund." The fund shall be used exclusively, and may be expended without further council action, for those expenses associated with the administration and enforcement of this Chapter 10.45. 
G.  The amount of any cost recovery fees, false alarm administrative penalties and late fees that have become final pursuant to this Section 10.45.130 shall be deemed a debt to the city, and an action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction in the amount of the delinquent debt. Payment of any administrative penalties and late charges shall not prohibit criminal prosecution for the violation of any provisions of this chapter. 
H.  The issuing officer shall take reasonable steps to notify persons subject to the provisions of this chapter of their responsibility to register. However, any failure of the issuing officer to do so shall not relieve that person from compliance with this chapter and all applicable requirements. 
(Ord. 2150 § 1 (part), 1998)  
10.45.140 - Right to discontinue response. 
The issuing officer reserves the right to discontinue response by fire or police officers to any permitted location based upon a signal generated by a silent or audible alarm when: (1) the alarm user has been given written notice after being charged six false alarm administrative penalties within any twelve month period, or (2) the alarm user has failed to pay any cost recovery fee, or administrative penalty. Reinstatement may occur when the alarm user has taken steps to eliminate or correct the problem(s) and has documented the corrective action in writing to the issuing officer and paid any penalties or fees that are due. This section shall not be construed or interpreted to authorize a nonresponse to a telephone call using the "9-1-1" emergency telephone system. 
(Ord. 2150 § 1 (part), 1998)  
10.45.150 - Suspension/revocation of permits. 
The issuing officer may revoke or suspend an alarm user's permit under this chapter for violating any provisions of this chapter, or the rules or regulations made pursuant to this chapter, including but not limited to, false alarms which exceed the numbers permitted pursuant to Section 10.45.130, or for failing or refusing to pay the false alarm administrative penalty as provided in this chapter. The issuing officer shall first notify the holder of the permit in writing of the intention to suspend or revoke the permit no later than seventy-two hours before the effective hour of the suspension or revocation, along with notice of the opportunity for administrative review of the proposed action pursuant to Section 10.45.160. The notice shall specify a suspense date, after which the action or administrative penalty shall become final unless appealed. 
(Ord. 2150 § 1 (part), 1998)  
10.45.160 - Appeals. 
Any alarm user, operator or agent aggrieved by the decision of the issuing officer to suspend or revoke its permit or to impose an administrative penalty may appeal to the city manager within ten days of receipt of notice of the issuing officer's decision. The city manager or designee shall thereupon set the matter for an administrative hearing within fifteen days before an examiner. The examiner shall be neutral and unbiased, and may be a member of city staff. The examiner shall allow the issuing officer and the appellant each to present and examine all relevant evidence. The formal rules of evidence do not apply, but the examiner shall allow evidence of a nature which responsible persons are accustomed to rely upon in the conduct of serious affairs to be admissible upon the issue. The review and written decision of the hearing examiner shall be final and constitute the exhaustion of administrative remedy. It shall be served upon the permittee and issuing officer, accompanied by a certificate of mailing, no later than fifteen days following the hearing. 
(Ord. 2150 § 1 (part), 1998)  
10.45.170 - Criminal penalties. 
It is unlawful to violate any mandatory provision or prohibition of this chapter. Each violation constitutes a separate offense for each day during any portion of which a violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted. 
(Ord. 2150 § 1 (part), 1998)  
10.45.180 - Limitations of liability. 
The city is under no duty, liability or obligation to a permittee or any other person by reason of any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2150 § 1 (part), 1998)  
10.45.190 - Severability of provisions. 
If any section of this chapter, or any part thereof, is determined invalid or unconstitutional, such determination shall not invalidate the remaining portions. 
(Ord. 2150 § 1 (part), 1998)  
10.45.200 - Exemptions applicable to other alarm systems. 
The provisions of this chapter 10.45 do not apply to the following alarm systems: (a) alarm systems used by Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation insured institutions; (b) alarm systems affixed to automobiles, boats, boat trailers, recreational vehicles and aircraft; (c) alarm systems used exclusively to summon medical assistance; (d) fire alarm systems installed in a building or structure pursuant to the Uniform Fire Code (Chapter 15.28) as a condition to the issuance of a building permit for that building or structure, except that the finance director may collect a false alarm cost recovery fee or administrative penalty, or both, for each false alarm emanating from that system pursuant to Section 10.45.130. 
(Ord. 2150 § 1 (part), 1998)  
10.45.210 - Exemption for governmental entities. 
Except for cost recovery, the provisions of this chapter do not apply to public, municipal, county, state and federal agencies. The city reserves the right to seek cost recovery for false alarms generated from other governmental facilities, unless exempted by agreement or statute. 
(Ord. 2150 § 1 (part), 1998)  
10.45.220 - Confidentiality. 
The information furnished and secured pursuant to this chapter shall be confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection and shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not be known except to persons charged with the administration of this chapter. No information shall be released to the public regarding whether or not an alarm system is installed at any particular premises. 
(Ord. 2150 § 1 (part), 1998)  
Chapter 10.46 - POLICE SERVICES AT PARTIES, GATHERINGS OR EVENTS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 
 
10.46.010 - Purpose. 
The city finds and determines that the control of parties, gatherings or events on private property is necessary when such continued activity is determined to be a threat to the peace, health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
Police officers have been required to make as many as three return calls to a location of a party, gathering or event in order to disperse uncooperative participants, and the return of police officers to a location constitutes a drain of manpower and resources, often leaving other areas of the city without minimal levels of police protection; all of which creates a significant hazard to the safety of the police officers and to the public in general and constitutes a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 1969 § 1 (part), 1989)  
10.46.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  "Party, gathering or event" is a group of persons who have assembled or are assembling on private property for a social occasion or social activity. 
B.  "Person responsible for the event" is the person who owns the property where the party, gathering or event takes place and/or the person in charge of the premises and/or the person who organized the party, gathering or event. If the person responsible for the event is a minor, then the parents or guardians of that minor will jointly and severally be liable for the costs incurred for police services. 
C.  "Police services" include the salaries of the police officers for the amount of time actually spent in responding to, handling all associated duties, or in remaining at the party, gathering or event at a rate established by the director of finance; the actual cost of any medical treatment to injured officers; and the cost of repairing any damaged city equipment or property. 
D.  "Special security assignment" is the assignment of police officers and services during the second call to a location after the distribution of a written warning that the party, gathering or event violates the law. 
(Ord. 1969 § 1 (part), 1989)  
10.46.030 - Police services at parties, gatherings or events requiring a second response. 
When a party, gathering or event occurs on private property and a police officer at the scene determines that there is a threat to public peace, health, safety or general welfare, the persons responsible for the event will be held liable for the cost of providing police services for the special security assignment during the second response by the police after the first warning to control the threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare. 
The return call, or second call, may also result in the arrest and/or citation of violators of the California Penal Code or other local ordinances. 
(Ord. 1969 § 1 (part), 1989)  
10.46.040 - Police service fee. 
The police service fee shall include the cost of personnel and support, equipment damages, and cost of injuries to officers. The fee shall be no less than and shall not exceed the cost of police services for a single event. 
The amount of such fee charged shall be deemed a debt to the city of the person or persons receiving said services and, if minors, of their parents or guardians. Any person owing money shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the city for recovery of such amount, including reasonable attorney fees. 
(Ord. 1969 § 1 (part), 1989)  
10.46.050 - Billing. 
The chief of police shall notify the director of finance in writing, following the rendering of police services, of the name and address of the person responsible for the event, the date and time of the event, the services performed and the costs thereof, and such other information as may be required. The director of finance shall thereafter cause appropriate billings to be made. 
(Ord. 1969 § 1 (part), 1989)  
10.46.060 - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the chief of police to bill for police services rendered may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days of the date of the billing. Upon the filing of such request, the city clerk shall set a time and place for the hearing and shall notify the appellant thereof. The hearing shall be held within thirty days after the appeal is filed. At the hearing, any person may present evidence in opposition to or in support of the appellant's case. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall either grant or deny the appeal and the decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. 1969 § 1 (part), 1989)  
Chapter 10.47 - RAPID ENTRY SYSTEMS FOR GATED MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL COMPLEXES 
 
10.47.010 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The city council recognizes that there is a need for public safety officers to gain immediate access to the common areas of gated multifamily residential complexes when responding to calls for assistance. The presence of a locked gate delays the response time of the police department and can result in an increased danger of bodily injury or death to persons in need of assistance. 
B.  The city council recognizes that specific types of rapid entry systems are already required under the Uniform Fire Code for fire department access, but that there is also a further need for a separate, less inclusive, minimally intrusive, means of accessing the common interior areas of gated residential complexes for emergency police purposes. The city council therefore determines that gated multifamily residential complexes shall be required to install and maintain a separate rapid entry system for police at the main gate to those complexes in order to eliminate unnecessary barriers and delays that jeopardize public health and safety. 
(Ord. 2182 § 1 (part), 2001)  
10.47.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Gated multifamily residential complex" means any residential, apartment, or condominium complex consisting of three or more dwelling or living units, any residential care facility, or any other type of institutional residential facility, any of which have one or more locked security gates at the exterior to the common or interior areas through which access is provided to individual residential units or rooms, and the perimeter of the complex is completely gated, fenced or walled. 
"Locked security gate" means a gate with a lock that is provided for security purposes to deny vehicular or pedestrian access, or both, to the common interior area of the complex. 
"Rapid entry system" means a lock box positioned at the exterior of the main gate of a gated multifamily residential complex containing either: 
1.  A key to the gate; 
2.  A separate master key pad for emergency access; or 
3.  A gate combination for those gates equipped with combination locks. 
(Ord. 2182 § 1 (part), 2001)  
10.47.030 - Applicability. 
A.  All gated multifamily residential complexes with restricted access through locked security gates shall be equipped with a rapid entry system at or near the gated main entrances or other access locations designated by the chief of police. The chief of police shall designate the type of rapid entry system to be used within the city and shall have the authority to require all gated multifamily residential communities to use the designated system. Normally, only one entry point shall be designated, unless the size or layout of the complex dictates that multiple entry points is necessary. 
B.  The chief of police is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations for the use of the rapid entry system. The chief may only require access to the common area or areas of the complex that allow access to the individual residential units or areas, but not to the interiors of any residential units or storage areas. Police entry to such areas may be gained only as allowed by law. 
C.  The owner or operator of any gated multi-family residential complex required to have a rapid entry system shall, at all times, keep the rapid entry system in good working order and equipped with a current key, keypad or combination, as applicable, for quick access at all times. 
(Ord. 2182 § 1 (part), 2001)  
10.47.040 - Implementation. 
A.  The building and safety director shall not issue any building permit or approve any final inspection under a building permit to any gated entry multifamily residential complex hereafter to be constructed, or to any existing complex that is to be so modified as to require a building permit, unless provision for installation of a rapid entry system at the main gate or access point has been made. All plans submitted for the issuance of building permits for qualifying complexes shall contain provisions for a required rapid entry system. 
B.  All other gated multifamily residential complexes currently in existence that are subject to this chapter shall have one year from the effective date of this chapter to install an operational rapid entry system. 
C.  The chief of police shall be responsible for identifying and notifying the complexes that are subject to this chapter of its requirements, and scheduling necessary implementation with the owner or operator. 
(Ord. 2182 § 1 (part), 2001)  
10.47.050 - Enforcement. 
Violations of this chapter may be enforced through criminal, administrative or civil action, or combination. Violations for a first offense are infractions and any subsequent violation committed or continued after thirty days from the date of a first violation shall be a misdemeanor. Penalties are as prescribed in Section 1.20.010 of this code. 
(Ord. 2182 § 1 (part), 2001)  
VI. OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY  
Chapter 10.48 - SIGN POSTING—PUBLIC SIGNS 
 
10.48.010 - Posting signs prohibited—Generally. 
Except as otherwise provided in Section 10.48.030, all persons are prohibited from posting signs and advertisements within the city on telegraph or telephone poles, or on bridges or sign board posts, or any other public property. 
(Ord. 1102 § 1, 1964: Ord. 115 § 1, 1894)  
10.48.020 - Disfiguring sign post prohibited. 
No person shall in any way destroy, injure or disfigure any street sign post. 
(Ord. 115 § 2, 1894)  
10.48.030 - Posting signs prohibited—Exception. 
The city council by resolution, after considering the recommendation of the planning commission, and in accordance with standards to be established by resolution duly adopted, may grant permission to post not withstanding the provisions of Section 10.48.010, such sign or signs as it may determine to be reasonable and proper upon written application to the city clerk, filed by the person, organization or other entity desiring to post such sign or signs. 
(Ord. 1102 § 2, 1964: Ord. 115 § 4, 1894)  
10.48.040 - Penalty. 
Every person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter is punishable as prescribed in Section 1.20.010. 
(Ord. 1358 § 2 (part), 1973: Ord. 115 § 3, 1894)  
Chapter 10.50 - OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC WAY 
 
10.50.010 - Obstructing prohibited—Removal. 
It is unlawful for any person to injure or to obstruct, or cause to be obstructed, any public street, road, alley or other public highway within the city, or any public bridge, wharf, or sidewalk therein, or to render the same or any part thereof inconvenient or dangerous to pass, and the street superintendent is required to cause any and all such obstructions to be removed, first giving to the party causing such obstruction notice to remove the same, and upon the failure to do so, cause the same to be done at the expense of the city. 
Large commercial three-cubic yard or larger refuse containers may be placed on the city-owned public right-of-way by the franchised trash disposal agency of the city. The container shall: be placed no more than six inches from the curb; be adequately marked with reflectors so as not to be a hazard to traffic; be maintained in a clean and safe condition; and be placed to serve a designated site for not longer than one week except where given a time extension by the director of public works. These containers shall not, by time extension or otherwise, be placed at a site for a time period equal to four weeks or for more than four separate occasions within a twelve-month period. 
(Ord. 1775, 1982; Ord. 7 § 7, 1887)  
Chapter 10.52 - REGULATIONS FOR THE USE OF MUNICIPAL PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS AND GOLF COURSES 
 
10.52.010 - Prohibited activities. 
No person shall engage in any of the following acts within the premises of any city park, playground, golf course, or recreation facility: 
A.  Transport, carry, or discharge any firearm, weapon, air gun, slingshot, or explosive of any kind. 
B.  Use archery equipment, hit golf balls, play baseball, football, soccer, cricket or any other game of ball, in a designated picnic area. 
C.  Bring, ride, allow, or permit any bovine animal, sheep, goat, swine, or horse to enter or occupy the premises. 
D.  Bring or permit any dog, other than a seeing-eye dog, to enter or occupy the premises, unless the same is kept on a leash adequate to control such dog at all times. This prohibition against dogs off-leash does not apply to dogs within a "leash free" area, or city designated "dog park." 
E.  Take, kill or maltreat any bird or animal, either wild or domestic. 
F.  Pick, dig, remove, carry away, or willfully damage or destroy park improvements, soil, plants or trees on the premises. 
G.  Drive or ride a motorcycle, automobile, or any other motorized vehicle on any walkway or turfed area. 
H.  Willfully damage or vandalize any building or structure located upon the premises. 
I.  Except for pedestrians or joggers, enter or occupy the premises between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. without the consent of the city council, the city manager, or their authorized agents. 
J.  Enter or trespass in any area, building or facility which is fenced and locked. 
K.  Drive or operate any motor vehicle in any park in excess of fifteen miles per hour. 
L.  Park any automobile or vehicle in any park at any place other than designated parking areas. Places where parking is permitted shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
M.  Wash, perform maintenance on, or make other than emergency repairs upon any automobile, motorcycle or self-driven vehicle in any park. 
N.  Make a fire in any park other than in stoves, pits or braziers provided by the city. 
O.  Except for charcoal lighter, bring into any park any material which will, if spilled or spread, be injurious to the turf or plant growth. 
P.  Throw or dispose of any bottles, tin cans, broken glass, paper, clothes, cast iron, rubbish, soil, or other debris of any kind, except in approved containers provided by the city. 
Q.  Willfully remove, damage or destroy any athletic equipment provided by the city. Normal wear and tear is acceptable 
R.  Move or remove from one location to another any part or parts of field equipment. 
S.  Open or close any valve pertaining to the water mains or sprinkler system, or to expose or interfere with any gas pipe, hydrant, pitcock, sewer, catch basin, backflow preventer, or other similar device in any park. 
T.  Indulge in indecent or riotous conduct or language, or to otherwise make noises in such a manner as to disturb any picnic, meeting, concert or activity. 
U.  Operate a public address system without prior written permission of the city. This prohibition shall not include the use of small portable radios, as long as such radios are operated at such a volume as not to disturb other persons present in the park. 
V.  Willfully disturb or interfere with any employee of the city acting within the scope of his or her employment, or to disturb or interfere with any spectator or participant in any event or activity conducted in any park, or to enter any park for the purpose of committing any such disturbance or interference. 
W.  Camp or lodge overnight in or upon any park, unless prior written permission is obtained from the city. 
X.  Vend, offer for sale, or dispose of goods, wares or merchandise, or conduct any business unless authorized to do so by Chapter 13.30, or by the city council or their designee, except that nothing in this provision shall prohibit religious or political solicitations subject to subsection (II) of Section 10.52.010. 
Y.  Practice, carry on, conduct or solicit for any trade, occupation, business or profession without the written permission of the city council. 
Z.  Play upon any tennis court wearing shoes other than tennis-type shoes. 
AA.  Use any tennis court for tennis tournaments, team practices, or other special events of any kind without the prior written permission of the city. 
BB.  Wade or swim in any pool except when supervised. 
CC.  Use any park facility for which a charge is made without first having paid the fee requested and having received the required permit. 
DD.  Remove any authorized or official sign indicating that any park facility or equipment is reserved. 
EE.  For any male person to use any toilet set apart for women, and for any female person to use any toilet set apart for men, provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to children accompanied by their father, mother or guardian. 
FF.  Climb onto any building or structure not designated for such activity. 
GG.  Tear down, deface or destroy any sign posted pursuant to the above sections. 
HH.  Except in any golf course, smoke any tobacco products or dispose of any tobacco product in any place other than a designated waste disposal container. 
II.  No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill circulars, pamphlets, tracts, or advertisements in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city. Nothing herein shall prevent any person from handing out, distributing, or selling any commercial handbill on any public sidewalk or pedestrian pathway in conformance with Chapter 13.30 of this code provided, however, that no person shall hand out, distribute, or sell any commercial handbill in any other public place not allowed by Chapter 13.30. Further, it is not unlawful on any sidewalk, street, pedestrian pathway, or other public place within the city for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. No person shall post or affix to any pole, tree, car, fence or structure situated therein any kind of handbill, circular, pamphlet, tract, or advertisement. 
JJ.  Except as otherwise provided in subdivision (1) of this subsection, operate any food establishment (as defined in Section 113780 of the California Health and Safety Code), mobile food facility (as defined in Section 113900 of the California Health and Safety Code), vending machine (as defined in Section 113903 of the California Health and Safety Code), produce stand (as defined in Section 113855 of the California Health and Safety Code), swap meet prepackaged food stand (as defined in Section 113905 of the California Health and Safety Code), temporary food facility (as defined in Section 113895 of the California Health and Safety Code), satellite food distribution facility (as defined in Section 113880 of the California Health and Safety Code), stationary mobile food preparation unit (as defined in Section 113890 of the California Health and Safety Code), mobile food preparation unit (as defined in Section 113815 of the California Health and Safety Code) or open air barbecue facility (as defined in Section 113830 of the California Health and Safety Code). 
1.  This subsection is not intended to prohibit activities wherein no permanent facilities are used for storing or handling food, nor families, groups, or other organizations which give or sell food to its members and guests at occasional events. For the purposes of this subsection the term "occasional event" means an event that occurs not more than two days in any ninety-day period. 
2.  This prohibition does not apply to: (a) special events in accordance with Chapter 15.60; (b) a city council sponsored community event; (c) sidewalk vendors in accordance with Chapter 13.30; (d) those who have obtained the necessary permit to hold an event in a city park, at a city recreation center, or community center. 
3.  The exception found in subdivision (1) of this subsection shall not be construed to allow a person to use park property as a mobile or stationary kitchen, "eating establishment", restaurant or similar purpose to provide food to the general public, including but not limited to a food bank as defined in Section 114445 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 2264, 2005; Ord. 1999, 1990: Ord. 1867, 1985) 
(Ord. No. 2011-2363, § 1, 7-19-2011; Ord. No. 2018-2452, § 6, 12-4-2018; Ord. No. 2019-2458, §§ 7—10, 5-21-2019)  
10.52.020 - Dog park regulations. 
Dog owners or person with custody, care charge, control, or possession of a dog shall comply with the following: 
A.  The presence of a dog in a city designated dog park shall constitute implied consent of the person either owning or controlling the dog to the regulations imposed by the city. A dog park means an area within a city park specifically designated by the city as an area for dogs to be "off-leash." 
B.  Dog parks shall be used during park hours only. 
C.  Dogs must be keep on a leash going to and from the dog park. 
D.  A person shall not have more than three dogs within a dog park. 
E.  Dog leashes, choke chains, prong collars, and head collars (Halti, Gentle Leader, etc.) must be removed before dogs run loose in the dog park. 
F.  Dog owners or person with custody, care charge, control, or possession of a dog shall not abandon or otherwise leave any off-leash dog unattended or unsupervised within a dog park 
G.  Dog owners must clean up after their dog(s) using closeable bags and dispose of the waste in a trash receptacle. 
H.  Dogs must be under vocal control and not cause a public nuisance, safety hazard or harass people, other dogs or wildlife. 
I.  Aggressive behavior by a dog(s) is not permitted. Dogs must be removed from the dog park at the first sign of aggression. 
J.  The presence of a dog in a dog park shall constitute a waiver of liability, on behalf of the person either owning or controlling the dog, to the benefit of the City of National City, as well as an agreement and undertaking by the person either owing or controlling the dog to protect, indemnity, defend, and hold harmless the City of National City for any injury or damage caused by the dog. 
K.  In the event of a dog bite that results in injury requiring medical care to a person or another dog, dog owners shall provide to the injured person or owner or custodian of the injured dog, at the time of the injury, his or her full name, correct dog license information, telephone number, mailing address, and driver's license number. 
L.  Dogs must have a current dog license as required by Municipal Code Section 18.12.010, and have up-to-date vaccinations. A current dog license may serve as proof of compliance. 
M.  Under no circumstances shall a sick dog that has been diagnosed with a contagious disease, or that shows signs of illness be allowed in any dog park. 
N.  Female dogs in estrus (heat cycle) are not allowed within a dog park. 
O.  Food, pet treats and dog food are not allowed inside the dog park. 
P.  Dog owners or person with custody of a dog shall not permit their dog(s) to dig holes. 
Q.  A dog park shall not be used as a children's play-area. No children under the age of sixteen are permitted in the dog park unless accompanied by an adult and are closely supervised. 
(Ord. No. 2011-2363, § 1, 7-19-2011)  
10.52.030 - Enforcement. 
This chapter may be enforced by any official or officer who is charged by the Municipal Code with code enforcement authority. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, and shall carry the penalties as prescribed in Chapter 1.20 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-2363, § 1, 7-19-2011)  
Chapter 10.53 - REGULATIONS FOR USE OF SKATEBOARD PARKS 
 
10.53.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers and California Health and Safety Code Section 115800, and any succeeding or related statutes, for the purpose of protecting the city from claims arising from use of the public skateboard parks. Riding or using a skateboard or other wheeled recreational device at a skateboard park is an inherently dangerous recreational activity, and persons using skateboards or other wheeled recreational devices do so at their own risk. 
(Ord. 2311 § 1 (part), 2008; Ord. No. 2016-2412, §§ 1, 2, 4-19-2016)  
10.53.015 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, "other wheeled recreational device" means any of the following non-motorized devices: bicycles, scooters, in-line skates, roller stakes, or wheelchairs. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2412, §§ 1, 2, 4-19-2016)  
10.53.020 - Skateboarding prohibited in certain areas. 
Skateboarding is prohibited in city parks and recreational facilities unless specifically authorized in areas designated by this chapter and as further designated by resolution of the city council. The city designates and maintains as a skateboard park facility that area located within Kimball Park, where the current basketball/tennis courts are sited, and whose boundaries are designated by a fence and sign designating the area as a city skateboard park. 
(Ord. 2311 § 1 (part), 2008; Ord. No. 2016-2412, §§ 1, 2, 4-19-2016)  
10.53.030 - Protective gear required. 
It is unlawful for any person to ride, operate, or use a skateboard or other wheeled recreational device at any skateboard park located on city property unless that person is wearing a helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads (collectively, "safety equipment") in accordance with the safety equipment manufacturer's recommendations. The safety equipment must be in a serviceable condition. 
(Ord. 2311 § 1 (part), 2008; Ord. No. 2016-2412, §§ 1, 2, 4-19-2016)  
10.53.040 - Skateboard park prohibited activities. 
A.  The prohibited activities within the premises of any city park, playground, recreational facility, and golf course contained in Section 10.52.010 of this code shall also apply to designated skateboard parks located on city property. 
B.  No person shall engage in any of the following acts within the premises of any designated skateboard park located on city property: 
1.  Place or use any unauthorized apparatus, pieces of equipment, or obstacles within the skateboard park; 
2.  Place or use other materials, including, but not limited to, ramps or jumps, within the skateboard park; 
3.  Ride or use a skateboard or other wheeled recreational device on wet surfaces; 
4.  Enter the skateboard park unless actively riding or using a skateboard or other wheeled recreational device; 
5.  Use, consume, or have within his or her custody or control, food or beverages, within the skateboard park; 
6.  Enter the skateboard park while under the influence of alcoholic beverages or drugs; 
7.  Use or possess glass containers, bottles, or other breakable glass objects or products within the skateboard park; 
8.  Use or engage in intimidation, hazing, bullying, pushing or fighting; 
9.  Ride or use a skateboard or other wheeled recreational device with more than one rider on the device at any one time; 
10.  Ride, operate, or use any device other than a skateboard or other wheeled recreational device in the skateboard park as permitted herein. Prohibited devices include, but are not limited to any motorized vehicles, skateboards, or skates. 
(Ord. 2311 § 1 (part), 2008; Ord. No. 2016-2412, §§ 1, 2, 4-19-2016)  
10.53.050 - Signs. 
The city will post signage at the skateboard park affording reasonable notice that any person riding a skateboard in the skateboard park must wear a helmet, elbow pads, and kneepads, and that any person failing to do so will be subject to citation under this chapter. The signage will state at a minimum the following: 
SKATEBOARDING OR USE OF NON-MOTORIZED BICYCLES, SCOOTERS, IN-LINE SKATES, ROLLER SKATES, OR WHEELCHAIRS ONLY. THIS SKATEBOARD PARK IS NOT SUPERVISED. SKATEBOARDING OR USE OF A SKATEBOARD PARK IS HAZARDOUS. USE AT YOUR OWN RISK. THE NATIONAL CITY MUNICIPAL CODE REQUIRES PERSONS USING THIS SKATEBOARD PARK TO WEAR A HELMET, ELBOW PADS, AND KNEE PADS. NO UNAUTHORIZED APPARATUS, PIECES OF EQUIPMENT, OR OBSTACLES. FAILURE TO COMPLY IS UNLAWFUL AND MAY BE SUBJECT TO CITATION UNDER NCMC CHAPTER 10.53. 
(Ord. 2311 § 1 (part), 2008; Ord. No. 2016-2412, §§ 1, 2, 4-19-2016)  
10.53.060 - Violations. 
Every act prohibited or declared unlawful and every failure to perform an act made mandatory by this chapter shall be prosecuted as a misdemeanor or an infraction as provided in Section 1.20.010 of this code and in accordance with Chapter 1.20 of this code. 
(Ord. 2311 § 1 (part), 2008; Ord. No. 2016-2412, §§ 1, 2, 4-19-2016)  
Chapter 10.54 - GRAFFITI CONTROL 
 
10.54.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used, they shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to such respective terms in this section: 
A.  "Abatement notice" means a notice issued by the city manager or his/her designee, or by a department director, which requires abatement of a public nuisance. 
B.  "Abatement and related administrative costs" include, but are not limited to, city funds and expenses of abatement, as defined herein. 
C.  "Aerosol paint container" means any aerosol container, regardless of the material from which it is made, which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint or anything other than a solution which can be removed with water after it dries. 
D.  "Deface" includes the application of graffiti to any exterior surface of any building, structure or immobile object. 
E.  "City funds" include, but are not limited to, court costs, attorney's fees, costs of removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material, costs of repair and replacement of defaced property, and the law enforcement costs incurred by the city in identifying and apprehending the person who created, caused or committed the graffiti on publicly or privately owned permanent real or person property within the city. 
F.  "Expenses of abatement" include, but are not limited to, court costs, attorney's fees, costs of removal of the graffiti, costs of repair and replacement of defaced property, and the law enforcement costs incurred by the city in identifying and apprehending a minor who applies graffiti in violation of Section 10.54.020. 
G.  "Felt-tip marker" means any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which, at its broadest width is greater than one-eighth inch, containing an ink that is not water-soluble or anything other than a solution which can be removed with water after it dries. 
H.  "Graffiti" includes any inscription, drawing, word, figure or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, painted, pasted to or otherwise affixed to or on the surface of any building, structure, structural component, wall, fence, pavement or any other surface, to the extent that same was not authorized in advance by the owner thereof, or despite such advance authorization, is otherwise unlawful. 
I.  "Graffiti implement" means an aerosol paint container, a felt-tip marker, a paint stick or any tool, liquid or liquid container used or designed to etch glass. 
J.  "Minor," for purposes of the nuisance abatement cost collection provisions set forth in Sections 10.54.090 and 10.54.092, means a minor who has confessed to, admitted to, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a violation of Section 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7 of the Penal Code, or a minor convicted by final judgment of a violation of Section 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7 of the Penal Code, or a minor declared a ward of the juvenile court pursuant to Section 602 of the Welfare and Institutions Code by reason of the commission of an act prohibited by Section 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6 or 640.7 of the Penal Code. 
K.  "Paint stick" means a device containing any solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, leaving a mark at least one-eighth of an inch in width, visible from a distance of twenty feet, and not water-soluble. 
L.  "Responsible party" means any person who is the owner or tenant, or who has primary responsibility for control of property, or who has primary responsibility for the repair or maintenance of property. 
(Ord. 2202, 2002; Ord. 2091 § 1, 1995: Ord. 2074 § 1 (part), 1994)  
10.54.020 - Unlawful to apply graffiti. 
It is unlawful for any person to apply graffiti upon the surface of any public or private building, structure, structural component, wall, fence, pavement or any other surface, to the extent same was not authorized in advance by the owner thereof, or despite such advance authorization, is otherwise unlawful. 
(Ord. 2074 § 1 (part), 1994)  
10.54.030 - Access to graffiti implements. 
A.  Furnishing. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, except a parent or legal guardian, to sell, give or in any way furnish, any graffiti implement to any minor under the age of eighteen years, unless that person, firm or corporation provides for the supervision of the minor's use of such graffiti implement, so as to assure that the minor does not deface any public or private property, or violate any other section of this chapter. 
B.  Display for Sale. No person, firm or entity engaged in a commercial enterprise ("seller") shall display for sale, trade or exchange, any graffiti implement except in an area from which the public shall be securely precluded without employee assistance. 
(Ord. 2074 § 1 (part), 1994)  
10.54.040 - Possession of graffiti implements. 
A.  Possession by Minors. It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen years to have in his or her possession, whether such minor is or is not in or on an automobile or other form of conveyance, any graffiti implement while upon public property or upon private property without the consent of the owner of such private property whose consent is given in advance and whose consent shall be given as to the person's presence while in the possession of a graffiti implement. 
1.  School Exception for Felt-Tip Markers. The foregoing provision shall not apply when such person is attending, or travelling to or from a school at which such person is enrolled, if such person is participating in a class at said school which has, as a written requirement of said class, the need to use felt-tip markers. 
B.  Possession in Designated Public Places. No person shall have in his or her possession any graffiti implement while engaged in any activity in any public park, playground, swimming pool or recreational facility, or while loitering in or near an underpass, bridge abutment, storm drain, and other similar types of infrastructure not normally used by the public, except as may be authorized by the city. 
(Ord. 2074 § 1 (part), 1994)  
10.54.050 - Unlawful to permit property to remain defaced. 
It is unlawful for any responsible party to permit property which is defaced with graffiti to remain so defaced for a period of seventy-two hours after notice of same by the city unless: 
A.  Said responsible party shall demonstrate by a preponderance of evidence that he/she does not have the financial or physical ability to remove the defacing graffiti; or 
B.  Unless it can be demonstrated that the responsible party has an active program for the removal of graffiti and has scheduled the removal of the graffiti as part of that program, in which case it shall be unlawful to permit such property defaced with graffiti to remain defaced for a period of seventy-two hours after notice of same. 
(Ord. 2074 § 1 (part), 1994)  
10.54.060 - Nuisance declared. 
A.  Graffiti as a Nuisance. The existence of graffiti within the city limits of the city is found to be obnoxious, indecent and offensive, and constitutes a public and private nuisance, and may be abated according to the provisions and procedures contained in this chapter. 
B.  Graffiti Attracting Surface as a Nuisance. The existence of any surface of a structure on a parcel of land which has been defaced with graffiti after removal more than five times in twelve months is a public and private nuisance, and may be abated by minor modifications thereto, or to the immediate area surrounding same, according to the provisions and procedures herein contained as follows: Said surface or surfaces shall be required to be retrofitted, at the expense of the property owner of said lot, not to exceed a total cost of one percent of the assessed value of the property according to the last equalized county assessment roll, or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, or at the expense of the city at the city's option, with such features or qualities as may be established by the city as necessary to reduce the attractiveness of the surface for graffiti, or as necessary to permit more convenient or efficient removal thereof. 
(Ord. 2074 § 1 (part), 1994)  
10.54.070 - Use of city funds to remove graffiti. 
The city shall be authorized, pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.3, to use public funds for the removal of graffiti from publicly or privately owned real or personal property, or for the painting or repairing of same, but shall not authorize or undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive area than that where the graffiti is located, unless the graffiti cannot be removed cost effectively, in which case public funds may be used to repair or replace the portion of the property that was defaced, or unless the responsible party agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the more extensive area. 
(Ord. 2091 § 2, 1995: Ord. 2074 § 1 (part), 1994)  
10.54.080 - Entry upon private property. 
A.  Securing Owner Consent. Prior to entering upon private property or property owned by a public entity other than the city, for the purpose of removal of graffiti, the city shall attempt to secure the consent of the property owner, and a release of the city from liability for private or public property or liability damage. 
B.  Failure of Responsible Party to Remove or Consent to Removal. If a responsible party fails to remove the offending graffiti within the time specified in Section 10.54.050, or if the city shall have requested consent to remove or paint over the offending graffiti and the responsible party shall have refused consent for entry on terms acceptable to the city consistent with the terms of this section, the city may commence abatement and cost recovery proceedings for the removal of the graffiti according to the following procedure. 
C.  Abatement and Cost Recovery Proceedings. 
1.  Notice and Conduct of Due Process Hearing. The city manager, or his/her designee, ("hearing officer") shall give not less than forty-eight hours notice, served in the same manner as summons in a civil action in accordance with Article 3 (commencing with Section 415. 10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure (if the owner of record, after diligent search cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county pursuant to Government Code Section 6062) to the responsible party or parties who are responsible for the maintenance of a parcel of property containing graffiti ("property"), and, if a different person is the owner of record of the parcel of land on which the nuisance is maintained, based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, then to said owner ("owner") also, of a "due process" hearing at which said responsible party and owner shall be entitled to present evidence and argue that his/ her property does not contain graffiti. The determination of the hearing officer after the "due process" hearing shall be final and not appealable. If, after the due process hearing, regardless of the attendance of the responsible party, owner or their respective agents, the hearing officer determines that the property contains graffiti viewable from a public or quasi-public place, the hearing officer shall give written notice ("eradication order") that, unless the graffiti is removed within five days thereafter, or such longer time as the hearing officer shall find reasonable, the city shall enter upon the Property, cause the removal, painting over (in such color as shall meet with the approval of the hearing officer) or such other eradication thereof ("eradication effort") as the hearing officer determines appropriate, and shall provide the responsible party and owner thereafter with an accounting of the costs of such eradication effort on a full cost recovery basis. 
2.  Eradication Effort. Not sooner than the time specified in the order of the hearing officer, the city manager, or his designee, shall implement the eradication order, and shall provide an accounting to the responsible party, and as appropriate, the owner, of the costs thereof ("eradication accounting"). Service of the eradication accounting shall be made by first-class mail, with postage prepaid, marked to the last known address of the responsible party and owner, if appropriate. If said address is not known, then the eradication accounting shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property for a period of ten days. 
3.  Cost Hearing. The responsible party or owner, if appropriate, may request a due process hearing on the eradication accounting before the hearing officer, which shall be conducted according to the procedures set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section. If the responsible party or owner fails to request a hearing before the hearing officer on the eradication accounting, or if requested, after such a cost hearing, the hearing officer determines that all or a portion of the costs are appropriately chargeable to the eradication effort, the total amount set forth in the eradication accounting, or such amount thereof determined as appropriate by the hearing officer, ("Assessed eradication charges") shall be due and payable by the responsible party within thirty days. 
4.  Lien. As to such property where the responsible party is the owner, if all or any portion of the assessed eradication charges remain unpaid after thirty days, pursuant to the authority created by law, including Government Code Section 38773, et seq., such portion thereof as shall remain unpaid shall constitute and is declared to constitute a lien on the property which was the subject matter of the eradication effort. The city manager or his/ her designee shall present a resolution of the lien to the city council, and upon passage and adoption thereof, shall cause a certified copy thereof to be recorded with the San Diego County recorder's office. 
(Ord. 2074 § 1 (part), 1994)  
10.54.090 - Recovery of abatement and related costs by abatement lien—Procedure. 
A.  Pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.2, the city may, by recordation of a lien, recover abatement and related administrative costs incurred in the summary abatement of any nuisance resulting from the defacement by a minor of the property of another, whether publicly or privately owned, by graffiti. The lien may be recorded upon a parcel of land owned by the minor, or upon a parcel of land owned by the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor. Prior to recordation of the lien, the city shall serve upon the minor, or upon the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, the notice prescribed in this section. 
B.  The notice shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action pursuant to Article 3 (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. If the minor, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy of the notice upon the property owned by the minor, in a conspicuous place, for a period of ten days. If the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy of the notice upon the property owned by the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, in a conspicuous place, for a period of ten days. The notice shall also be published pursuant to Section 6062 in a newspaper of general circulation that is published in the county in which the property is located. 
C.  A graffiti nuisance abatement lien shall be recorded by the city clerk in the county recorder's office and from the date of recording shall have the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien. 
D.  A graffiti nuisance abatement lien shall specify the amount of the lien, the name and address of the responsible city department, the date of the abatement order, the street address, legal description and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner (i.e., the minor or parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor) of the parcel. 
E.  In the event that the nuisance abatement lien is discharged, released or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the information specified in subsection (D) of this section shall be recorded by the city. 
F.  A nuisance abatement lien may be foreclosed by an action brought by the city for a money judgment. 
G.  The city may recover from the property owner (i.e., the minor or parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor) any costs incurred regarding the processing and recording of the nuisance abatement lien and providing notice to the property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien. 
(Ord. 2091 § 3, 1995)  
10.54.092 - Recovery of abatement and related costs by special assessment—Procedure. 
A.  Pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.6, the city may, by placement of a special assessment, recover abatement and related administrative costs incurred in the summary abatement of any nuisance resulting from the defacement by a minor of the property of another, whether publicly or privately owned, by graffiti. The special assessment may be placed against a parcel of land owned by the minor, or upon a parcel of land owned by the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor. 
B.  A notice of special assessment shall be delivered by the city to the county auditor, who shall place it on the county assessment roll. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. However, if any real property to which the abatement and related administrative costs relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon prior to the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the abatement and related administrative costs shall not result in a lien against the real property but shall instead be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. Notices or instruments relating to the abatement proceeding or special assessment may be recorded. 
C.  The city shall file a withdrawal of the notice of special assessment in the event the minor or the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor pays in full the costs of abatement of the public nuisance. 
(Ord. 2091 § 4, 1995)  
10.54.100 - Violation—General penalty. 
A violation of any of the provisions or failure to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor; provided that notwithstanding any other provision of this code, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor may, in the discretion of the city attorney, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction. The city attorney may upgrade an infraction complaint to become a misdemeanor complaint at any time. 
(Ord. 2074 § 1 (part), 1994)  
10.54.110 - Police diversion program. 
In lieu of, or as part of, requesting prosecution of a petition to declare a minor to be a ward of the court under Welfare and Institutions Code Section 602 (including but not limited to, offenses which, in the opinion of the police chief, constitute a violation of this chapter), or in lieu of prosecuting a violation of this chapter as a crime against an adult, the police chief with the approval of (or according to rules and procedures approved by) the city manager, shall be authorized to offer said minor or adult an option to perform such community service as the police chief deems appropriate, but which community service shall, if offered at all, contains the following minimum elements: 
A.  The minor shall perform at least thirty hours of community service. 
B.  At least one of the custodial parents, or if none, guardians, shall be in attendance at least fifty percent of the period of assigned community service. 
C.  The entire period of community service shall be performed under the supervision of a community service provider approved by the chief of police. 
D.  Reasonable effort shall be made to assign the subject minor or adult to a type of community service that is reasonably expected to have the most rehabilitative effect on the minor or adult. To the extent that the offense giving rise to the offer of community service constitutes a violation of this chapter, reasonable effort shall be made by the chief of police to assign the minor to community service which constitutes in significant part the removal of graffiti. 
(Ord. 2074 § 1 (part), 1994)  
10.54.120 - Mandatory juvenile delinquent community service. 
Any minor determined to be a ward of the court under Welfare and Institutions Code Section 602 as a result of committing an offense in the city shall be required, at the city's option, to perform community service, including graffiti removal service of not less than thirty hours nor more than eighty hours. 
(Ord. 2074 § 1 (part), 1994)  
10.54.130 - Parental civil liability. 
Any parent or other legal guardian who consents to, permits, or otherwise knowingly allows her or his child under the age of eighteen to possess a graffiti implement shall be personally liable for any and all costs to any person incurred in connection with the removal of graffiti caused by said child, or by said graffiti implement, and for all attorney's fees and court costs incurred in connection with the civil prosecution of any claim for damages. 
(Ord. 2074 § 1 (part), 1994)  
10.54.140 - Civil responsibility for damages—Wrongful display. 
Any person who displays a graffiti implement in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be personally liable for any and all costs incurred by any party in connection with the removal of graffiti, or the repair of any property containing graffiti, caused by a minor who has obtained a graffiti implement as a direct result of such unlawful display, and used said graffiti implement to deface property in violation of this chapter. Said person shall additionally be liable for all attorney's fees and court costs incurred in connection with the civil prosecution of any claim for damages. 
(Ord. 2074 § 1 (part), 1994)  
10.54.150 - Reward authority. 
A.  Pursuant to Section 53069.5 of the Government Code, the city does hereby offer a reward of one hundred fifty dollars for information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person for violation of Section 10.54.020 of this chapter, not to exceed three hundred dollars per incident of graffiti. In the event of multiple contributors of information, the reward amount shall be divided by the city in the manner it shall deem appropriate. For the purposes of this section, diversion of the offending violator to a community service program, or a plea bargain to a lesser offense, shall constitute a conviction. 
B.  Claims for rewards under this section shall be filed with the city manager or his/her designee, and approved by the city council at a public meeting. 
Each claim shall: 
1.  Specifically identify the date, location and kind of property damaged or destroyed; 
2.  Identify by name the person who is convicted, or confessed to the damage or destruction of the city property. 
3.  Identify the court and the date upon which the conviction occurred or the place and the date of the confession. 
C.  No claim for a reward shall be approved by the city council unless an authorized representative of the city investigates and verifies the accuracy of the claim and recommends that it be approved. Approval of a reward rests within the sole discretion of the city council, and this section creates no right or claim against the city by anyone claiming a reward. 
D.  The person committing the graffiti, and if an unemancipated minor, then the custodial parent of said minor, shall be civilly liable to the city for the reward paid pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. 2074 § 1 (part), 1994)  
VII. CONSUMER PROTECTION  
Chapter 10.56 - CONSUMER COMMODITIES 
 
10.56.010 - Readable prices on packaged consumer commodities. 
A.  Definitions. 
1.  "Automatic check out system" means a computer capable of reading the universal product code or similar code to determine the price of items being purchased. 
2.  "Consumer commodity" includes: 
a.  Food including all material, whether solid, liquid, or mixed, and whether simple or compound, which is used or intended for consumption by human beings or domestic animals normally kept as household pets and all substances or ingredients added to any such material for any purpose. This definition shall not apply to individual packages of cigarettes or individual cigars; 
b.  Napkins, facial tissues, toilet tissue, foil wrapping, plastic wrapping, paper toweling and disposable plates and cups; 
c.  Detergents, soaps and other cleaning agents; 
d.  Pharmeceuticals, including nonprescription drugs, bandages, female hygiene products and toiletries. 
3.  "Grocery department" is an area within a general retail merchandise store which is engaged primarily in the retail sale of packaged food rather than food prepared for immediate consumption on or off the premises. 
4.  "Grocery store" means a store engaged primarily in the retail sale of packaged food rather than food prepared for consumption on the premises. 
5.  "Sale item or special" is any consumer commodity offered in good faith for a period of seven days or less on sale at a price below the normal price that is usually sold for in that store. 
B.  Package Labeling Requirements. Every retail grocery store or grocery department within a general retail merchandise store which uses an automatic checkout system shall cause to have a clearly readable price indicated on each packaged consumer commodity offered for sale. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any of the following: 
1.  The following consumer commodities which were not generally item-priced on January 1, 1977, as determined by the Department of Food and Agriculture: 
a.  Beer, individual containers, 
b.  Soft drink, individual containers, 
c.  Candy bars, mints, 
d.  Dry drink, individual packets (Kool-aid type), 
e.  Cigarettes and cigars, either individually or in cartons, 
f.  Baby food, strained and junior jars only, 
g.  Eggs, 
h.  Frozen novelties (ice cream bars, popsicles, etc.), 
i.  Ice cream, cartons, 
j.  Milk, including buttermilk and chocolate drink, 
k.  Packaged produce, 
1.  Yogurt; 
2.  Any unpackaged fresh food produce or to consumer commodities that are under three cubic inches in size, weighing less than three ounces and priced under thirty cents; 
3.  Any consumer commodity offered as a sale item or as a special; 
4.  Any business which has as its only regular employees the owner thereof, or the parent, spouse or child of such owner, or, in addition thereto, not more than two other regular employees; 
5.  Identical items within a multi-item package; 
6.  Items sold through a vending machine. 
D.  Violations and Penalties. 
1.  The intentional violation of this section shall be an infraction. 
2.  Failure to have a clearly readable price indicated on twelve units of same item or of the same item of the same commodity shall constitute a presumption of intent to violate this section. 
3.  Every additional twelve units of the same item that fail to have an indicated price on them shall constitute a presumption of intent to violate this section. 
4.  Each day that a violation continues shall also constitute a separate violation, after notification thereof to the manager or assistant manager of the retail grocery store or the grocery department of the general retail merchandise store, and shall constitute a presumption of intent to violate this section. 
5.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any person may bring an action to enjoin a violation of this section. 
E.  Liability. Any person, firm, corporation, or association who violates this section shall be liable to any person injured for any losses or expenses thereby incurred and for the sum of fifty dollars in addition thereto. The remedy set forth herein is applicable only to actions brought in the name of and on behalf of a single plaintiff and shall not be applicable in multiple-plaintiff or class actions. 
F.  Unintentional Error. Improper pricing on the shelf or on the item due to unintentional error shall not constitute a violation of this section. 
G.  The remedies set forth in this section are the exclusive remedies available to any person for violation of this section. 
(Ord. 1724, 1980)  
Chapter 10.57 - SWAP MEETS 
 
10.57.010 - Definitions and designation. 
As used in this chapter, the terms "swap meet operator," "vendor" and "swap meet" shall have the meanings ascribed to them by Business and Professions Code Section 21661. A swap meet is designated as a regulated activity in order to ensure legitimate business practice that does not facilitate the possession or transfer of stolen property. 
(Ord. 2224 § 19 (part), 2003)  
10.57.020 - Prohibited items. 
It is unlawful for any vendor in a swap meet to exchange, barter, trade or sell, the following items of personal property: firearms, ammunition, explosives, animals and livestock, any item of personal property from which the serial number or identifying number has been removed, or any other item of personal property which is prohibited from being exchanged, bartered, traded or sold by ordinance or resolution or any laws of the city, the county, or the state. 
(Ord. 2224 § 19 (part), 2003)  
10.57.030 - Participants informed of prohibited items. 
The swap meet operator shall take the following steps to notify each vendor of the prohibitions against selling property designated in Section 10.57.020: 
A.  The swap meet operator shall install and maintain a public address system of sufficient volume to be heard in all parts of the licensed premises during the conduct of the swap meet. 
B.  The swap meet operator shall install and maintain signs in the English and Spanish languages announcing the prohibitions of Section 10.57.020. One sign shall be installed for every twenty-five vending sites within the premises. Each sign shall be of a minimum dimension of three feet by four feet. There shall also be installed a sign at each entrance to the licensed premises stating that the sale of property forbidden by Section 10.57.020 is illegal. 
C.  The swap meet operator shall give to each vendor entering the premises written notice of the restrictions of this chapter. 
D.  The swap meet operator shall make oral announcements in the English and Spanish languages of the restrictions of this chapter through the use of the required public address system. Announcements shall be made at least once every sixty minutes during the operation of a swap meet as defined in this chapter. 
E.  The swap meet operator or agent shall maintain a constant foot patrol of the licensed premises to observe violations of this chapter. The foot patrol shall be of sufficient frequency that each vending site is passed and observed by the patrolman at least once every sixty minutes during the operation of a swap meet as defined in this chapter. 
F.  Upon observing a violation of this chapter the swap meet operator or agent shall notify the National City police department and report the violation. 
(Ord. 2224 § 19 (part), 2003)  
10.57.040 - Suspension or revocation of license. 
Violation of any provision of this chapter by any person, firm or corporation shall be proper ground for suspension or revocation of the business tax license issued pursuant to Chapter 6.04. 
(Ord. 2224 § 19 (part), 2003)  
10.57.050 - Vendor to obtain business tax license. 
Except as provided in Section 10.57.060, every vendor selling new merchandise, every vendor selling used merchandise more frequently than twice each calendar year, and every vendor advertising for products or services at a swap meet shall obtain a tax license from the city pursuant to Chapter 6.04 for his or her operations at a swap meet. The vendor may give the address of the swap meet at which he or she operates as the business address for the purpose of obtaining the tax certificate. The vendor must provide a mailing address of the business on the application, which may be his or her home address and home telephone number if there is no fixed place of business. 
(Ord. 2224 § 19 (part), 2003)  
10.57.060 - Occasional sales. 
Vendors engaging in the occasional or infrequent sale of used goods at a swap meet, which is defined as two or fewer sales per calendar year, each sale not exceeding four consecutive days, are not required to pay a city business tax prior to operating at a swap meet. 
(Ord. 2224 § 19 (part), 2003)  
10.57.070 - Control of the sale of certain goods. 
Each vendor shall maintain records and comply with Business and Professions Code Sections 21663 through 21666. Records shall be provided to the chief of police, as required. 
(Ord. 2224 § 19 (part), 2003)  
10.57.080 - Operator's records. 
The operator of a swap meet shall comply with Business and Professions Code Sections 21664, 21665 and 21666. Records shall be provided to the chief of police as required. 
(Ord. 2224 § 19 (part), 2003)  
10.57.090 - Premises—Paving requirements. 
Portions of real property to be used by a swap meet operator for conducting a swap meet sales area, parking, and for the foot travel of participants, shall be paved with surfacing approved by the director of public works prior to that real property being utilized for the conducting of a swap meet. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent an operator from installing suitable landscaping or lawns in lieu of paving any of the areas subject to this section. 
(Ord. 2224 § 19 (part), 2003)  
10.57.100 - Premises—Fencing requirements. 
The portions of real property used for the swap meet shall be fenced with fencing not less than six feet in height, constructed of chain link or other open type of material that does not materially obscure visibility through such fencing. 
(Ord. 2224 § 19 (part), 2003)  
10.57.110 - Premises—Restroom requirements. 
All parcels of real property used for the conducting of swap meets shall be serviced by adequate restroom facilities. 
(Ord. 2224 § 19 (part), 2003)  
10.57.120 - Premises—Remaining overnight prohibited. 
No person shall remain overnight on premises used for the swap meet. 
(Ord. 2224 § 19 (part), 2003)  
VIII. OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS  
Chapter 10.60 - CURFEW 
 
10.60.010 - Curfew restrictions. 
A.  Definitions. For purposes of this section: 
"Curfew hours" means the period from ten p.m. any evening of the week until five a.m. the following day. 
"Emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
"Guardian" means: (1) a person who, under court order or agency placement, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or (2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court. 
"Minor" means any person under eighteen years of age. 
"Parent" means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster parent or step-parent of another person. 
"Public place" means any place to which any member of the public has access, including, but not limited to, any public right-of-way, public grounds, parks, dedicated open or trail space, or any privately owned land that is unsupervised and is open and generally available to the public, including, but not limited to, vacant lots, the parking lots and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, housing complexes, shopping centers, and malls. 
"Remain" means to: (1) linger or stay; or (2) fail to immediately leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or other person in control of the premises. 
"Responsible adult" means a person at least eighteen years of age, authorized by a parent or guardian to have the temporary care and custody of a minor. 
"Serious bodily injury" means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
B.  Except as provided in subsection D of this section, it is unlawful for any minor to be present in or remain in any public place within the city of National City during curfew hours. 
C.  Except as provided in subsection D of this section, it is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor knowingly to permit, or by insufficient control to allow, the minor to be present in or remain in any public place within the city during curfew hours. 
D.  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection B or C of this section that the minor was: 
1.  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian, or by a responsible adult; 
2.  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, or the responsible adult, without any detour or stop; 
3.  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
4.  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
5.  Involved in an emergency; 
6.  Attending an official school, religious or recreational activity supervised by one or more responsible adults or a public agency, civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or is going to or is returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious or recreational activity that was supervised by one or more responsible adults or a public agency, civic organization or another similar entity that assumed responsibility for the minor; 
7.  Exercising First Amendment "expressive activity" rights protected by the United States Constitution; or 
8.  Emancipated pursuant to law. 
(Ord. 2138 § 1, 1997: Ord. 2136 § 1, 1997: Ord. 2026, 1992: Ord. 1032 (part), 1962: Ord. 702 § 1, 1943)  
10.60.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person or persons who violate this chapter are guilty of an infraction and punishable as provided in Section 1.20.010. 
(Ord. 1621, 1978; Ord. 1358 § 2 (part), 1973: Ord. 1032 (part), 1962: Ord. 702 § 3, 1943)  
Chapter 10.62 - PORNOGRAPHIC MATERIALS 
 
10.62.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Exhibit" means to show; 
B.  "Harmful to minors" means that quality of any description or representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sadomasochistic abuse, when it: 
1.  Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest of minors, and 
2.  Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors, and 
3.  Is utterly without redeeming social importance for minors; 
C.  "Knowingly" means having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both: 
1.  The character and content of any material described herein which is reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant, and 
2.  The age of the minor, provided however, that an honest mistake constitutes an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor; 
D.  "Minor" means any person under the age of eighteen years; 
E.  "Nudity" means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state; 
F.  "Sado-masochistic abuse" means flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed; 
G.  "Sexual conduct" means acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse, or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such person be female, breast; 
H.  "Sexual excitement" means the condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(Ord. 1203 § 1, 1968)  
10.62.020 - Minors—Offering harmful material unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person who, with knowledge that a person is a minor, or who fails to exercise reasonable care in ascertaining the true age of a minor, knowingly distributes to, or exhibits to, or offers to distribute or exhibit to such minor any harmful material. 
(Ord. 1203 § 2, 1968)  
10.62.030 - Minors—Documents showing age. 
Proof that the defendant or his employee or agent demanded and was shown and acted in reliance upon any of the following documents as proof of the age of a minor shall be a defense to any criminal prosecution under this section: 
A document issued by the federal government, or any state, county, or municipal government or subdivision or agency thereof, including but not limited to a driver's license, a registration certificate issued under the Selective Service Act, or an identification card issued to a member of the armed forces identifying the holder and showing that the holder is eighteen years of age or over. 
(Ord. 1203 § 3, 1968)  
10.62.040 - Adult entertainment establishments. 
The provisions of this chapter also apply to all uses allowed by Chapter 18.69 (Adult entertainment establishments). 
(Ord. 1699 § 4(F), 1979)  
IX. WEAPONS  
Chapter 10.68 - FIREARMS 
 
10.68.010 - Firing weapons prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any pistol, gun or rifle or any description of firearms, or to discharge any air gun, bow or anvil loaded with any explosive, or any cannon within the city or along or upon the waterfront of the city or upon any of the tide waters within the city, or upon or from any wharf or pier within the city. 
B.  Provided, that nothing herein contained applies to or prevents the firing of salutes for men-of-war or other steamships or sailing vessels on San Diego Bay, nor the firing of guns under the authority of the United States, or of the state of California, nor to shooting galleries or target ranges. 
C.  Provided, further, that the council may issue by resolution, its permit or permits to any person or persons to shoot, fire or discharge guns, pistols, or firearms of any description upon such terms, under such conditions and for such time as it deems advisable, and which terms, conditions and time shall be set forth in such permit when exercising the privileges granted therein. 
D.  Provided, further, that the council has the authority by resolution to designate certain areas within the city in which it is lawful to shoot, fire or discharge guns, pistols or firearms upon such terms and under such conditions and for such time as it deems advisable. 
(Ord. 1241 § 1, 1970: Ord. 22 § 1, 1888: Ord. 7 § 2, 1887)  
X. POLICE REGULATED BUSINESSES  
Chapter 10.70 - POLICE REGULATED BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
 
10.70.010 - Purpose and intent—Permit required. 
A.  It is the purpose and intent of the city council to establish procedures for permit issuance and regulation of certain businesses and activities as police regulated for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. Businesses identified in this Division X (Chapters 10.70 through 10.79) have a higher degree of potential for one or more types of illicit activity - prostitution, disorderly conduct, gambling, fraudulent practices, or the concealment or facilitation of transfers of stolen property. Therefore, regulation of the operations of these establishments is appropriate to protect legitimate business practice and the public health, safety and welfare. 
B.  A business, activity or a performer or technician which is identified in Chapters 10.71 through 10.79 is designated a "regulated business," "regulated activity," "regulated performer" or "regulated technician," as the case may be, and the specific regulations applicable to their conduct are set out in Chapters 10.71 through 10.79. The procedures set out in this Chapter 10.70 shall uniformly govern the administration and appeals process regarding the issuance, denial, suspension, or revocation of any permit required to operate as a regulated business or activity or as a regulated performer or technician pursuant to Chapters 10.71 through 10.79. 
C.  The issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter does not excuse a regulated business, activity, performer, or technician from complying with any other revenue or regulatory requirement of this code or state law. A separate permit shall be required for each type of activity regulated by Chapters 10.71 through 10.79, unless otherwise provided. The issuance of a certificate or permit under other provisions of this code does not excuse compliance with or create a defense to any violation of the requirements of this chapter or Chapters 10.71 through 10.79, as applicable, or any other provisions of law or ordinance, including conditional use permits required under Title 8. 
D.  It is unlawful for any person to operate a business or activity or perform or practice as a performer or technician regulated by this chapter and Chapters 10.71 through 10.79, as applicable, without a valid permit issued by the chief of police or designee, or to operate, perform or practice while the permit is suspended or revoked. Each day a violation of this section exists constitutes a separate misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2220 § 1(part), 2003: Ord. 2204 § 5 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 6, 1-22-2019)  
10.70.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of Chapters 10.70 through 10.79, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  "Person" means and includes a natural person, a partnership, joint venture or a corporation. 
B.  "Operator" means any person who supervises, manages, directs, organizes, controls, or in any other way is responsible for or in charge of the daily operation, conduct or activities of the regulated business or activity. 
C.  "Owner" means any person or entity having an ownership interest in the establishment. 
D.  "Responsible person" means any person who is an owner, operator, or manager, and includes any employee or agent in apparent charge of the premises for which the application is made or required or a permit is issued. 
E.  "Permit" means a permit issued by or under the authority of the chief of police or designee that authorizes activity regulated under Chapters 10.71 through 10.79. 
F.  "Permittee" means an owner to whom a permit issued by or under the authority of the chief of police or designee that authorizes activity regulated under Chapters 10.71 and 10.79. 
G.  "Applicant" means the natural person(s) who complete and sign an application pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2220 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 2204 § 5 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 6, 1-22-2019)  
10.70.030 - Applications. 
A.  Any person required to obtain a permit pursuant to Chapters 10.71 through 10.79 shall file a written application with the chief of police or designee on a city-approved form, and pay the non-refundable fee set forth in the National City fee schedule, to recoup all investigative costs. The applicant shall provide proof of payment of any regulatory fees imposed by the state of California or county of San Diego contemporaneously with the filing. Written application forms prepared by the chief of police or designee may require the applicant to be photographed, finger printed and to provide, in addition to the information listed below, such other information as is reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. The application form shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. For massage establishments, the application shall be completed and signed by the owner of the proposed massage establishment, if a sole proprietorship; one general partner, if the owner is a partnership; or two officers, if the owner is a corporation. 
B.  An applicant for a permit shall submit the following information: 
1.  The full name of the business, including the name under which the business will be conducted; 
2.  The address where the business is to be conducted; 
3.  The applicant's full, true name, and any other names used; 
4.  The applicant's date of birth; 
5.  The applicant's present residential address and telephone number; 
6.  The previous addresses of the applicant for the three years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
7.  Applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair; 
8.  Three recent portrait photographs at least two inches by two inches taken within the preceding six months, which accurately depict the current appearance of the applicant; 
9.  The applicant's driver's license and/or identification card issued by a state or federal governmental agency, or other photographic identification bearing a bona-fide seal of a foreign government; 
10.  If the owner is a corporation, domestic stock, domestic non-profit, qualified foreign corporation, limited liability company, general partnership, or limited partnership, the application shall include the following: 
a.  A business entity status report issued by the California Secretary of State; 
b.  Organizational documents for the business entity including but not limited to a copy of the fictitious name statement and/or articles of incorporation; 
c.  Full name, date of birth, residential address, and business address for each officer and director; 
d.  The name, date of birth, and residence addresses of the responsible employee(s) to be principally in charge of the day-to-day operations of the establishment. 
e.  The full name of the owner, including any DBAs. 
11.  The tax identification number for the business; 
12.  The name, address, email address, and telephone number of the real property owner where the business will be operated, and a copy of the lease or rental agreement, if applicable; 
13.  The business license and permit history of the applicant, including whether the applicant when previously operating in this or another city or state under a license or permit, has had that license or permit suspended or revoked, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to the suspension or revocation; 
14.  For massage establishment businesses regulated under Chapter 10.79, a copy of the massage practitioner certificate issued by the California Massage Therapy Council pursuant to Chapter 10.5 of the California Business and Professions Code for each owner who has been issued a certificate, or a statement that such a certificate has not been issued or has been previously revoked or cancelled with information regarding such revocation or cancelation; 
15.  For massage establishment businesses regulated under Chapter 10.79, a list of all persons who will administer massage, including but not limited to employees and independent contractors. Such list shall include the full true name and any other names used, date of birth, copy of their driver's license or any other photo identification card issued by a state or federal agency, and a copy of the valid massage practitioner certificate issued by the California Massage Therapy Council pursuant to Chapter 10.5 of the California Business and Professions Code; 
16.  For massage establishment businesses regulated under Chapter 10.79, all services must be described on the application for the permit; 
17.  Business, occupation, or employment history of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application; 
18.  A list, broken down for each applicant, each responsible employee(s) to be principally in charge of the day-to-day operations of the establishment, and all partners if a partnership, or all officers and directors if a corporation, of all criminal convictions, including pleas of nolo contender, within the preceding five years, including those dismissed or expunged pursuant to Penal Code section 1203.4, but excluding minor traffic violations, and the date and place of each such conviction, as well as a full explanation of the circumstances; 
19.  A complete set of fingerprints taken for each owner if a sole proprietorship, or each natural person, including the owner and operator or person to be principally in charge of the day-to-day operations of the establishment; unless in the case of massage establishment businesses, they hold a valid massage practitioner certificate issued by the California Massage Therapy Council pursuant to Chapter 10.5 of the California Business and Professions Code; 
20.  A signed statement authorizing the city, through its officers, agents, and employees, to conduct a background check of the applicant, owners(s), and natural persons to be principally in charge of the day-to-day operations to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truthfulness of the statements set forth in the application and to ensure continual compliance with all applicable provisions of the law; 
21.  A signed acknowledgment that the owner(s) shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees or independent contractors working on the premises of the business and acknowledging that failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any local, state or federal law and, for massage establishment businesses regulated under Chapter 10.79, failure to comply with California Business and Professions Code section 4600 et seq., may result in the suspension, revocation, or denial of the permit; 
22.  An acknowledgement that the applicant consents to periodic inspection of the regulated premises or activity, and that revocation of the permit may occur for any unjustified refusal to allow the same; 
23.  An acknowledgement that the applicant has received a copy of Chapter 10.70 and any applicable chapter from Chapters 10.71 through 10.79 which regulate the business or activity of the applicant; and 
24.  A signed statement by the applicant certifying under penalty of perjury that all information in the application is true and correct, and acknowledging that failure to be truthful may result in denial of the application. 
(Ord. 2204 § 5 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 6, 1-22-2019)  
10.70.040 - Investigation. 
The chief of police or designee, upon receipt of a written application for a permit and payment of the necessary fees shall promptly conduct an appropriate investigation to determine whether a permit should be issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The chief of police or designee shall consider any relevant factual material relating to such application. 
(Ord. 2204 § 5 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 6, 1-22-2019)  
10.70.050 - Permit issuance or denial. 
A.  Issuance. The chief of police or designee may deny a permit application, based upon investigation and substantial evidence, if he or she finds one or more of any of the following: 
1.  That the operation or the premises of the activity, as proposed by the applicant, would violate any applicable laws, including but not limited to the city's fire, building, zoning and health regulations; or 
2.  That the applicant, any other person who will be directly engaged in the management and operation of the regulated business or activity, or an applicant who is to participate or perform services as a regulated technician or performer: 
a.  Has been convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction by a final judgment of any misdemeanor or felony, within the five years preceding the date of application, which rationally and reasonably relates to the conduct of the regulated activity; or 
b.  Has allowed acts to occur in any business operations for the preceding five years which would violate those sections of the Penal Code listed in Section 10.70.050A.2.d, or any provision of this chapter or Chapter 10.79, irrespective of a conviction or acquittal; or 
c.  Has had a permit to operate a business that is or would be regulated pursuant to Chapters 10.70 through 10.79 suspended or revoked in any jurisdiction, within the preceding five years; or 
d.  Within the five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the following offenses: 
(1)  An offense that requires registration under California Penal Code Section 290; or 
(2)  An offense which is a violation of Sections 311 through 311.7, 313.1, 314, 315, 316, 318 or 647(a), 647(b), 647(d), 647(h), 653.22, 653.23 or 290 of the California Penal Code; or 
(3)  An offense that is a reduction from any offense listed in Section 10.70.050A.2.d. (1) or (2) to some other offense under the Penal Code which would not require registration, pursuant to a plea of guilty negotiated prior to trial; or 
(4)  Any misdemeanor or felony involving theft of property; or 
3.  That the applicant has made any false, misleading or fraudulent material statement of fact in the permit application, or any other related document required by the city in connection with the application; or 
4.  The applicant has not complied with the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 10.79; or 
5.  For establishments regulated by Chapter 10.79, the applicant proposes to locate the massage establishment in the same building as a massage establishment that has surrendered its permit or had its permit revoked within five years of the application date because a person engaged in any criminal conduct and/or violation of this chapter or Chapter 10.79 while on the premises of the former massage establishment; or 
6.  That the application is incomplete and the required information or documents were not submitted within twenty days of a request for the information or documents. 
B.  Timeliness and Conditional Issuance of Permit. Upon receipt of a properly completed application, the chief of police or designee shall either approve or deny the application within thirty days. Failure to take action on a permit application within thirty days shall not result in an automatic approval. If the chief of police or designee is awaiting investigation results from another governmental agency within those thirty days, the chief of police or designee shall issue a revocable conditional permit on the thirtieth day if a local records check fails to disclose any disqualifying information and the operation would otherwise be in compliance with all other applicable laws and regulations; except that a revocable conditional permit shall not be issued to an escort or massage technician or operator until it affirmatively appears that there is no disqualifying information, in order to avoid the potential for physical harm to a potential patron pending final action. Any revocable conditional permit shall be revoked if further investigation discloses the existence of a disqualifying factor under this Section 10.70.050. 
C.  An applicant whose application is denied based on subsection (A)(1) through (A)(5) of this section is not eligible to reapply for five years after notice of denial. An applicant whose application is denied for failure to comply with subsection (A)(6) is not eligible to reapply for one hundred eighty days after notice of denial. 
D.  Permits must be exercised within one year of issuance or shall be deemed abandoned. 
E.  A permit is deemed abandoned if the establishment which has exercised its permit ceases operations covered by the permit for one hundred eighty days. 
F.  A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be operative until and unless all other required local, state, or federal licenses and permits have been obtained. 
(Ord. 2204 § 5 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 6, 1-22-2019)  
10.70.060 - Notice of decision. 
Upon taking final action to issue or deny a permit application, or to suspend or revoke a permit under Section 10.70.080, the chief of police or designee shall give written notice of decision and the reasons to the applicant and to any other person requesting such notice. The notice of decision shall inform the applicant or permittee of the right to appeal under Section 10.70.070 and the time limits prescribed for such review. The chief of police or designee shall file a proof of service with the city clerk establishing the method and date of service. The issuance of the notice of decision shall begin the running of any period of limitation for city council or judicial review under Section 10.70.070 as follows: 
A.  Three calendar days after mailing a notice of decision to the address shown on the application by both first class mail, postage prepaid with return address clearly marked, and by certified mail, return receipt requested. Receipt of either by the addressee shall constitute service of notice. Actual receipt, however, shall not be a pre-requisite to the running of any period of limitation. 
B.  Immediately upon personal service or personal delivery of the notice of decision to the applicant. 
(Ord. 2204 § 5 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 6, 1-22-2019)  
10.70.070 - Appeal. 
A.  Any applicant or permittee aggrieved by the decision of the chief of police or designee regarding the issuance, conditional issuance, suspension, revocation or denial of a permit, shall have a right to appeal to the city council. 
B.  An appeal to the city council must be perfected within fifteen calendar days after the service of a notice of decision by filing a letter of appeal with the city clerk stating the basis for the appeal. An applicant or permittee filing an appeal shall pay a nonrefundable fee to the finance department at the time the appeal is filed. The amount of such fee shall be as determined from time to time by resolution of the city council. Upon receipt of the letter of appeal and proof of payment of the appeal fee, the city clerk shall set the matter for consideration by the city council at a regularly scheduled meeting as soon as reasonably practicable. The city clerk shall give the appealing party, and any other person requesting the same, at least five calendar days written notice of the time and place of such hearing. 
C.  At the time and place set for the hearing, the city council shall give the appealing party and any other interested party a reasonable opportunity to be heard and show cause why the determination of the chief of police or designee should not be upheld. After the chief of police or designee has presented the statement of facts upon which the determination was made, the burden to show that the action taken by the chief of police or designee was not based on substantial evidence, or was arbitrary, capricious, or unjustified shall be upon the appealing party. The determination of the city council shall be final and conclusive and shall constitute the exhaustion of administrative remedy. The written determination of the city council shall be served upon the appealing party by the city clerk. Service shall conform to Section 10.70.060, and shall govern the commencement of any period of limitation for judicial review under Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.6 or 1094.8, whichever is applicable. 
(Ord. 2204 § 5 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 6, 1-22-2019)  
10.70.080 - Suspension and revocation. 
A.  The chief of police or designee may suspend or revoke any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter if he or she finds that: 
1.  The operation conducted by the permittee violates or has violated any applicable laws, including but not limited to the city's building, zoning and health regulations and Chapters 10.70 through 10.79, as applicable; 
2.  The permittee, including a regulated performer or technician, or any other person who is directly engaged in the management and operation of the regulated business has, while the permit is in effect: 
a.  Allowed, committed or been convicted of an act that constitutes a violation of law which rationally and reasonably relates to the conduct of the regulated activity, 
b.  Allowed or committed acts listed in Section 10.70.050(A)(2) to occur at a regulated business, irrespective of adjudication, conviction or acquittal, or 
c.  Allowed a regulated performer or technician with a contagious or communicable disease to perform services under the auspices of the permittee; or 
3.  The applicant or permittee had knowingly made a false, misleading, or fraudulent material statement of fact in the permit application or any other document required in connection with the application. 
B.  The chief of police or designee shall serve the permittee with a written order stating the reasons for the suspension or revocation. The order may be for a limited period, not to exceed ninety days, or for permanent revocation. The order shall advise the permittee of appeal rights under Section 10.70.070. The chief of police or designee may issue the order without regard to the status of prosecution or finality of a conviction affecting a permittee, so long as the chief of police or designee has determined that sufficient facts exist to justify the suspension. The order shall be effective immediately if personally served, or three calendar days after it has been deposited in the course of regular transmission in the United States Postal Service. 
C.  Except as provided under Section 10.70.080(D), immediately upon the order becoming effective, the permittee shall cease all operations under the permit and shall surrender the permit to the chief of police or designee. 
D.  In lieu of issuing an order of suspension or revocation, the chief of police or designee may impose conditions of probation for a specified duration not to exceed one year, during which period the permittee shall be subject to the order of suspension or revocation if the chief of police or designee determines those conditions have been violated. If the permittee accepts the order of probation, no appeal shall be allowed under Section 10.70.070. If, however, the permittee objects to the terms of probation, probation shall not be allowed, the order of suspension or revocation shall take effect, and appeal rights of the permittee under Section 10.70.070 shall then be applicable. 
E.  Only when an appeal is taken to the city council shall the order of suspension or revocation be stayed pending determination by the city council in the manner set forth in Section 10.70.070 of this chapter. The determination of the city council will be final and conclusive and constitute the exhaustion of administrative remedies. A written notice of decision of city council shall be served on the permittee in accordance with Section 10.70.060, and service shall begin the period of limitation for judicial review under Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.6 or 1094.8, whichever is applicable. 
F.  Police permits issued for an establishment to conduct business regulated under Chapters 10.71 through 10.79 are separate from and independent of any conditional use permit that is required or issued under the provisions of Title 18 of this code. Revocation or suspension of a police permit shall not operate to revoke or suspend a conditional use permit, notwithstanding that the same or similar terms and conditions may be applicable to both permits. Revocation or suspension of a police permit affects only the authority of the establishment to provide or allow a particular form of entertainment or activity at the premises for which the police permit is issued. The establishment may continue to conduct all other business for which it is licensed or allowed by law to conduct, unless separate action is taken to abate the establishment as a public nuisance or to revoke or suspend any other issued permit, including a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 2220 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 2204 § 5 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 6, 1-22-2019)  
10.70.090 - Posting or exhibiting. 
A.  Permits issued to an operator shall be posted in plain view at the main entrance to the premises where the business or activity for which the permit is issued is conducted, and shall remain posted while the permit is in force. 
B.  Permits issued to a regulated performer or technician shall be carried on their person, except that the permit of a regulated performer or technician may instead be posted on the regulated premises together with the permit issued for the regulated business or activity. 
C.  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person subject to this chapter or Chapters 10.71 through 10.79 to fail to post or carry an issued permit as required by this section, or to fail to exhibit an issued permit upon demand of the chief of police or designee. 
(Ord. 2204 § 5 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 6, 1-22-2019)  
10.70.100 - Inspection of premises. 
A.  Issuance of a police permit is conditional upon the premises regulated under Chapters 10.71 through 10.79 being available for reasonable inspection by the police department, the fire department, the health officer, or city code compliance officials following approval of the application and during the operating hours of the regulated business or activity. Refusal to allow reasonable inspection during operating hours upon demand of an authorized official is grounds for the suspension or revocation of an issued permit, or the denial of an application for a permit. No application shall be granted if the premises do not meet applicable requirements of law or ordinance. 
B.  If necessary or appropriate, the official may obtain an inspection warrant after inspection has been denied. Inspection pursuant to an issued inspection warrant does not mitigate or exonerate the suspension or revocation of the permit. 
C.  The county health officer is authorized to charge inspection fees established within the applicable fee schedule of the county of San Diego or the National City fee schedule. 
(Ord. 2204 § 5 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 6, 1-22-2019)  
10.70.110 - Duration. 
Unless provided otherwise in Chapters 10.71 through 10.79, permits issued pursuant to this chapter remain valid until revoked, surrendered, or abandoned. 
(Ord. 2204 § 5 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 6, 1-22-2019)  
10.70.120 - Transfer of permit. 
It is unlawful to transfer a permit from one person to another. It is unlawful to use a permit at another location except with the written approval of the chief of police or designee. An application for transfer of permit to another location shall be in writing and accompanied by a processing fee established in the National City fee schedule. The application for transfer shall contain the same information required for an initial application for a permit. Any transfer of a permit in violation of this Section 10.70.120 is void and shall confer no rights upon the transferee nor create any obligation upon the city to honor the transfer or to afford notification or appeal rights under Sections 10.70.060 or 10.70.070 to either the transferor or the transferee. 
(Ord. 2204 § 5 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 6, 1-22-2019)  
10.70.130 - Transition provisions. 
A.  A business lawfully conducting business in the city as of the effective date of this Chapter 10.70 that is to be regulated by Chapters 10.71 through 10.79 will be issued an appropriate police permit by the chief of police or designee without further payment of fees, provided the business or activity was otherwise in compliance with the regulatory and fiscal provisions of the municipal code in effect immediately prior to the enactment of this ordinance. Permits issued pursuant to this Section 10.70.130(A) shall thereafter be fully subject to the provisions of Chapter 10.70 and Chapters 10.71 through 10.79, as applicable, regarding administration, operation and licensing. 
B.  An existing business that does not meet the compliance standards for permit issuance under Section 10.70.130(A), and all new businesses commencing operations shall comply with Chapter 10.70 and Chapters 10.71 through 10.79, as applicable. 
(Ord. 2204 § 5 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 6, 1-22-2019)  
10.70.140 - Notice of changes. 
A.  Permittees of establishments governed by Chapter 10.79 shall only allow persons certified by the California Massage Therapy Council to provide massages at, or in association with the establishment, and shall immediately notify the chief of police or designee, in writing, of any change to the list provided pursuant to Section 10.70.030(B)(14). 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 6, 1-22-2019)  
10.70.150 - Public nuisance. 
Each regulated business or any business that is required to be regulated that operates in violation of Chapter 10.70 through 10.79, as may be applicable, is a public nuisance and may be enjoined civilly or administratively. In addition, and to the extent not expressly provided elsewhere in this code, it is unlawful and a misdemeanor to maintain a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 2204 § 5 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 6, 1-22-2019)  
10.70.160 - Violations and regulatory enforcement. 
Violation of any of the mandatory requirements or prohibitions contained in Chapters 10.70 through 10.79 are misdemeanors and constitute grounds for suspension or revocation of an issued permit, except that any requirement or prohibition designated as "regulatory only" will be treated only as grounds for suspension or revocation of an issued permit, and criminal prosecution may not occur for that violation. 
(Ord. 2204 § 5 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 6, 1-22-2019)  
10.70.170 - Severability. 
The city council declares that the invalidity of any section or portion of Chapters 10.70 through 10.79 shall not affect the validity of any other remaining section or portion; that the council would have adopted each of those remaining portions, notwithstanding any later declared invalidity. Any provision determined invalid under the preceding sentence may either be severed or, if it can be judicially interpreted in a way that could harmonize it with the remaining provisions, then it may be so judicially interpreted and, as interpreted, be applied so as to give full purpose, meaning, and effect to the remaining provisions. 
(Ord. 2204 § 5 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 6, 1-22-2019)  
Chapter 10.73 - LIVE ADULT ENTERTAINMENT AT ADULT ORIENTED ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
10.73.010 - Permit required. 
A.  An "adult oriented entertainment establishment" defined in Section 10.73.020(A) is a police regulated business, and a person performing "live adult entertainment" as defined in Section 10.73.020(D) in an adult oriented entertainment establishment is a police regulated performer. A police permit shall be required as a condition of operation or performance of activity of that business or activity. 
B.  An adult oriented entertainment establishment shall not be required to obtain a separate police permit to operate as a cabaret or entertainment establishment regulated under Chapter 10.78. However, the regulatory provisions of Chapter 10.78 regulating noise control and patron conduct shall also be applicable to an adult oriented entertainment establishment as regulatory violations governing suspension or revocation of a permit issued under this chapter. 
C.  Issuance and administration of permits is governed by Chapter 10.70 of this code. 
(Ord. 2220 § 2 (part), 2003: Ord. 2204 § 6 (part), 2002)  
10.73.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Adult oriented entertainment establishment" means an adult oriented entertainment business defined in Sections 18.69.020 and 18.69.030 which provides "live adult entertainment" as defined in Section 10.73.020(D). 
B.  "Specified anatomical areas" is defined in Section 18.69.020(A). 
C.  "Specified sexual activity" is defined in Section 18.69.020(B). 
D.  "Live adult entertainment" means any type of presentation in which one or more persons appear before an audience of any number of other persons and engage in actual or simulated specified sexual activity or expose specified anatomical areas, or both. The mere presence of an employee unclothed or in attire, costume or clothing which exposes to public view any specified anatomical area of the employee, or the permitting or allowing any other person (including a patron) present on the establishment premises to participate in actual or simulated specified sexual activity, or to appear unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing so as to expose the specified anatomical areas of that person, shall also constitute "live adult entertainment". 
E.  A "live adult entertainer" is a person who performs "live adult entertainment", as that term is defined in Section 10.73.020(D). 
(Ord. 2204 § 6 (part), 2002)  
10.73.030 - Prohibitions and regulations for presentation of live adult entertainment. 
A.  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to operate an adult oriented entertainment establishment without a valid adult oriented entertainment establishment permit. 
B.  It is unlawful for any owner, proprietor, manager, person in charge, or any employee of an adult oriented entertainment establishment to allow upon the regulated premises any live adult entertainment by any person, whether as an employee, independent contractor, patron or customer, without the person performing the live adult entertainment possessing a valid live adult entertainer permit. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person, whether as an employee, independent contractor, patron or customer, to perform live adult entertainment in an adult oriented entertainment establishment without a valid live adult entertainer's permit. 
D.  Violation of this Section 10.73.030 is a misdemeanor and constitutes grounds for the revocation or suspension of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2204 § 6 (part), 2002)  
10.73.040 - Patron contact—Prohibited. 
A.  No live adult entertainer shall approach or be allowed to approach within six feet of any patron of the permitted premises. 
B.  Live adult entertainment shall be performed only upon a stage or platform during the progress of the entertainment. The stage or platform shall be located at a minimum height of eighteen (18) inches above the floor of, and at a minimum distance of six feet from, the patron seating or viewing area. No patron shall occupy or be allowed to occupy the stage or platform during any performance. 
C.  A passageway of not less than six feet in width shall be provided through any part of the room occupied by customers, guests or patrons when required for the ingress and egress of live adult entertainers to the stage or platform where live adult entertainment is presented. 
D.  No adult entertainment establishment operator shall allow a patron to approach within six feet of, or touch, a live adult entertainer while any part of the performer's specified anatomical areas are exposed. 
E.  No patron shall approach within six feet of a live adult entertainer while any part of the performer's specified anatomical areas are exposed. 
F.  Violation of any subsection of this section is a misdemeanor and shall also be grounds for the suspension or revocation of a permit issued to an operator as well as the permit of the regulated performer or live adult entertainer who causes or allows any violation to occur. 
(Ord. 2220 § 2 (part), 2003: Ord. 2204 § 6 (part), 2002)  
10.73.050 - Food or beverage service—Regulated. 
Food or beverage (alcohol or nonalcohol served in an adult entertainment establishment shall be clothed so as to fully cover the specified anatomical areas of the server while serving food or beverages to any patron. No portion of the specified anatomical areas of the server shall be exposed to view. Violation of this section is a misdemeanor and is grounds for the suspension or revocation of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter 
(Ord. 2204 § 6 (part), 2002)  
Chapter 10.74 - ESCORT SERVICES 
 
10.74.010 - Title and administration. 
This chapter may be cited as the National City escort service ordinance. Issuance and administration of permits is governed by Chapter 10.70. 
(Ord. 2204 § 7 (part), 2002)  
10.74.020 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide for the orderly regulation of escort service business in the city to ensure that an escort service business does not facilitate the practice of prostitution or allow persons who have been convicted of crimes of prostitution or violence to function as escorts, in order to protect the public health, welfare and safety. 
(Ord. 2204 § 7 (part), 2002)  
10.74.030 - Definitions. 
A.  "Escort service" means any business providing social companions for hire to accompany a person of the opposite or same sex to events including, but not limited to, social events, sporting events and theatrical events. 
B.  "Escort service technician" means any person employed by an escort service to render services as a companion for hire to its clients. 
C.  "Specified anatomical areas" is defined in Section 18.69.020(A) and "specified sexual activity" is defined in Section 18.69.020(B). 
(Ord. 2204 § 7 (part), 2002)  
10.74.040 - Escort service operator permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate an escort service business within the city without the permit required by this chapter, or to employ or allow a person to act as an escort service technician unless such person has a valid escort service technician permit. 
(Ord. 2204 § 7 (part), 2002)  
10.74.050 - Escort Service Technician's permit required. 
A.  Except as provided in Section 10.74.050(D), it is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to act as an escort service technician unless such person holds a valid permit issued by the chief of police. 
B.  A permit to act as an escort service technician does not authorize the operation of an escort service business. A person with a valid permit to operate an escort service may also act as an escort service technician within or for the permitted escort service establishment. 
C.  This Chapter 10.74 shall not apply to any private investigator or security operative licensed by the state of California to provide investigation or security services. 
D.  This Chapter 10.74 shall not apply to an escort service technician who is licensed and operating under a valid escort service technician permit issued by another jurisdiction within San Diego County only so long as that person remains in compliance with Sections 10.74.060 and 10.74.070 during the performance of escort services within this jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 2204 § 7 (part), 2002)  
10.74.060 - Advertising and patron conduct regulations. 
A.  No escort service business permitted under this chapter shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed, any advertising matter that describes or depicts any portion of the human body in a manner which, or through the use of descriptive language, would reasonably suggest that any service regarding the display of specified anatomical areas or the performance of specified sexual activity, or both, is available. 
B.  No escort service technician performing services for hire or having accepted or solicited any form of consideration from a patron, shall: 1) disrobe or expose specified anatomical areas for the view of that patron or any other person; 2) allow the touching of the technician's specified anatomical areas by the patron; or, 3) touch the patron's specified anatomical areas, whether those areas are exposed or not. 
C.  This section is regulatory only. Violation shall be grounds for revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. 2204 § 7 (part), 2002)  
10.74.070 - Record of engagements. 
A.  Every operator of an escort service business shall keep a record of the date and hour of each engagement, the name and address of the patron, and the name of the escort service technician engaged. This record shall be open to inspection by officials charged with the enforcement of these provisions for the purpose of law enforcement and for public health reasons. The information furnished or secured as a result of any such inspection shall be kept confidential and shall not be released to any source except pursuant to a lawful subpoena or court order. Records shall be maintained by the operator for a period of six months from the date of engagement of services, and may be destroyed after that date. 
B.  Every patron must furnish photo identification to an escort service operator. Photo identification consists of one of the following: a valid driver's license issued by the patron's state or country of residence; a federal or state government or military identification card; a passport; or any other form of identification on which the patron's photograph and current address appears. If, because of physical disability, a patron is unable to furnish a governmentally issued form of photographic identification, an escort service operator is authorized to accept any commercially reasonable form of identification that will serve to identify that patron. 
C.  The escort service operator shall maintain a record of the identification produced by the patron, which shall be kept for the times specified in subsection A. Notwithstanding the use of a credit card, each patron must comply with subsection B of this section. 
D.  No escort service operator or technician shall provide services to a patron who has refused to provide required identification. This subsection D is regulatory only. Violation shall be grounds for revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. 2204 § 7 (part), 2002)  
Chapter 10.78 - ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
10.78.010 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The city council encourages the development of arts and culture in the city, and recognizes that variety in entertainment venues in the city can provide a rich and diverse cultural experience for residents and visitors to the city. The council also recognizes that nonalcoholic entertainment venues provide a safe place for families and young adults to gather. The council finds also that entertainment establishments can present an environment with the potential for excessive noise generation and disorderly conduct by patrons, particularly at closing times, with adverse public safety impacts on surrounding businesses and residences. 
B.  It is therefore the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate the operations of entertainment establishments in the interests of public safety. All permittees will be held responsible for controlling patron conduct in and around the establishments, making adequate provisions for security and crowd control, protecting the city's youth from criminal activity and for minimizing disturbances as a result of providing entertainment at the premises of the establishment. 
C.  It is further the intent of this chapter to provide options in imposing regulatory conditions tailored to the particular establishment which will allow the business or event to flourish while meeting the city's public safety needs and avoiding unnecessary restrictions on existing businesses or organizations with a history of compliance with the city laws. 
(Ord. 2220 § 3 (part), 2003)  
10.78.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  "ABC License" means a license issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control for the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
B.  "Admission charge" means any fee or charge for the right or privilege to enter any place of entertainment including a minimum service charge, event charge, cover charge, charge for the use of seats and tables, or any other similar charge. It also includes the purchase or presentation of a ticket or token directly or indirectly required as a condition for entrance. It does not include tips, gratuities, voluntary donations or suggested donations for employees or any person providing entertainment. 
C.  "Conditional use permit" means a permit issued by the city pursuant to Chapter 18.116 in determining conditions related to the operation of public premises. 
D.  "Dance and dancing" means movement of the human body, accompanied by music or rhythm. 
E.  "Entertainment" or "live entertainment" means any single event or series of events open to the public and conducted for guests or patrons, including but not limited to: 
1.  Presentations by single or multiple performers, such as singers, musicians, hypnotists, pantomimes, comedians, musical song or dance acts, plays, concerts, any type of contest, sporting events, exhibitions, carnival, rodeo or circus acts, demonstrations of talent, shows, reviews, or any other activity which may be attended by members of the public; 
2.  Dancing to live or recorded music; 
3.  The presentation of recorded music played on electronic sound equipment which is operated by an agent or contractor of the establishment, commonly known as "DJ" or "disc jockey." 
F.  "Theater" or "cinema" means any commercial establishment showing films or regular theatrical performances, such as performances of literary compositions that tell a story that are given usually, but not exclusively, on a stage and with ascending row seating or some similar arrangement of seating. 
G.  "Cabaret" refers to a premises defined in Section 18.04.113, and shall include an "adult cabaret" defined by Section 18.69.020(H). 
(Ord. 2220 § 3 (part), 2003)  
10.78.030 - Entertainment permit—Required. 
A.  Except as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to provide, allow or permit any entertainment in an establishment or cabaret open to the public without a police permit. 
B.  The restrictions and regulations imposed by this chapter on patron conduct shall also apply to adult cabarets and other adult oriented entertainment establishments regulated in Chapter 10.73, violation of which may also result in suspension or revocation of a permit issued under Chapter 10.73. 
C.  This chapter shall apply to existing and new establishments as provided in Section 10.78.140. 
(Ord. 2220 § 3 (part), 2003)  
10.78.040 - Exemption from the permit requirement. 
The following types of entertainment and events are exempt from the permit required by this chapter. This exemption does not relieve any establishment from complying with all other applicable laws, including noise control regulations contained in Title 12 of this code. 
A.  Entertainment sponsored by any public agency, board of education, or any political subdivision of the State of California; 
B.  Entertainment sponsored by any nonprofit organization, such as Girl Scouts, Boy Scouts, Little League or Boys and Girls Club, whose primary objective is youth activities and child welfare. If the event is a dance, the following requirements must also be met in order for the exemption to apply: 
1.  No person eighteen years of age or older shall be admitted as a guest, unless as a bona fide student or member of the sponsoring agency or organization, 
2.  No alcoholic beverages shall be served, consumed or permitted on the premises, 
3.  Chaperones from the sponsoring agency must be present on the premises at the rate of two adults at least twenty-five years of age or older for every one hundred guests, and 
4.  The event shall finish by twelve a.m. and the premises and the adjoining parking lots shall be promptly vacated by all the guests; 
C.  Events conducted under a special event permit issued pursuant to Chapter 15.60, which imposes conditions within the permit related to the entertainment; 
D.  Entertainment at any establishment limited solely to the playing of a radio or sound system, music recording machine, juke box, television or recorded music, including karaoke, provided no dancing is allowed or permitted; 
E.  Entertainment not open to the public that is provided for members and guests at private clubs having an established membership with regular dues, the operation of which is not primarily for monetary gain; 
F.  Entertainment for invited guests at a private event such as a wedding reception, banquet or celebration where there is no admission charge. 
G.  Entertainment conducted in connection with a regularly established recreation or theme park; 
H.  Entertainment conducted or sponsored by any club, organization, society or association which is exempt from taxation pursuant to Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3), when all proceeds, if any, generated from the entertainment are used exclusively for the benevolent purposes of such club, society or association; 
I.  Performances by students that are part of a curriculum or program at educational institutions defined by the Education Code; 
J.  Theaters; 
K.  Motion picture theaters or cinemas not providing live entertainment; 
L.  Dance lessons, theatrical and performing arts lessons; 
M.  Book readings, book signings, poetry recitations and similar entertainment, including plays, consisting only of spoken words or with incidental music; 
N.  Political fund-raisers; 
O.  Entertainment at cabarets consisting of ambient electronic or incidental music provided for the guests or patrons by musicians such as a piano player, harpist, strolling violinist, mariachi band, guitarist or band. If, however, there is an admission charge required to observe or listen to such entertainment, it will not be considered ambient or incidental; 
P.  Any establishment, venue or assemblage of forty-nine persons or less, as restricted under a maximum occupancy load for the premises, provided that all the following conditions exist: 
1.  There is no admission charge, 
2.  The premise is not licensed for the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages, 
3.  Customer dancing is not allowed, and 
4.  Any entertainment ceases between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. 
(Ord. 2220 § 3 (part), 2003)  
10.78.050 - Hours of operation. 
All entertainment establishments subject to this chapter must be closed and all patrons must vacate the premises between two a.m. and six a.m. 
(Ord. 2220 § 3 (part), 2003)  
10.78.060 - Disorderly patron conduct—Regulated. 
The responsible person shall make reasonable efforts to remove from or prevent the admission to the premises of any person whose conduct is or would be in violation of Penal Code Section 415 (fighting, loud noise, offensive words in public places) or Section 647 (disorderly conduct) at the premises or on any parking lot or parking facility used, owned or leased by the establishment. This section is regulatory only. 
(Ord. 2220 § 3 (part), 2003)  
10.78.070 - Reasonable passageway—Required. 
It is unlawful for any responsible person to fail to provide a reasonable passageway, which passageway shall not be less than six feet in width through any part of a room used by patrons and entertainers for their ingress and egress. This section is regulatory only. 
(Ord. 2220 § 3 (part), 2003)  
10.78.080 - Observation of noise abatement and control laws—Required. 
The responsible person shall observe all laws applicable to noise abatement and control contained in Title 12 of this code. When applicable, a regulated premise may be required to reduce the sound level of music to a designated decibel level—notwithstanding the allowance under title 12 of a higher decibel level limit—within one hour prior to closing time in order to minimize noise behavior of patrons upon departure. This section is regulatory only. 
(Ord. 2220 § 3 (part), 2003)  
10.78.090 - Disorderly conduct within one hundred feet of premises—Regulated. 
The responsible person shall take reasonable steps to control the conduct of patrons so as to prevent or minimize noisy patron behavior and disorderly or unlawful conduct at the establishment and within one hundred feet of the establishment on the public sidewalks or rights-of-way. Unlawful conduct includes solicitation for acts of prostitution or sales of narcotics and other controlled substances. The responsibility for patron conduct shall also extend for a distance of one hundred feet along the public sidewalks or rights-of-way from any other property owned, used or leased by the regulated premise for parking. Noisy patron behavior shall include yelling, shouting or loud talking after ten p.m. nightly that continues for more than one minute and disturbs two or more adult occupants of residential structures within one hundred feet of the regulated premises or any incidental property used for parking, even if such conduct is not otherwise unlawful. Distance shall be measured in a straight line from the boundary of the regulated premise or incidental property. This section is regulatory only. 
(Ord. 2220 § 3 (part), 2003)  
10.78.100 - Orderly dispersal—Required. 
The responsible person shall cause the orderly dispersal of individuals from the establishment at closing time, and shall not allow any patrons to congregate on public sidewalks or rights-of-way within one hundred feet of the premises or on any parking lots owned, used or leased by the establishment. This section is regulatory only. 
(Ord. 2220 § 3 (part), 2003)  
10.78.110 - Restrictions on alcoholic beverage on premises. 
No person shall bring or be allowed to bring or possess an alcoholic beverage in premises regulated under this chapter unless allowed by the permittee's ABC license. This section is regulatory only. 
(Ord. 2220 § 3 (part), 2003)  
10.78.120 - Authority of police officer where there is immediate threat to public safety. 
A.  A police officer may require a permittee or other responsible person to immediately cease operations and disperse all patrons for the remainder of its daily operation whenever disorderly conduct by patrons reaches a magnitude that presents an immediate threat to the public safety and well-being of patrons or general public in the vicinity. 
B.  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail to comply with any directive issued by a police officer under the authority of Section 10.78.120(A). Violation by a responsible person of a regulated premise shall also constitute grounds for revocation or suspension of the permit. 
(Ord. 2220 § 3 (part), 2003)  
10.78.130 - Conditions imposed on entertainment permits. 
A.  The chief of police may impose conditions relating to the operation of the entertainment on the permit. Conditions may require or relate to: 
1.  The days, hours and location of operation; 
2.  Separate entrances, exits and restroom facilities on the premises, or similar restrictions designed to prevent minors from obtaining alcohol; 
3.  Age restrictions on minors allowed on the premises; 
4.  Hiring and numbers of licensed security guards; 
5.  Advance notification being given to the chief of police of the date of a particular event if that event is not held as part of the regularly scheduled events of the business; 
6.  In consultation with the planning director or building and safety director, use of sound insulation or acoustic barriers and measures designed to minimize sound disturbances to surrounding premises; and 
7.  Other conditions reasonably related to public safety and welfare. 
B.  Conditions shall be based on specific facts or events reasonably related to insuring public safety, including the protection of minors from alcohol and other criminal activity. 
C.  Conditions will be listed on the permit. 
D.  The chief of police shall consider the appropriateness of the conditions as they may affect other lawfully permitted activities on the premises. 
E.  No conditions shall be imposed that conflict with any local, state or federal law or the permittee's ABC License. 
F.  Notwithstanding Section 10.78.130(A), if the applicant has an ABC license or a conditional use permit issued since January 1st, 2002 upon which the chief of police has had meaningful input in determining conditions on the permit related to the operation of the entertainment, including the ages of the patrons, and there has been no change in or violations regarding the manner or type of entertainment offered, those conditions will also be the conditions of the police permit issued under authority of this chapter. Nothing in this subsection is intended to prevent the chief of police from imposing any condition related to the age of patrons inside an ABC establishment if the ABC license does not address that issue. The intent of this subsection is to allow the sale and service of food to minors in a bona fide public eating place (ABC license types 41, 47, and various club licensed premises) with reasonable conditions placed on the permit to prevent curfew violations and protect the minors from alcohol and other criminal activity. 
G.  Unless otherwise stated on the permit, a permit's conditions are subject to modification (1) at the time of renewal of the permit at the request of the permittee, (2) in conjunction with a modification of the same conditions on an ABC license or conditional use permit, or (3) at the time of renewal by the chief of police based on demonstrated experience at the regulated premises. At the time of renewal, the chief of police may order the removal or modification of any condition. Nothing in Sections 10.78.130(F) or (G) is intended to prevent the chief of police from modifying any condition in conjunction with regulatory action taken against the permittee pursuant to Chapter 10.70. 
H.  Issuance, imposition, suspension or revocation of any particular condition or permit is appealable through the procedures set forth in Chapter 10.70. 
I.  Conditions may not be imposed to suppress or regulate speech in any manner contrary to the First Amendment. 
(Ord. 2220 § 3 (part), 2003)  
10.78.140 - Issuance and duration of permit. 
A.  With the exception of a permit that is issued for a single event, any public dance, cabaret or commercial recreational assemblage permit issued on or before the effective date of this chapter shall be valid for one year from the date it was issued, subject to the conditions or restrictions existing at the time it was issued. Renewal applications shall be submitted to the chief of police in accordance with Chapter 10.70. The chief of police may impose conditions on a renewal permit in accordance with this chapter. The chief may modify the application process to eliminate requirements that are redundant or irrelevant to a particular premises or its operation. All new permits and renewal permits shall remain valid until revoked, suspended, cancelled by the permittee, or until a change in ownership occurs. Permits shall not be assigned without the express authorization of the chief of police; unauthorized assignment shall automatically void the permit. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all entertainment establishments currently doing business in the city. Existing establishments that are not covered under Section 10.78.140(A) shall make application for a permit within sixty days following the effective date of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2220 § 3 (part), 2003)  
10.78.150 - Effect of revocation or suspension of entertainment permit. 
Police permits issued under this chapter are separate from and independent of any conditional use permit that is required or issued under the provisions of Title 18 of this code. Revocation or suspension of a police permit shall not operate to revoke or suspend a conditional use permit, notwithstanding that those same or similar terms and conditions may be applicable to both. Revocation or suspension of an entertainment permit shall affect only the authority of the establishment to provide or allow entertainment or dancing at the premises for which the police permit is issued. The establishment may continue to conduct all other business for which it is licensed or allowed by law to conduct, unless separate action is taken to abate the establishment as a public nuisance or to revoke or suspend any other issued permit, including a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 2220 § 3 (part), 2003)  
Chapter 10.79 - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 6, adopted Jan. 22, 2019, amended Ch. 10.79 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 10.79, §§ 10.79.010—10.79.110, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. 2204 § 8 (part), 2002; Ord. 2220 § 4, 2003). 
 
10.79.010 - Title and administration. 
This chapter may be referred to as the National City massage establishment ordinance. Issuance and administration of permits is governed by Chapter 10.70. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 8, 1-22-2019)  
10.79.020 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide for the orderly regulation of a massage establishment business in the city in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare by promulgating minimum standards for the establishment and operation of those businesses and to prevent the facilitation of prostitution. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 8, 1-22-2019)  
10.79.030 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the following words or phrases are used, they shall mean as follows: 
A.  "California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC)" means the state organized non-profit organization created to regulate the massage industry set forth in Chapter 10.5 of Division 2 of the California Business and Professions Code, commencing with section 4600. 
B.  "CAMTC certificate" means a current and valid certificate issued by the California Massage Therapy Council to a massage technician. 
C.  "Massage" means any method of pressure on, or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the external parts of the body with the hands or other parts of the body, with or without the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances or with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptic, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments, or other preparations commonly used in this practice. 
D.  "Massage establishment" means an establishment where massage is administered. 
E.  "Massage practitioner," "massage technician," or "technician" means any person, including a holistic health practitioner as defined in subsection H, who gives or administers to another person of the same or opposite gender, for any form of consideration, a "massage" as defined in this chapter. 
F.  "Massage establishment operator" or "operator" means any person, including a holistic health practitioner as defined in subsection H, who operates an establishment to give or administer to another person of the same or opposite gender, for any form of consideration, a "massage" as defined in this chapter. This includes any person who supervises, manages, directs, organizes, controls, or in any other way is responsible for or in charge of the daily operation, conduct, or activities of a massage establishment. 
G.  "Massage practitioner certification" means a certification issued by the California Massage Therapy Council pursuant to Chapter 10.5 of the California Business and Professions Code. 
H.  "Permit" under this chapter means an annual permit to operate a massage establishment as required by this code. 
I.  The term "specified anatomical areas" means any of the following areas of the human body: pubic region, human genitals, perineum, anal region, and the areas of the female breasts that include the areola and the nipple. 
J.  "Holistic health practitioner" means a non-medical or other health care therapist who uses acupressure (excluding "acupuncture") or a massage specialty and therapeutic approach in caring for clients, and who is not licensed by the state of California. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 8, 1-22-2019)  
10.79.040 - Massage operator permit required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to operate a massage establishment in or upon any premises within the city without the permit required by this chapter and Chapter 10.70, except as exempted by Section 10.79.170. 
B.  A massage establishment police regulated permit required by this chapter and Chapter 10.70 shall be valid for one year, coinciding with the city business license effective and expiration dates. Permit renewal shall be made by the applicant within thirty days prior to the expiration of the permit. If an application for renewal of a permit and all required information is not timely received and the permit expires, no right or privilege to continue the massage establishment governed by Chapter 10.79 shall exist. 
C.  It is unlawful for the operator, owner, or other responsible person, of a massage establishment to employ or otherwise allow a person to perform massage who does not have a valid massage practitioner certification issued by the California Massage Therapy Council pursuant to Chapter 10.5 of the California Business and Professions Code or CAMTC certificate. 
D.  The owner or operator of a massage establishment shall submit a revised list with the information specified in Section 10.70.030.B.15 to the police department within five business days upon any change to the list. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 8, 1-22-2019)  
10.79.050 - Massage technician's certification required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to perform services as a massage technician without a valid massage practitioner certification issued by the California Massage Therapy Council pursuant to Chapter 10.5 of the California Business and Professions Code. 
B.  A massage practitioner certification does not authorize the operation of a massage establishment. Any person or massage technician who desires to operate a massage establishment must apply separately to the city for a permit and a business license. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 8, 1-22-2019)  
10.79.060 - Minimum facilities required. 
No permit to conduct a massage establishment shall be granted unless an inspection by the chief of police or designee and the county health officer and the fire and building officials demonstrates that the proposed establishment does or will comply with each of the following minimum requirements: 
A.  A recognizable and legible sign is posted at the main entrance identifying the premises as a massage establishment; 
B.  Minimum lighting of at least forty watts is provided in accordance with the building code of the city; 
C.  Minimum ventilation is provided in accordance with the building code of the city; 
D.  Equipment approved by the health department for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in performing acts of massage is provided; 
E.  Hot and cold running water is provided at all times; 
F.  Closed cabinets are provided, which cabinets shall be utilized for the storage of clean linen; 
G.  Adequate dressing, locker, and toilet facilities are provided for patrons. A minimum of one dressing room containing a separate locker for each person to be served, which locker shall be capable of being locked, and a minimum of one toilet and one wash basin shall be provided by every massage establishment; 
H.  All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms, and all other physical facilities for the establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wooden surfaces must be painted with a washable, mold resistant paint. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet rooms must be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected each day the business is in operation with a disinfectant approved by the health department. Bathtubs must be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected after each use with a disinfectant approved by the health department; and 
I.  A minimum of one separate wash basin is provided in each massage establishment for the use of employees of any such establishment, which basin shall provide soap or detergent and hot and cold running water at all times, and is located within or as close as practicable to the area devoted to the performing of massage services. In addition, there must be provided at each washbasin sanitary towels placed in permanently installed dispensers. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 8, 1-22-2019)  
10.79.070 - Massage establishment operating requirements. 
No person, association, partnership, or corporation may engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on the operation of a massage establishment unless each and all of the following requirements are met: 
A.  Massage operations may only be carried on, and the premises may only be open, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
B.  A list of services available and the cost of such services shall be posted in an open and conspicuous public place on the premises. The service shall be described in readily understandable language in English and may also then be described in any other language. No owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager, permittee, or licensee in charge of or in control of the massage establishment shall permit and no massage technician shall offer or perform, any service other than those posted. 
C.  The massage establishment business tax license, massage establishment permit, and a copy of the permit of each and every massage technician employed by or working in the establishment must be displayed in an open and conspicuous public place on the premises. 
D.  Hot and cold running water under pressure shall be provided to all washbasins, bathtubs, showers, and similar equipment. Each washbasin shall be provided with soap or detergent and sanitary towels placed in permanently installed dispensers. A trash receptacle shall be provided in each toilet room. 
E.  Clean and sanitary towels, sheets and linens shall be provided for each patron receiving massage services. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted, and reuse is prohibited unless they have been first laundered. Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets, provided that such paper is used once for each person and then discarded into a sanitary receptacle. 
F.  Disinfecting agents and sterilizing equipment shall be available for any instruments used in performing any massage. Instruments will be disinfected or sterilized after each use. 
G.  Pads used on massage tables shall be covered in a workmanlike manner with durable, washable plastic or other waterproof material. 
H.  Each establishment shall provide to all patrons clean, sanitary, and opaque coverings capable of covering the patron's specified anatomical areas. Such coverings shall be used for one customer only and shall not be reused without first being cleaned. 
I.  No owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager, or permittee in charge of or in control of a massage establishment shall permit a massage to be given unless the patron's specified anatomical areas are covered during the entire massage by the covering referred to in subsection (H). 
J.  With the exception of bathrooms or dressing rooms not open to public view, no person or persons shall be permitted in any area within the massage establishment which is used in common by the patrons or which can be viewed by patrons from such an area, unless the specified anatomical areas of all persons within that area are fully covered. 
K.  It is unlawful for an owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager, permittee in charge of or in control of a massage establishment to permit any massage technician to perform any service or task while in the presence of a patron or to be on the premises of a massage establishment during its hours of operation unless the massage technician is dressed in a manner that does not violate paragraph (10) of subdivision (a) of Section 4609 of the California Business and Professions Code. 
L.  Any person performing services as a massage technician must wear a visible CAMTC identification card and have a copy of their driver's license or any other photo identification card issued by a state or federal agency readily available for inspection by city or county investigating officials. 
M.  An operator or owner must be on the business premises at all times during hours of operation of the business. 
N.  For each massage service provided, every massage establishment shall keep a complete and legible written record of the following information: the date and hour that service was provided; the service received; the name or initials of the employee entering the information; and the name of the massage practitioner administering the service. Such records shall be open to inspection and copying by the chief of police or designee, or may be used by any massage practitioner or operator as records of service provided, but may not be provided to other parties by the massage practitioner or operator unless otherwise required by law. Such records shall be retained on the premises of the massage establishment for a period of two years and be immediately available for inspection during business hours. 
O.  No massage establishment located in a building or structure with exterior windows fronting a public street, highway, walkway or parking area shall block visibility into the interior reception and waiting area through the use of curtains, closed blinds, tints, or any other material that obstructs, blurs, or unreasonably darkens the view into the premises. 
P.  All signs shall be in accordance with the current ordinances of the City of National City. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 8, 1-22-2019)  
10.79.080 - Massage establishment—Prohibited conduct. 
In addition to the conduct/activities, items, and/or substances prohibited by federal and state laws, the following conduct is prohibited at massage establishments: 
A.  The sale, service, or consumption of alcohol or marijuana; and 
B.  Audio and/or video recording of, or monitoring of, the patron, the massage therapist, or the massage therapy, without the prior written consent of the patron; and 
C.  Residing in or at the massage establishment by any person including but not limited to the operator, owner, responsible person, or employee of the massage establishment; and 
D.  Advertising or marketing illegal activity, advertising or marketing sexual content related to massage therapy, or advertising or marketing sexual content in the promotion of the massage establishment; and 
E.  Use or possession of adult-oriented merchandise, including "sex toys" and/or condoms, in any part of a massage establishment; and 
F.  Any sexual activity at a massage establishment; and 
G.  No owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager, permittee, or licensee in charge of or in control of a massage establishment shall permit any person to massage or intentionally touch the specified anatomical areas of another person while performing the services of a massage technician. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 8, 1-22-2019)  
10.79.090 - Off-premises massage—Prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, massage, for any form of consideration, in any hotel room, motel room, guesthouse or other place of public accommodation. This section shall not be construed to prohibit: 
A.  Maintaining a licensed massage establishment upon the premises of a place of public accommodation; or 
B.  The holder of a massage practitioner certification issued by the California Massage Therapy Council pursuant to Chapter 10.5 of the California Business and Professions Code from giving or administering massages within hospitals, convalescent centers, rest homes, offices, or the private home of a patron. For the purposes of this section, offices and private homes shall not include hotel rooms, motel rooms, or guest houses. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 8, 1-22-2019)  
10.79.100 - Existing businesses—Regulated. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described in this chapter whether the described activities in the chapter were established before or after the effective date of this chapter. Any existing massage technician who performs massage and any massage establishment that employs or utilizes persons to perform massage within the jurisdiction of the city, that operates with a valid and current business license issued by the city and all other necessary approvals issued prior to the effective date of any amended regulations in this chapter or Chapter 10.70, and that operates in compliance with all local, state and federal laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, must be in full compliance with Chapters 10.70 and 10.79 no later than sixty days following the effective date of any new regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 8, 1-22-2019)  
10.79.110 - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, psychiatrists, psychologists, acupuncturists, physical therapists, family counselors or other health care professionals who are licensed to practice their respective professions by the state of California or who are permitted to practice temporarily under the auspices of an associate or establishment duly licensed by the state of California, pursuant to the Business and Professions Code; 
B.  Nurses and other health care professionals who are registered or licensed under the laws of this state and administer a massage in the normal course of professional health care duties; 
C.  A trainer of any duly constituted athletic team or athlete who administers massage in the normal course of training duties to the team or athlete; 
D.  Barbers, cosmetologists, and estheticians duly licensed under the laws of the state who administer a massage incidental to a barber or beauty service provided in the normal performance of their profession. This exemption shall apply only if massage is provided from a fixed and permanent location of business; 
E.  Therapeutic massage administered in or under the auspices of any health facility, hospital or other establishment licensed under California statutes in which the above-described persons practice their respective professions, provided the massages are given only by exempt individuals or persons acting under their supervision; 
F.  Any bona fide athletic club which offers tennis, racquetball, swimming or other sport activities and possesses a sauna or steam room. Massage shall only be administered to members of the athletic club by persons who are exempt under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 8, 1-22-2019)  
10.79.120 - Inspection by officials. 
The city, county, or any investigating official shall have the right to enter the premises of the massage establishment from time to time during regular business hours to conduct reasonable inspections to enforce compliance with this chapter, Chapter 10.70, and with building, fire, electrical, plumbing, and/or state and local health and safety regulations. 
No person shall refuse to permit or interfere with a lawful inspection of the massage establishment by city or county investigating officials. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 8, 1-22-2019)  
10.79.130 - Unlawful massage establishment or operation. 
Any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter, Chapter 10.70 and/or state and federal laws shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city attorney may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for the abatement, removal, or enjoinment thereof, in any manner provided by law, including as provided in Chapter 10.70. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2454, § 8, 1-22-2019) 
Title 11 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters:  
Chapter 11.04 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
11.04.010 - Definitions—Generally. 
A.  The following words and phrases when used in this title shall for the purpose of this title have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter. 
B.  Whenever any words or phrases used in this title are defined in the Vehicle Code of this state, such definitions are incorporated herein and apply to such words and phrases used herein as though set forth herein in full. 
(Ord. 827 § 1, 1951)  
11.04.020 - Alley. 
"Alley" means any unnamed street less than twenty-five feet in width between property lines. 
(Ord. 827 § 2, 1951)  
11.04.030 - California Maintenance Manual. 
"California Maintenance Manual" means that book of traffic engineering standards and instructions formulated and published by the Division of Highways of the Department of Public Works of the state, entitled "Manual of Instructions" together with such amendments and additions thereto as may be hereafter approved by the city council by resolution. 
(Ord. 827 § 3, 1951)  
11.04.040 - Central traffic district. 
"Central traffic district" means all streets and portions of streets within the area described as follows: All that area bounded and described as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of the southerly line of 6th Street and the westerly line of National Avenue; thence southerly along the westerly line of National Avenue to the northerly line of 7th Street; thence westerly along the northerly line of 7th Street to the easterly line of Roosevelt Avenue; thence southerly along the easterly line of Roosevelt Avenue to the southerly line of 9th Street; thence easterly along the southerly line of 9th Street to the westerly line of National Avenue; thence southerly along the westerly line of National Avenue to the northerly line of 10th Street; thence westerly along the northerly line of 10th Street to the easterly line of Roosevelt Avenue; then southerly along the easterly line of Roosevelt Avenue to the southerly line of 10th Street; thence easterly along the southerly line of 10th Street to the westerly line of National Avenue; thence southerly along the westerly line of National Avenue to the northerly line of 13th Street; thence easterly along the easterly prolongation of the northerly line of 13th Street to the easterly line of National Avenue; thence northerly along the easterly line of National Avenue to the southerly line of 10th Street; thence easterly along the southerly line of 10th Street one hundred thirty-five feet; thence at right angles northerly to a point on the northerly line of 10th Street, a distance thereon one hundred thirty-five feet easterly from National Avenue; thence westerly along the northerly line of 10th Street to the easterly line of National Avenue; thence northerly along the easterly line of National Avenue to the southerly line of 9th Street; thence easterly along the southerly line of 9th Street to the easterly line of "A" Avenue; thence northerly along the easterly line of "A" Avenue to the southerly line of 8th Street; thence easterly along the southerly line of 8th Street to the westerly line of "C" Avenue; thence northerly along the westerly line of "C" Avenue to the northerly line of 8th Street; thence westerly along the northerly line of 8th Street to the easterly line of "A" Avenue; thence northerly along the easterly line of "A" Avenue to the northerly line of 7th Street; thence westerly along the northerly line of 7th Street to the easterly line of National Avenue; thence northerly along the easterly line of National Avenue to the southerly line of 6th Street; thence westerly along the southerly line of 6th Street to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. 827 § 4, 1951)  
11.04.050 - City council. 
"City council" means the city council of National City. 
(Ord. 827 § 5, 1951)  
11.04.060 - Holiday. 
"Holiday" means any day designated as such in Section 10 of the Political Code of the state; provided however, that Saturday afternoon shall not be considered a holiday for the purposes of this title. 
(Ord. 827 § 6, 1951)  
11.04.070 - Loading zone. 
"Loading zone" means the space adjacent to the curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
(Ord. 827 § 7, 1951)  
11.04.080 - Official time standard. 
Whenever certain hours are named herein, they mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the city. 
(Ord. 827 § 8, 1951)  
11.04.090 - Official traffic control device. 
"Official traffic control device" includes all signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this title placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
(Ord. 827 § 9, 1951)  
11.04.100 - Official traffic signal. 
"Official traffic signal" includes any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and proceed and which is erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 827 § 10, 1951)  
11.04.110 - Park. 
"Park" means to stand or leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
(Ord. 827 § 11, 1951)  
11.04.120 - Parkway. 
"Parkway" means that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk. 
(Ord. 827 § 12, 1951)  
11.04.130 - Passenger loading zone. 
"Passenger loading zone means, the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
(Ord. 82-7 § 13, 1951)  
11.04.140 - Pedestrian. 
"Pedestrian" means every person afoot. 
(Ord. 827 § 14, 1951)  
11.04.150 - Person. 
"Person" means every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation. 
(Ord. 827 § 15, 1951)  
11.04.160 - Police officer. 
"Police officer" means every officer of the police department of this city. 
(Ord. 827 § 16, 1951)  
11.04.165 - Recreational vehicle. 
"Recreational vehicle" means any camp trailer, camper, fifth-wheel travel trailer, trailer coach, or house car as defined in California Vehicle Code sections 242, 243, 324, 362, 396, 635, recreational vehicle as defined in California Health and Safety Code section 18010, or boat or boat on a trailer, regardless of whether the boat or boat on a trailer is attached to a motor vehicle or carrier trailer as defined in California Vehicle Code 14.005. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2410, § 5, 3-15-2016)  
11.04.170 - Secondary traffic district. 
"Secondary traffic district" means all streets and portions of streets within the area described as follows: All that area bounded and described as follows: 
A.  Parcel 1. Beginning at the intersection of the easterly line of Roosevelt Avenue and the southwesterly line of Main Street; thence southeasterly along the southwesterly line of Main Street to the westerly line of National Avenue; thence southerly along the westerly line of National Avenue to the northerly line of 5th Street; thence westerly along the northerly line of 5th Street to the westerly line of Hoover Avenue; thence southerly along the westerly line of Hoover to the southerly line of 10th Street; thence easterly along the southerly line of 10th Street to the westerly line of Roosevelt Avenue; thence southerly along the westerly line of Roosevelt Avenue to the southerly line of 13th Street; thence easterly along the southerly line of 13th Street to the westerly line of National Avenue; thence southerly along the westerly line of National Avenue to the northerly line of 18th Street; thence easterly along the northerly line of 18th Street to the easterly line of National Avenue; thence northerly along the easterly line of National Avenue to the easterly prolongation of the northerly line of 13th Street; thence westerly along said easterly prolongation and the northerly line thereof of 13th Street to the easterly line of Roosevelt Avenue; thence northerly along the easterly line of Roosevelt Avenue to the southerly line of 12th Street; thence easterly along the southerly line of 12th Street to the westerly line of National Avenue; thence northerly along said westerly line of National Avenue to the northerly line of 12th Street; thence westerly along the northerly line of 12th Street to the easterly line of Roosevelt Avenue; thence northerly along the easterly line of Roosevelt Avenue to the southerly line of 11th Street; thence easterly along the southerly line of 11th Street to the westerly line of National Avenue; thence northerly along the westerly line of National Avenue to the northerly line of 11th Street; thence westerly along the northerly line of 11th Street to the easterly line of Roosevelt Avenue; thence northerly along the easterly line of Roosevelt Avenue to the northerly line of 9th Street; thence westerly along the northerly line of 9th Street to the westerly line of Roosevelt Avenue; thence northerly along the westerly line of Roosevelt Avenue to the northerly line of 7th Street; thence easterly along the northerly line of 7th Street to the easterly line of Roosevelt Avenue; thence northerly along the easterly line of Roosevelt Avenue to the southerly line of 6th Street; thence easterly along the southerly line of 6th Street to the westerly line of "A" Avenue; thence southerly along the westerly line of "A" Avenue to the northerly line of 7th Street; thence easterly along the northerly line of 7th Street to the easterly line of "A" Avenue; thence northerly along the easterly line and the northerly prolongation of the easterly line of "A" Avenue to the northerly line of 6th Street; thence westerly along the northerly line of 6th Street to the easterly line of National Avenue; thence northerly along the easterly line of National Avenue to the southeasterly prolongation of the northeasterly line of Main Street; thence northwesterly along the southeasterly prolongation of the northeasterly line of Main Street to the easterly line of Roosevelt Avenue; thence southerly along the easterly line of Roosevelt Avenue to the point of beginning; 
B.  Parcel 2. Beginning at the intersection of the westerly line of "C" Avenue and the southerly line of 8th Street; thence easterly along the southerly line of 8th Street to the westerly line of Highland Avenue; thence northerly along the westerly line of Highland Avenue to the northerly line of 8th Street; thence westerly along the northerly line of 8th Street to the westerly line of "C" Avenue; thence southerly along the westerly line of "C" Avenue to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. 827 § 17, 1951)  
11.04.180 - Stop. 
A.  When required "stop" means complete cessation of movement. 
B.  "Stop" or "stand," when prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
(Ord. 827 § 18, 1951)  
11.04.190 - Traffic. 
"Traffic" means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances either singly or together while using any street for purposes of travel. 
(Ord. 827 § 19, 1951)  
11.04.200 - Oversized vehicle or load. 
Oversized vehicle or load means any building, structure, vehicle, load, trailer, or combination thereof, which exceeds the height, width, length, size or weight of vehicle or load limitations provided for in Division 15 of the Vehicle Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 1998 § 1, 1990)  
Chapter 11.08 - ADMINISTRATION 
Sections: 
 
11.08.010 - City traffic engineer. 
The office of city traffic engineer is established. The city engineer shall serve as city traffic engineer in addition to his other functions, and shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this title. 
(Ord. 1428 (part), 1974: Ord. 827 § 20, 1951)  
11.08.020 - Signs—Installation and maintenance. 
Whenever in this title signs or other notices are authorized, it shall be the duty of the city manager to install and to maintain the signs or other notices. 
(Ord. 827 § 90, 1951)  
Chapter 11.12 - ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
11.12.010 - Police—Fire department—Authority. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city. 
B.  Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
C.  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Ord. 827 § 21, 1951)  
11.12.020 - Obedience required—Regulations. 
It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this title. 
(Ord. 827 § 22, 1951)  
11.12.030 - Obedience required—Enforcing officers. 
No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order of a police officer or fire department official or other person authorized by law when directing traffic. 
(Ord. 827 § 23, 1951)  
11.12.040 - Unauthorized person directing traffic prohibited. 
No person other than an officer of the police department or a person deputized by the chief of police or person authorized by law or other persons designated by resolution of the city council shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal (except that persons may operate when and as herein provided any mechanical push-button signal erected by order of the city traffic engineer). 
(Ord. 827 § 24, 1951)  
11.12.050 - Obedience required—Public employees. 
The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this state, any county or city and it is unlawful for any said driver to violate any of the provisions of this title except as otherwise permitted in this title or by state statute. 
(Ord. 827 § 25, 1951)  
11.12.060 - Exemptions—Certain vehicles. 
A.  The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of the police or fire department, any public ambulance or public utility vehicle or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified in the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call. 
B.  The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his wilful disregard of the safety of others. 
C.  The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or any vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail; or during the periods of proclaimed national emergency to any vehicle owned or operated by the Department of the Army, Navy or Air Force. 
D.  The provisions of this title regulating overtime parking shall not apply to any vehicle owned and operated by a permanently physically incapacitated person, as hereinafter defined, when such person parks such vehicle in a permitted parking space other than a loading, passenger or bus zone during all hours when it is otherwise lawful to park in the same space, subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Such person shall make application to the city manager for a personal identification card for use of the person to whom issued. Such application shall set forth sufficient facts to show that applicant is a permanently physically incapacitated person, as determined from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
2.  Upon approval of the application by the city manager, the chief of police shall issue such identification card. 
3.  Such identification card shall be displayed to any police officer upon request. 
4.  Abuse of privileges, or noncompliance with the above conditions, or conditions hereafter imposed by the city council shall constitute sufficient grounds for revocation by the city manager of the privileges herein granted. 
(Ord. 827 § 26, 1951)  
11.12.070 - Property damage report—Required when. 
A.  The driver of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or owned by a public utility, including but not limited to any fire hydrant, ornamental lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, or resulting in damage, to any ornamental shade tree, traffic control device, or other property of a like nature located in or along any street, alley or other public place, shall within twenty-four hours after such accident make a written report of such accident to the police department of this city. 
B.  Every such report shall state the time when and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning and of the person driving or in charge of such vehicle or animal, the license number of every such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property damaged in such accident. 
C.  A driver involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this section if and during the time such driver is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event such driver shall make a report as required in subsection A within twenty-four hours after regaining ability to make such report. 
(Ord. 827 § 27, 1951)  
11.12.080 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of Chapters 11.04 through 11.44 is guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof, unless otherwise provided, is punishable as prescribed in Section 1.20.010. 
(Ord. 1621, 1978; Ord. 1358 § 2 (part), 1973; Ord. 827 § 91, 1951)  
Chapter 11.16 - SPEED LIMITS 
Sections: 
 
11.16.010 - Speed zones designated. 
A.  Pursuant to Sections 22357 and 40802 of the CVC, the City Council of the City of National City, on the basis of engineering and traffic surveys conducted and certified by a professional engineer in accordance with Section 627 of the CVC and Section 2B.13 of the MUTCD, does hereby establish the following speed limits as reasonable and safe to facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic on the portions of roadways within the City of National City summarized in subsections "B" through "F" below. 
B.  Twenty-five miles per hour is declared and established as the prima facie speed limit on the following streets: 
1.  16th Street from Wilson Avenue to National City Boulevard. 
2.  18th Street from Wilson Avenue to National City Boulevard. 
3.  22nd Street from Wilson Avenue to National City Boulevard. 
4.  32nd Street from Tidelands Avenue to Marina Way. 
5.  8th Street from National City Boulevard to "D" Avenue. 
6.  8th Street from "D" Avenue to Highland Avenue. 
7.  "D" Avenue from Division Street to 4th Street. 
8.  "D" Avenue from 4th Street to 8th Street. 
9.  "D" Avenue from 8th Street to Plaza Boulevard. 
10.  "D" Avenue from Plaza Boulevard to 16th Street. 
11.  "D" Avenue from 16th Street to 18th Street. 
12.  Grove Street from Prospect Street to Sweetwater Road. 
13.  Hoover Avenue from 22nd Street to Mile of Cars Way. 
14.  "L" Avenue from 16th Street to 18th Street. 
15.  "L" Avenue from 24th Street to 28th Street. 
16.  "L" Avenue from 28th Street to 30th Street. 
17.  Manchester Road from Plaza Boulevard to Angelo Drive. 
18.  Marina Way from Bay Marina Drive to 32nd Street. 
19.  McKinley Avenue from 14th Street to 19th Street. 
20.  Palm Avenue from 16th Street to 18th Street. 
21.  Palm Avenue from 18th Street to 22nd Street. 
22.  Plaza Boulevard from Coolidge Avenue to Hoover Avenue. 
23.  Plaza Boulevard from Hoover Avenue to National City Boulevard. 
C.  Thirty miles per hour is declared and established as the prima facie speed limit on the following streets: 
1.  16th Street from National City Boulevard to "D" Avenue. 
2.  16th Street from Highland Avenue to "L" Avenue. 
3.  16th Street from "L" Avenue to Palm Avenue. 
4.  16th Street from Palm Avenue to Grove Street. 
5.  16th Street from Grove Street to Euclid Avenue. 
6.  16th Street from Euclid Avenue to Lanoitan Avenue. 
7.  16th Street from Lanoitan Avenue to Harbison Avenue. 
8.  18th Street from National City Boulevard to "D" Avenue. 
9.  18th Street from "D" Avenue to Highland Avenue. 
10.  18th Street from Highland Avenue to "L" Avenue. 
11.  18th Street from "L" Avenue to Palm Avenue. 
12.  18th Street from Palm Avenue to Newell Street. 
13.  18th Street from Newell Street to Euclid Avenue. 
14.  18th Street from Euclid Avenue to Granger Avenue. 
15.  18th Street from Granger Avenue to Rachael Avenue. 
16.  19th Street from Tidelands Avenue to Cleveland Avenue. 
17.  24th Street from "D" Avenue to Highland Avenue. 
18.  24th Street from Highland Avenue to "L" Avenue. 
19.  30th Street from Hoover Avenue to National City Boulevard. 
20.  30th Street from National City Boulevard to "D" Avenue. 
21.  30th Street from "D" Avenue to Highland Avenue. 
22.  4th Street from National City Boulevard to D Avenue. 
23.  4th Street from "D" Avenue to Highland Avenue. 
24.  4th Street from Highland Avenue to Palm Avenue. 
25.  4th Street from Euclid Avenue to Clairmont Avenue. 
26.  4th Street from Clairmont Avenue to Harbison Avenue. 
27.  8th Street from Harbor Drive to I-5. 
28.  8th Street from I-5 to National City Boulevard. 
29.  Bay Marina Drive from Tidelands Avenue to Marina Way. 
30.  Bay Marina Drive from Marina Way to I-5. 
31.  Civic Center Drive from Harbor Drive to National City Boulevard. 
32.  Division Street from National City Boulevard to D Avenue. 
33.  Division Street from "D" Avenue to Highland Avenue. 
34.  Harbison Avenue from 4th Street to 8th Street. 
35.  Harbison Avenue from 8th Street to Plaza Boulevard. 
36.  Harbison Avenue from Plaza Boulevard to 16th Street. 
37.  Highland Avenue from North City Limit to Division Street. 
38.  Highland Avenue from Division Street to 4th Street. 
39.  Highland Avenue from 4th Street to 8th Street. 
40.  Highland Avenue from 8th Street to Plaza Boulevard. 
41.  Highland Avenue from 24th Street to 30th Street. 
42.  Highland Avenue from 30th Street to South City Limit. 
43.  "L" Avenue from 8th Street to Plaza Boulevard. 
44.  "L" Avenue from 18th Street to 21st Street. 
45.  "L" Avenue from 21st Street to 24th Street. 
46.  Main Street from I-5 to National City Boulevard. 
47.  McKinley Avenue from 19th Street to 23rd Street. 
48.  Mile of Cars Way from I-5 to Hoover Avenue. 
49.  Palm Avenue from Division Street to 4th Street. 
50.  Palm Avenue from 4th Street to 8th Street. 
51.  Palm Avenue from 8th Street to Plaza Boulevard. 
52.  Palm Avenue from Plaza Boulevard to 16th Street. 
53.  Plaza Boulevard from National City Boulevard to "D" Avenue. 
54.  Plaza Boulevard from "D" Avenue to Highland Avenue. 
55.  Roosevelt Avenue from Division Street to 4th Street. 
56.  Roosevelt Avenue from 4th Street to 8th Street. 
57.  Roosevelt Avenue from 8th Street to Plaza Boulevard. 
58.  Roosevelt Avenue from Plaza Boulevard to Civic Center Drive. 
59.  Roosevelt Avenue from Civic Center Drive to 16th Street. 
60.  West Avenue from 16th Street to 18th Street. 
61.  Wilson Avenue from Civic Center Drive to 18th Street. 
62.  Wilson Avenue from 18th Street to 24th Street. 
D.  Thirty-five miles per hour is declared and established as the prima facie speed limit on the following streets: 
1.  16th Street from "D" Avenue to Highland Avenue. 
2.  24th Street from National City Boulevard to "D" Avenue. 
3.  30th Street from Highland Avenue to "L" Avenue. 
4.  30th Street from L Avenue to 2nd Avenue. 
5.  4th Street from Palm Avenue to "T" Avenue. 
6.  4th Street from "T" Avenue to Euclid Avenue. 
7.  8th Street from Highland Avenue to "L" Avenue. 
8.  8th Street from "L" Avenue to Palm Avenue. 
9.  8th Street from Palm Avenue to Euclid Avenue. 
10.  8th Street from Euclid Avenue to Harbison Avenue. 
11.  8th Street from Harbison Avenue to Plaza Boulevard. 
12.  Cleveland Avenue from Civic Center Drive to 19th Street. 
13.  Cleveland Avenue from 19th Street to Bay Marina Drive. 
14.  "D" Avenue from 18th Street to 24th Street. 
15.  "D" Avenue from 24th Street to 26th Street. 
16.  "D" Avenue from 26th Street to 30th Street. 
17.  Division Street from Highland Avenue to Palm Avenue. 
18.  Division Street from Palm Avenue to "T" Avenue. 
19.  Division Street from "T" Avenue to Euclid Avenue. 
20.  Euclid Avenue from North City Limit to Division Street. 
21.  Euclid Avenue from Division Street to 4th Street. 
22.  Euclid Avenue from 4th Street to 8th Street. 
23.  Euclid Avenue from 8th Street to Plaza Boulevard. 
24.  Euclid Avenue from Plaza Boulevard to 16th Street. 
25.  Euclid Avenue from 16th Street to 18th Street. 
26.  Euclid Avenue from 18th Street to 24th Street. 
27.  Harbison Avenue from Division Street to 4th Street. 
28.  Highland Avenue from Plaza Boulevard to 16th Street. 
29.  Highland Avenue from 16th Street to 18th Street. 
30.  Highland Avenue from 18th Street to 24th Street. 
31.  Hoover Avenue from Mile of Cars Way to 30th Street. 
32.  Hoover Avenue from 30th Street to 33rd Street. 
33.  Mile of Cars Way from Hoover Avenue to National City Boulevard. 
34.  National City Boulevard from Division Street to 4th Street. 
35.  National City Boulevard from 4th Street to 8th Street. 
36.  National City Boulevard from 8th Street to Plaza Boulevard. 
37.  National City Boulevard from Plaza Boulevard to Civic Center Drive. 
38.  National City Boulevard from Civic Center Drive to 16th Street. 
39.  National City Boulevard from 16th Street to 18th Street. 
40.  National City Boulevard from 18th Street to 24th Street. 
41.  National City Boulevard from 24th Street to 30th Street. 
42.  National City Boulevard from 30th Street to South City Limit. 
43.  Newell Street from 18th Street to Prospect Street. 
44.  Palm Avenue from I-805 to Division Street. 
45.  Plaza Bonita Road from Sweetwater Road to Bonita Mesa Road. 
46.  Plaza Boulevard from Highland Avenue to Palm Avenue. 
47.  Plaza Boulevard from Palm Avenue to I-805. 
48.  Plaza Boulevard from I-805 to Euclid Avenue. 
49.  Plaza Boulevard from Euclid Avenue to Harbison Avenue. 
50.  Sweetwater Road from 2nd Avenue to I-805/Euclid Avenue. 
51.  Tidelands Avenue from Civic Center Drive to 19th Street. 
52.  Tidelands Avenue from 19th Street to Bay Marina Drive. 
53.  Tidelands Avenue from Bay Marina Drive to 32nd Street. 
E.  Forty miles per hour is declared and established as the prima facie speed limit on the following streets: 
1.  Division Street from Euclid Avenue to Harbison Avenue. 
2.  Euclid Avenue from 24th Street to Sweetwater Road. 
3.  Paradise Valley Road from 8th Street to Plaza Entrada. 
4.  Plaza Bonita Center Way from Valley Road to Sweetwater Road. 
5.  Plaza Boulevard from Harbison Avenue to 8th Street. 
6.  Valley Road from Plaza Bonita Center Way to San Miguel Court. 
F.  Forty-five miles per hour is declared and established as the prima facie speed limit on the following streets: 
1.  Harbor Drive from North City Limit to 8th Street. 
2.  Harbor Drive from 8th Street to Civic Center Drive. 
3.  Sweetwater Road from I-805/Euclid Avenue to Valley Road. 
4.  Sweetwater Road from Valley Road to Plaza Bonita Road. 
5.  Sweetwater Road from Plaza Bonita Road to Calmoor Street. 
6.  Sweetwater Road from Calmoor Street to Plaza Bonita Center Way. 
7.  Valley Road from Sweetwater Road to Calle Abajo 
(Ord. 2273, 2005: Ord. 2149, 1998: Ord. 2045 §§ 1—4, 1992; Ord. 2043 §§ 1—4, 1992; Ord. 1963, 1988; Ord. 1960, 1988; Ord. 1931, 1987) 
(Ord. No. 2012-2378, 12-4-2012; Ord. No. 2017-2443, 12-19-2017)  
11.16.020 - Signs erected. 
It is authorized and directed that appropriate signs giving notice of the speed zones designated in Section 11.16.010 be erected on the streets named in Section 11.16.010. 
(Ord. 1884, 1986)  
Chapter 11.20 - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 
Sections: 
 
11.20.010 - Installation—Authority. 
A.  The city manager shall cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices when and as required by resolution or ordinances of this city. 
B.  Whenever the Vehicle Code of this state requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law the city manager is authorized to cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto. 
(Ord. 827 § 28, 1951)  
11.20.020 - Enforcement—Signs required. 
No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate signs are in place and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person, giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Ord. 827 § 29, 1951)  
11.20.030 - Obedience required. 
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the traffic ordinances of this city unless otherwise directed by a police officer subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls. 
(Ord. 827 § 30, 1951)  
11.20.040 - Installation—Procedure. 
A.  When directed by resolution or ordinance of the city council the city manager shall cause to be installed and maintained official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard. 
B.  The city traffic engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by resort to filed observation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent and his determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the California Maintenance Manual issued by the Division of Highways of the state Department of Public Works. 
C.  Whenever the city manager causes to be installed and maintained an official traffic signal at any intersection, he shall likewise cause to be erected and maintained at such intersection street name signs visible to the principal flow of traffic unless such street name signs have previously been placed and are maintained at any such intersection. 
(Ord. 827 § 31, 1951)  
11.20.050 - Lane markings. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to mark center lines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the highway. When authorized signs have been placed designating off-center traffic lanes, no person shall disobey the instructions given by such signs. 
(Ord. 827 § 32, 1951)  
11.20.060 - Existing devices. 
Until removed or relocated by the city council, all traffic control devices heretofore installed by the city and in place on the effective date of the ordinance codified herein are approved. 
(Ord. 827 § 33, 1951)  
11.20.070 - Hours of operation. 
The city traffic engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this title. 
(Ord. 827 § 34, 1951)  
11.20.080 - Speed regulation. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections, and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. 827 § 89, 1951)  
Chapter 11.24 - TURNING MOVEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
11.24.010 - Marking—Authority. 
A.  The city traffic engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons, or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the city traffic engineer is authorized to allocate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right or left hand turns, and the course to be traveled as indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. 
B.  When authorized marker, buttons, or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
(Ord. 827 § 35, 1951)  
11.24.020 - Restricting signs—Authority. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day or permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(Ord. 827 § 36, 1951)  
11.24.030 - Restricting signs—Obedience required. 
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Ord. 827 § 37, 1951)  
11.24.040 - Right turn against signal prohibited—Authority. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine those intersections within any business or residence district at which the driver of a vehicle shall not make a right turn against a red or stop signal and shall erect proper signs giving notice of such prohibition. No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Ord. 827 § 38, 1951)  
Chapter 11.28 - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS 
Sections: 
 
11.28.010 - Sign erection. 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the city designates any one-way street or alley, the city manager shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Ord. 827 § 39, 1951)  
Chapter 11.32 - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
Sections: 
 
11.32.010 - Stop sign—Erection—Authority. 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates and describes any street or portion of any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the city manager shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows: 
A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances of other intersections where a stop is required and at any railroad grade crossing so designated. Every such sign shall conform with and shall be placed as provided in the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 1024 § 1, 1962; Ord. 827 § 40, 1951)  
11.32.020 - Stop sign—Obedience required. 
When stop signs are erected as provided in this chapter at the entrance to any intersection or at any railway grade crossing, every driver of a vehicle shall stop as required by the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 827 § 41, 1951)  
11.32.030 - Emerging from alley or private driveway. 
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, private property or building, shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into a sidewalk area extending across any alley way. 
(Ord. 827 § 42, 1951)  
11.32.040 - Regulations—Applicability. 
A.  The provisions of this title prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
B.  The provisions of this title imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the State Vehicle Code or the ordinances of this city, prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specific places or at specified times. 
(Ord. 827 § 56, 1951)  
11.32.050 - Parkways—Stopping in prohibited. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. 
(Ord. 827 § 57, 1951)  
11.32.060 - Vehicle storage on streets. 
A.  No person who owns or has possession, custody, or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than seventy-two consecutive hours. 
B.  In the event a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street for more than seventy-two consecutive hours, any member of the police department authorized by the chief of police may remove such vehicle from the street in the manner and subject to the requirements of Sections 22852 and 22853 or other applicable sections of the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 1117 § 1, 1965: Ord. 1024 § 3, 1962: Ord. 827 § 58, 1951)  
11.32.070 - Violation of restricted hours—Vehicle removal. 
In the event a vehicle is parked or left standing between seven a.m. and seven p.m. or between four a.m. and six a.m. upon a street where parking has been prohibited by resolution of the city council, and signs giving notice thereof are thereon erected, any member of the police department authorized by the chief of police may remove such vehicle from the street in the manner provided by and subject to the requirements of the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 1024 § 4, 1962: Ord. 827 § 59, 1951)  
11.32.080 - Storage or repair of vehicles prohibited. 
A.  Except for emergency repairs, no person shall grease or repair a vehicle upon any public street or public property. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person who deals in, or whose business involves the sale, lease, rental or charter of vehicles to store, park or stand any such vehicle upon any public street, except while such vehicle is under lease, rental or charter by a customer. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person whose business involves the repair or servicing of vehicles or vehicle components to store, stand or park any vehicle on any public street or public property after that person has accepted custody of that vehicle from the customer. 
(Ord. 2229 § 4, 2003: Ord. 827 § 60, 1951)  
11.32.090 - Parking parallel—Curb. 
A.  Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within eighteen inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing. 
B.  In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking. 
C.  The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways and shall erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. 827 § 61, 1951)  
11.32.100 - Angle loading—Permit. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permit may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and grants to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein, and it is unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. 
(Ord. 827 § 62, 1951)  
11.32.101 - Angle parking zones. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to place or cause to be placed pavement markings and signs designating angle parking zones when any resolution of this city designates such a zone on any street or portion of any street within the city. 
(Ord. 1900 (part), 1987: Ord. 1793, 1983)  
11.32.110 - Near schools. 
A.  The city traffic engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
B.  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Ord. 827 § 63, 1951)  
11.32.120 - Narrow streets. 
A.  The city traffic engineer is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty feet. 
B.  When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. 
(Ord. 827 § 64, 1951)  
11.32.130 - Hills. 
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway when upon any grade exceeding three percent within any business or residence district without blocking the wheels of such vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. 
(Ord. 827 § 65, 1951)  
11.32.140 - Stopping or parking prohibited—Signs required. 
The city traffic engineer shall appropriately sign or mark the following places and when so signed or marked no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of such places: 
A.  At any place within twenty feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the midblock end of a safety zone; 
B.  At any place within twenty-five feet of an intersection in the central traffic district or in any business district except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop; 
C.  Within twenty-five feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign, or official electric flashing device; 
D.  At any place where the city traffic engineer determines that it is necessary in order to eliminate unusual traffic hazard; 
E.  Except where a different distance is prescribed by council resolution, within fifty feet of any intersection marked with a sign that prohibits any vehicle whose height with or without a load exceeds six feet; 
F.  At any location where parking is restricted or prohibited between hours designated by resolution of the city council; 
G.  Any vehicle parked in violation of this section may also be towed after a parking citation has been issued, provided a sign has been posted authorizing the removal of vehicles parked in violation of such parking restriction. 
(Ord. 2267 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord. 827 § 66, 1951)  
11.32.150 - Unlawful parking—Vending by vehicle. 
A.  It is unlawful to park or stop a vehicle upon which merchandise is displayed or offered for sale or lease, upon any street, except upon the request of a purchaser and then only for the actual time necessary to consummate a sale, not to exceed a total of ten minutes at that location or at any immediately succeeding location that is within three hundred feet of the former location where the vendor completed the immediate last transaction. 
B.  The pick-up or delivery of merchandise is not regulated or made unlawful by this section. 
C.  The parking of a vehicle upon which merchandise is transported but is not being displayed or offered for sale is not made unlawful by this section, provided the vehicle is otherwise lawfully parked. 
D.  As used in this section, "merchandise" is as defined in Section 10.22.010C. 
(Ord. 2168 § 6, 1999: Ord. 1110 § 2, 1965; Ord. 827 § 67, 1951)  
11.32.160 - Emergency parking signs. 
A.  Whenever the city traffic engineer determines that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions or for other reasons, the city traffic engineer shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the city traffic engineer directs during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the city traffic engineer shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter. 
B.  When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. 
(Ord. 827 § 68, 1951)  
11.32.170 - Curb parking—Right-of-way. 
A.  For the purpose of this section, a "limited curb parking space" means an area open for lawful parking alongside of and adjacent to a curb, which area is not of sufficient length to permit two or more vehicles to freely move for parking therein at the same time. 
B.  Any person seeking to park his vehicle in a limited curb parking space whose vehicle arrives at said parking space prior to any other vehicle, and who proceeds beyond said space a distance not to exceed ten feet for the purpose of backing his vehicle therein, shall have the right-of-way over any person driving or attempting to drive any other vehicle directly into such limited curb parking space or who in any manner obstructs such limited curb parking space and the driver of such other vehicle shall immediately yield the right-of-way to the driver who first arrived at said parking space. 
C.  The city traffic engineer shall cause to be painted on the curb adjacent to each "limited curb parking space" lines demarcating the limits of said "limited curb parking space. 
D.  It is unlawful for any vehicle to be parked in front of, over or across any such line demarcating the boundary of a "limited curb parking space." 
(Ord. 945 § 1, 1959; Ord. 827 § 69, 1951)  
11.32.180 - Loading zone—Authority—Designation. 
A.  The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine and to mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows: 
1.  Any place in the central traffic district or any business district; 
2.  Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly. 
B.  In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes. 
C.  Loading zones shall be indicated by a yellow paint line stenciled with black letters, "LOADING ONLY," upon the top of all curbs within such zones. 
D.  Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by a white line stenciled with black letters, "PASSENGER LOADING ONLY," upon the tops of all curbs in said zones. 
(Ord. 827 § 70, 1951)  
11.32.190 - Curb markings. 
A.  The city traffic engineer is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this title to place, and when required herein shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and said curb markings shall have the meaning as herein set forth. 
1.  Red means no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone. 
2.  Yellow means no stopping, standing or parking at any time between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials, provided that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty minutes. 
3.  White means no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers which shall not exceed three minutes and such restrictions shall apply between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays and except as follows: When such zone is in front of a hotel or hospital, the restrictions shall apply at all times. When such zone is in front of a theater the restrictions shall apply at all times except when such theater is closed. 
4.  Green means no standing or parking for longer than fifteen minutes at any time between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays and shall be specifically designated by resolution of the city council. 
B.  When the city traffic engineer, as authorized under this title, has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the provisions of this section, and it is unlawful for any person not duly authorized, to paint or cause said curbs to be painted, 
(Ord. 827 § 71, 1951)  
11.32.200 - Loading permitted—Effect. 
A.  Permission herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials applies only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary there- for, and in no event for more than twenty minutes. 
B.  The loading or unloading of materials applies only to commercial deliveries, and the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages and United States mail. 
C.  Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers includes the loading or unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three minutes. 
D.  Within the total time limits above specified the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges hereby granted. 
(Ord. 827 § 72, 1951)  
11.32.210 - Loading zone—Restrictions—Generally. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material for such time as is permitted in Section 11.32.200. 
(Ord. 827 § 73, 1951)  
11.32.220 - Loading zone—Passenger—Restrictions. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time as is specified in Section 11.32.200. 
(Ord. 827 § 74, 1951)  
11.32.230 - Alley—Restrictions. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley, and shall not exceed such time as specified in Section 11.32.200. 
(Ord. 827 § 75, 1951)  
11.32.240 - Bus zones. 
A.  The city traffic engineer is authorized to establish bus zones opposite curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof subject to the directives and limitations set forth herein. 
B.  "Bus," as used in this section, means any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley coach, or passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers. 
C.  No bus zone shall exceed eighty feet in length, except that when satisfactory evidence has been presented to the city traffic engineer showing the necessity therefor, the city traffic engineer may extend bus zones not to exceed a total length of one hundred twenty-five feet. 
D.  Bus zones shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection. 
E.  No bus zone shall be established opposite and to the right of a safety zone. 
F.  The city traffic engineer shall cause to be painted a red line and stenciled with white letters "NO STANDING," together with the words "BUS ZONE" upon the top or side of all curbs and places specified as a bus zone. 
G.  No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle except a bus in a bus zone. 
(Ord. 827 § 76, 1951)  
11.32.250 - Taxi stands. 
A.  Subject to the approval of the city council, the chief of police and the traffic safety committee are authorized to establish taxicab stands opposite curb space for the standing of taxicabs duly licensed by the city, and to determine the location and number thereof. 
B.  The city traffic engineer shall cause such curb to be painted white and stenciled with black letters "NO STANDING," together with the words "TAXI STAND" upon the top or sides of all curbs and places specified as a taxicab stand. 
C.  No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle except a taxicab, duly licensed by National City, in a taxicab stand. 
D.  It is unlawful for the owner, driver, or operator of any taxicab to allow the taxicab to remain stopped or otherwise standing in the central traffic district except in a regularly established stand; provided, however, taxicabs may stop in any available parking space when actually loading or unloading passengers; provided, further, the taxicabs may stop, park, or stand in a place where parking is otherwise permitted between the hours of two a.m. and nine a.m. 
E.  In the event a vehicle is parked or left standing within a taxicab zone where parking has been prohibited by resolution or ordinance of the city council and signs giving notice thereof are thereon erected, any member of the police department authorized by the chief of police may remove such vehicle in the manner provided by and subject to the requirements of Section 22652(D) of the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 1111 § 1, 1965; Ord. 1096 § 1, 2, 1964; Ord. 827 § 77, 1951)  
11.32.260 - Time limit—Central traffic district. 
When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle within the central traffic district between the hours of seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for a period of time longer than one hour, unless and until changed by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 827 § 78, 1951)  
11.32.270 - Time limits—Other districts. 
When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle within a business district outside of the central traffic district or secondary traffic district between the hours of seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for a period of time longer than two hours, unless and until changed by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 827 § 79, 1951)  
11.32.280 - Time limits—Secondary traffic district. 
When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle within the secondary traffic district for a period of time longer than two hours at any time between the hours of seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays, unless and until changed by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 827 § 80, 1951)  
11.32.290 - Prohibited hours. 
When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon any street in the central traffic district between the hours of four-thirty a.m. and six p.m. or between four a.m. and six a.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials subject to the limitations of Section 11.32.200. 
(Ord. 1024 § 5, 1962: Ord. 827 § 81, 1951)  
11.32.300 - Absolutely prohibited. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any street hereinafter designated by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 827 § 82, 1951)  
11.32.310 - Temporary parking restrictions and time limit—Generally. 
It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle on any street in the city at any location where temporary signs have been installed by the city engineer prohibiting parking for purposes of maintaining or redirecting vehicular traffic during construction or street or utility service repair, provided at least twenty-four hours prior notice of such restriction has been given in accordance with California Vehicle Code Section 22651(l) or (m). Any installed sign may also authorize removal of a vehicle parked in violation of such parking restriction and such vehicle may thereafter be towed after a parking citation has been issued. 
(Ord. 2267 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord. 827 § 83, 1951)  
11.32.320 - Signs—Authorization. 
Signs provided in this article shall be authorized by resolution of the city council, and shall be erected on the street or streets set forth in such resolution. 
(Ord. 827 § 84, 1951)  
11.32.330 - Valet parking—Permits. 
The city council may grant by resolution permits for valet parking. Such permits shall be granted after receiving the recommendation of the chief of police and the traffic safety committee. 
(Ord. 1219 § 1, 1969)  
11.32.340 - Valet parking—Defined. 
"Valet parking" means a parking service conducted by the operator of private premises, through his own employees, in which customers' cars are taken from public loading zones and parked by the proprietor's employees. 
(Ord. 1219 § 2, 1969)  
11.32.350 - Valet parking—Spaces designated. 
The city council may designate by its resolution any parking spaces, as it may deem necessary, to be reserved for the use of the proprietor of a private business for the conduct of a valet parking service. The granting of permission to operate a valet parking service may be conditioned in such ways as the city council may deem proper. 
(Ord. 1219 § 3, 1969)  
11.32.360 - Heavy-duty commercial vehicles—Parking restrictions in all residential districts and east of National City Boulevard. 
A.  No person shall park any heavy-duty commercial vehicle more than three hours on a street in any residential district, except: 
1.  While actually loading or unloading property and the time to complete the evolution in addition to such three-hour period that is reasonably necessary to complete the work; 
2.  When such vehicle is parked in connection with, and in aid of, the performance of a service to or on a property, in the block in which such vehicle is parked and the time to complete the evolution in addition to such three-hour period is reasonably necessary to complete such service; or 
3.  Such vehicle is parked immediately in front or along side of premises actively devoted to industry or commerce and lying contiguous to the street. 
B.  Except as provided in subsection A of this section, no person shall park any heavy-duty commercial vehicle on any street east of and including National City Boulevard between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. daily. 
C.  For the purpose of this section, "heavy-duty commercial vehicle" means a single vehicle or combination of vehicles having more than two axles or weighing more than ten thousand pounds GVWR (gross vehicle weight rating), a single vehicle or combination of vehicles twenty feet or more in length, or a single vehicle or combination of vehicles six feet, eight inches or more in width, including dump trucks, moving vans, tractors, pole or pipe dollies, trailers and detached trailers or detached flatbed trailers. It shall not include a recreational vehicle. 
D.  For purposes of this section as authorized by California Vehicle Code Section 22507.5, a "residential district" means any street or streets where the contiguous property on that block is zoned for residential use pursuant to Chapter 18.14 of this code, including single-family detached dwellings, multifamily dwellings, apartment houses, or combination. It shall not include that area south of Division Street, west of National City Boulevard, north of 8th Street and east of Interstate 5. 
E.  Heavy-duty commercial vehicles parked in violation of subsection B of this section shall not be subject to citation until a minimum of twenty-four hours has elapsed following attachment of a notice to the vehicle directing its removal. The notice directing removal shall set forth the contents of this section and shall recite that the vehicle is in violation. After a particular vehicle has been tagged with a notice of removal and twenty-four hours has elapsed, parking citations may be issued thereafter for that vehicle for any further violations of this section without the necessity for further notice. 
F.  After a parking citation has been issued, any heavy-duty commercial vehicle parked in violation of this section may also be towed from any street upon which signage authorizing removal is posted, in addition to being subject to tow when parked for more than seventy-two consecutive hours pursuant to Section 11.32.060 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2267 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord. 1184, 1967) 
(Ord. No. 2016-2410, § 7, 3-15-2016)  
11.32.365 - Unattended heavy-duty detached trailers—Parking restrictions in commercial and industrial districts. 
A.  No person shall park any unattended heavy-duty detached trailer more than three hours on any street designated by city council resolution in a commercial or industrial district where signs are posted, except: 
1.  While actually loading or unloading property and the time to complete the evolution in addition to such three-hour period is reasonably necessary to complete the work; or 
2.  When such vehicle is parked in connection with, and in aid of, the actual performance of a service to or on a property in the block in which such vehicle is parked and the time to complete the evolution in addition to such three hour period is reasonably necessary to complete such service. 
B.  For the purpose of this section, an "unattached heavy-duty detached trailer" means a single trailer or combination of trailers having two axles or more or weighing more than ten thousand pounds GVWR (gross vehicle weight rating), any single trailer or combination of trailers twenty feet or more in length, or any single trailer or combination of trailers six feet, eight inches or more in width, including dump truck trailers, dollies, moving van trailers, pole or pipe dollies, house or travel trailers, or flat bed or enclosed trailers, none of which is attached to a truck, tractor or similar vehicle capable of towing, pulling or otherwise moving the trailer. 
C.  For purposes of this section, a "commercial or industrial district" means any block, street or streets where the contiguous property on that block is zoned for a commercial or industrial occupancy pursuant to Chapters 18.16 or 18.18 of this code. 
D.  After a parking citation has been issued, any unattended heavy-duty detached trailer parked in violation of this section may be towed from any street upon which signage authorizing removal is posted, in addition to being subject to tow when parked for more than seventy-two consecutive hours pursuant to Section 11.32.060 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2267 § 2 (part), 2005)  
11.32.366 - Parking recreational vehicles on city streets—Restricted. 
A.  The city council finds that the increase in the number of recreational vehicles parked on city streets, highways, alleys, public ways or public places, or public rights-of-way has a detrimental effect on the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents and negatively affects the quality of life in the city. The purpose and intent of the city council is to establish a process to allow a city resident to park the recreational vehicle on a city street for a limited period of time. 
B.  No person shall park or leave standing any recreational vehicle, whether motorized or not, whether attached to motorized vehicle or not, at any time upon any highway, street, alley, public way, or public place, except as otherwise allowed, in the City of National City except: 
1.  While a person is actively loading or unloading a recreational vehicle for a period not to exceed two hours; or 
2.  When the registered owner or lessor of a recreational vehicle is in possession of a permit issued pursuant to subsection 11.32.366.C. 
C.  For the purpose of this section, "recreational vehicle" shall include, but is not limited to the following: 
1.  Camp trailers (California Vehicle Code Section 242); 
2.  Fifth-wheel travel trailers (California Vehicle Code Section 324); 
3.  House cars (California Vehicle Code Section 362); 
4.  Trailer coaches (California Vehicle Code Section 635); 
5.  Mobile homes (California Vehicle Code Section 396); 
6.  Boats and/or trailers, including jet skis and/or jet ski trailers; 
7.  Dune buggies and off-road or all-terrain vehicles and/or trailers; 
8.  Trailers used for the transportation of equipment, vehicles, or animals; 
9.  Recreational vehicles (California Health & Safety Code Section 18010); 
10.  Folding camper trailers; 
11.  Any other motorized or towed vehicle designed, maintained or used primarily for recreational purposes. 
D.  Temporary Parking Permit Process. 
1.  The city manager, or designee, has the authority to adopt rules and regulations governing the permit process, and to issue permits for the parking of a recreational vehicle on a street if: 
a.  A written application is made to the city manager on a form established by the city manager, or designee; 
b.  The fees described in subsection 11.32.366.F are paid; and 
c.  The city manager, or designee, determines that the parking of the recreational vehicle will not create a safety hazard. 
2.  The permit shall be issued to a city resident or city property owner. 
3.  The permit shall include the name and address of the city resident or the city property owner, the license plate number of the recreational vehicle, the date of issuance, and the date(s) that the permit is valid. 
4.  The permit shall be valid only within the same block of the resident's or property owners' address, or upon a street adjacent to the resident's address, on either side of the street. 
5.  The permit shall be valid for no longer than twenty-four hours. 
6.  A city resident or city property owner may obtain no more than three permits at one time for a period of no longer than seventy-two consecutive hours. 
7.  A city resident or city property owner may not obtain more than six permits in any calendar month. A city resident or city property owner may not obtain more than seventy-two permits in any calendar year. 
8.  There shall be three days between the expiration of a permit, or if a city resident or city property owner obtained two or three permits at one time the expiration of the second or third permit, and the issuance of another permit to the same city resident or city property owner. 
9.  The city resident or city property owner shall display the permit in the recreational vehicle in such a manner that it is clearly visible to city enforcement officers. 
10.  The permitted recreational vehicle shall be subject to all applicable parking restrictions of the National City Municipal Code and the California Vehicle Code. 
11.  A city resident or city property owner in possession of a permit must comply with all state and local laws, including posted parking restrictions. 
12.  The fee for obtaining a permit shall be established by resolution of the city council. The fee shall be included in the city's fee schedule. 
E.  Any person violating this section is punishable as prescribed in Section 1.20.010. 
F.  As an alternative to subsection E., a violation of any provision of this Section may be punishable with an administrative citation or other civil or administrative remedy pursuant to Title 1 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2410, § 8, 3-15-2016)  
11.32.370 - Public parks. 
It is unlawful to park any motor vehicle in a public park in the city other than on a public street or in an area designated by signs as a public parking area. 
(Ord. 1205 (part), 1968)  
11.32.371 - Public property. 
It is unlawful to park or leave standing any motor vehicle on land owned or in possession of the city or the community development commission of the city, other than in an area designated for public parking. Where signs are posted giving notice of removal, any vehicle parked or left standing in violation of this section may be removed by the police department. 
(Ord. 1936, 1988)  
11.32.380 - Parking or obstruction of fire lane prohibited—Towing authorized. 
No vehicle shall be parked or obstruction maintained within a fire lane as defined in the Uniform Fire Code as adopted by this code. No owner or person in lawful possession or control of a fire lane shall allow the parking of a vehicle or maintenance of an obstruction to a fire lane as described herein. 
Any vehicle or obstruction which violates this section may be removed by city employees or a designated representative of the city. Vehicles shall only be removed as provided in the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 1774, 1982)  
11.32.390 - Unauthorized parking in reserved parking spaces prohibited. 
No person, other than the person for whom the parking space is reserved, shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within a reserved parking space located on any off-street parking facility owned or operated by the city. Any vehicle parked in violation of this section is subject to removal by the police department. All reserved parking spaces shall be appropriately marked by a permanent sign and/or pavement markings installed by the city traffic engineer. 
(Ord. 1880, 1986)  
11.32.400 - Parking violation—Penalties. 
A.  The registered owner, lessee or renter of a vehicle cited for violation of the provisions of Chapter 7.18 or 11.32 of this code or the California Vehicle Code shall pay the fine as indicated within twenty-one days from the date the citation was issued. 
B.  The failure of the registered owner, lessee or renter of the cited vehicle to pay the parking fine within twenty-one days of the issuance of the citation shall result in the penalty being increased to double the amount of the original penalty amount, i.e., penalty x 2. 
C.  Parking penalty fines are set to amounts consistent with the then current recommendations of the San Diego County parking penalty committee, on file in the office of the city clerk, in accordance with Vehicle Code Section 40203.5(a). 
D.  In accordance with Vehicle Code Section 4760, the city shall file an itemization of unpaid parking penalties, including administrative fees and the amount of costs of the city for costs of service, with the Department of Motor Vehicles for collection with the registration of the vehicle. 
(Ord. 2189, 2001: Ord. 2067, 1993: Ord. 1992, 1990: Ord. 1902, 1987)  
Chapter 11.34 - TRUCK IDLING AND PARKING MANEUVERS NEAR A SCHOOL OR RESIDENCE 
Sections: 
 
11.34.010 - Findings and purpose. 
A.  Air Pollution is a Public Health Concern in California. The San Diego Air Basin is currently designated as nonattainment for the state and federal ozone standard, and the state's particulate matter standards. Air pollution can cause or aggravate illnesses such as acute respiratory infections, asthma, chronic bronchitis, emphysema, and lung cancer. In addition to health impacts, air pollution imposes significant economic costs and negative impacts on our quality of life (nuisance). 
B.  The purpose of this chapter is to reduce public exposure to diesel particulate matter and other air contaminates by limiting the idling and practice of parking maneuvers of diesel fueled commercial vehicles. The purpose of this chapter is also to reduce such exposure especially to school-age children. 
C.  The air resources board identified diesel exhaust particulate matter as a toxic air contaminant. Particulate matter (PM-10) can collect in lungs where it can increase the number and severity of asthma attacks, cause aggravated bronchitis, and cause other lung diseases. Particulate matter can also exacerbate other illnesses. Ozone is a strong irritant which can restrict airways, resulting in difficulty breathing and forcing respiratory and cardiovascular systems to work harder. Chronic exposure reduces lung capacity, lower stamina, and leaves people vulnerable to long-term respiratory problems. Ozone is especially harmful to children, senior citizens and those suffering from asthma or existing heart and lung disease. 
D.  Public agencies can play an important role in improving air quality by limiting the amount of time engines are allowed to idle within their jurisdiction. Public agencies have the responsibility to lead the effort to improve air quality by adopting ordinances that are cost-effective in reducing ozone precursor emissions and toxic air contaminants. 
E.  A study of idling exhaust emissions conducted by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA420-R-02-025, October 2002) indicates that a typical 1980's—2001 model year truck operating on diesel fuel emits one hundred forty-four grams per hour of nitrogen oxide and eight thousand two hundred twenty-four grams per hour of carbon dioxide emissions and consumes about 0.82 gallons of diesel fuel per hour while idling. 
F.  A limitation on engine idling is established by the city of National City to discourage the idling of engines in the city. 
G.  The practice of commercial vehicles practicing repeated parking maneuvers near schools and residences contributes to the emission of toxic air contaminates in a manner similar to idling. A limitation on practicing parking maneuvers near schools and residences is established to discourage the emissions of toxic air contaminates. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.34.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
A.  "Commercial motor vehicle" means any vehicle or combination of vehicles as defined in Vehicle Code Section 15210(b) and any other motor truck with a gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand one pounds or more, except for either a zero-emission vehicle or a pickup truck as defined in Vehicle Code Section 471. 
B.  "Driver" means any person who drives, operates, or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
C.  "Emergency" means sudden, urgent, usually unforeseen occurrence. 
D.  "Gross vehicle weight rating" means the weight specified by the manufacturer as the maximum loaded weight of a single vehicle. 
E.  "Idling" means the engine is running while the vehicle is stationary. 
F.  "Official traffic control device" means any sign, signal, marking or device, consistent with Vehicle Code Section 21400, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic, but does not include islands, curbs, traffic barriers, speed humps, speed bumps or other roadway design features. 
G.  "Official traffic control signal" means any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and proceed and which is erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction. 
H.  "Vehicle" means any on-road, self-propelled vehicle that is required to be registered and have a license plate by the Department of Motor Vehicles. 
I.  "Vehicle/equipment owner" means the registered owner, lessee, licensee or bailee of any heavy- or medium-duty vehicle who operates or directs the operation of any such vehicle on either a for hire or not for hire basis. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.34.030 - Applicability. 
This chapter applies to all diesel fueled commercial motor vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating over ten thousand pounds. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.34.040 - Idling. 
A.  A driver of a commercial motor vehicle: 
1.  Shall turn off the engine upon stopping at a destination; 
2.  Shall not cause or allow an engine to idle at any location for more than five consecutive minutes; and 
3.  Shall not cause or allow a vehicle to idle at any location within one hundred feet of a school for: 
a.  More than five consecutive minutes, or 
b.  A period or periods aggregating more than five minutes in any one hour. 
B.  A private property owner shall not allow a vehicle located on the owner's property to violate the provisions of this chapter. A private property owner shall notify owners and operators of vehicles entering the owner's private property of the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.34.050 - Exemptions. 
A.  This chapter does not apply to a vehicle for the period or periods during which: 
1.  Idling is necessary while stopped: 
a.  For an official traffic control device, 
b.  For an official traffic control signal, 
c.  For traffic conditions over which the driver has no control, including, but not limited to, stopped in a line of traffic, stopped at a railroad crossing, or stopped at a construction zone, or 
d.  At the direction of a peace officer; 
2.  Idling is necessary to ascertain that the vehicle is in safe operating condition, equipped as required by all provisions of law, and all equipment is in good working order, either as part of the daily vehicle inspection or as otherwise needed, provided that such engine idling is mandatory for such verification; 
3.  Idling is necessary for testing, servicing, repairing or diagnostic purposes; 
4.  Idling is necessary for a period not to exceed three to five minutes (as per the recommendation of the manufacturer) to cool down a turbo charged heavy-duty vehicle before turning the engine off; 
5.  Idling is necessary to accomplish work for which the vehicle/equipment was designed, other than transporting goods, such as operating a lift, crane, pump, drill, hoist, mixer or other auxiliary equipment other than a heater or air conditioner; 
6.  Idling is necessary to operate a lift or other piece of equipment designed to ensure safe loading and unloading of goods and people; 
7.  Idling is necessary to operate defrosters, heaters, air conditioners, or other equipment to prevent a safety or health emergency, but not solely for the comfort of the driver or passengers. 
a.  The only exception for driver comfort would be a vehicle driver that is required to have rest time by law. In this case, the driver may only idle at a designated rest area or truck stop and will not idle within one thousand feet of a residential area or school, 
b.  The only specific exception for passenger comfort would be vehicles with a passenger onboard with a disability or health condition that would be critically aggravated if the vehicle were not maintained at an adequate temperature, 
c.  In the event idling is necessary to operate defrosters, heaters, air conditioners, or other equipment to prevent a safety or health emergency, but not solely for the comfort of the driver or passengers, such idling shall not occur within one hundred feet of a residence or a school; 
8.  Idling is necessary solely to recharge a battery or other energy storage unit of a hybrid electric vehicle/equipment; 
9.  Idling is necessary to operate equipment that runs intermittently. 
B.  Nothing in this chapter allows idling in excess of other applicable laws, including but not limited to: 
1.  Title 13 Code of Regulations Section 2480—Requirements/restriction of idling near a school. 
2.  Title 13 Code of Regulations Section 2485—Requirement/restriction of idling. 
3.  Vehicle Code Section 22515—Requirements for leaving a motor vehicle unattended. 
4.  Any local provision of this code or requirement as stringent as, or more stringent than, this chapter. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.34.060 - Practicing parking maneuvers. 
A.  A driver of a commercial motor vehicle shall not practice parallel parking, angled parking, perpendicular parking, or any type of parking, for the purpose of driver instruction, improvement, or education, within one hundred feet of a school. 
B.  A driver of a commercial motor vehicle shall not practice parallel parking, angled parking, perpendicular parking, or any type of parking, for the purpose of driver instruction, improvement, or education, within one hundred feet of a residential neighborhood. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.34.070 - Enforcement. 
This chapter may be enforced by the local air pollution control or air quality management district, and/or any peace officer as defined in Penal Code Section 830 et seq., and their respective agencies authorized representative(s). 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.34.080 - Penalty. 
Any violation of this chapter for which a penalty is not provided shall be punished according to Chapter 11.12 of this code. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.34.090 - Severability of provisions. 
The city council declares that the invalidity of any section or portion of this chapter shall not affect the validity of any other remaining section or portion; that the council would have adopted each of those remaining portions, notwithstanding any later declared invalidity. If any provision is determined by a court to be invalid, it shall be severed, or if it can be judicially interpreted in a way that would harmonize it with the remaining provisions, then it may be applied as interpreted, so as to give full purpose, meaning and effect to the remaining provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 11.36 - MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES 
Sections: 
 
11.36.010 - Driving through funeral processions. 
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between vehicles comprising a funeral procession while they are in motion and when the vehicles in such processions are conspicuously so designated. 
(Ord. 827 § 43, 1951)  
11.36.020 - Clinging to moving vehicles. 
Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, roller skates or any toy vehicle shall not attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway. 
(Ord. 827 § 44, 1951)  
11.36.030 - Driving on sidewalk. 
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area or any parkway except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Ord. 827 § 45, 1951)  
11.36.040 - New pavement. 
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted marking in any street when a barrier or sign is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when a sign is in place stating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. 
(Ord. 827 § 46, 1951)  
11.36.050 - Restricted access. 
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority. 
(Ord. 827 § 47, 1951)  
11.36.060 - Freeway use. 
No person shall drive or operate any bicycle, or any vehicle which is not drawn by a motor vehicle upon any street established as a freeway, as defined by the Vehicle Code, nor shall any pedestrian walk across or along any such street so designated and described except in space set aside for the use of pedestrians, provided official signs are in place giving notice of such restrictions. 
(Ord. 827 § 48, 1951)  
11.36.070 - Traffic control devices—Damaging. 
It is unlawful for any person to tear down, damage, mutilate or destroy any sign, sign-board, notice or traffic signal placed or affixed by the city, which sign is intended to direct or regulate traffic within the city. 
(Ord. 827 § 49, 1951)  
11.36.080 - Vehicles on private property. 
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in a private driveway or on private property without the direct or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such driveway or property. 
(Ord. 827 § 50, 1951)  
11.36.090 - Driving in park—Prohibited. 
A.  Definitions. 
1.  As used in this section, "motor vehicle" includes automobiles, motorcycles, motor bikes or any device which derives its motive power from internal combustion engines. 
2.  A "public park" is any land within the corporate limits which has been dedicated and accepted as a public park. 
3.  As used in this section "public street" means any street, roadway, or highway, or alley, or court dedicated to and accepted as a public street. 
B.  Driving in Parks Prohibited. It is unlawful to operate a motor vehicle in a public park in the city other than on a public street. 
(Ord. 1205 (part), 1968)  
11.36.100 - Driving in park—Violation—Penalty. 
A violation of Sections 11.36.090 through 11.36.120 is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of five hundred dollars and/or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months. 
(Ord. 1205 (part), 1968)  
11.36.110 - Driving in park—Damage. 
Any person who violates Sections 11.36.090 through 11.36.120 and thereby causes damages to public park property shall be responsible for the cost of repairing said damage. 
(Ord. 1205 (part), 1968)  
11.36.120 - Driving in park—Permitted. 
The city council may suspend the application of Sections 11.36.090 through 11.36.120 to any person or persons, for the purpose of conducting special events in public parks. 
(Ord. 1205 (part), 1968)  
Chapter 11.40 - STREET USE RESTRICTIONS 
Sections: 
 
11.40.010 - Central traffic district—Prohibited vehicles. 
A.  Except on state highways, no person shall operate any of the following vehicles in the central traffic district between the hours of seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day: 
1.  Any freight vehicle more than eight and one-half feet in width, with load, or any freight vehicle so loaded that any part of its load extends more than twenty feet to the front or rear of said vehicle; 
2.  Any vehicle carrying building material that has not been loaded, or is not to be unloaded, at some point within the central traffic district; 
3.  Any freight vehicle with a trailer; 
4.  Any vehicle conveying refuse, rubbish, garbage or dirt; 
5.  Any vehicle carrying crude or fuel oil. 
B.  Provided that the chief of police may by written permit authorize the operation of any such vehicle for the purpose of making necessary emergency deliveries to or from points within the central traffic district. 
(Ord. 827 § 85, 1951)  
11.40.020 - Advertising vehicles. 
No person shall operate or drive any vehicle used for advertising purposes or any advertising vehicle equipped with a sound-amplifying or loud speaking device upon any street or alley at any time within the central traffic district. 
(Ord. 827 § 86, 1951)  
11.40.030 - Horse-drawn vehicles. 
No person shall drive any animal-drawn vehicle into or within the central traffic district between the hours of four-thirty p.m. and six p.m. of any day. 
(Ord. 827 § 87, 1951)  
11.40.040 - Trains—Blocking streets prohibited. 
No person shall operate any train or train of cars, or permit the same to remain standing so as to block the movement of traffic upon any street for a period of time longer than five minutes. 
(Ord. 827 § 88, 1951)  
11.40.050 - Truck routes—Designated. 
The following streets are designated as traffic routes for the movement of motor vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight of six thousand pounds: 
A.  Main Street from the north boundary of the city to the easterly line of Roosevelt Avenue; 
B.  Roosevelt Avenue from the southerly line of Main Street to the intersection with West Avenue and thereafter continuing on West Avenue to West Avenue's intersection with National Avenue. 
C.  National Avenue from the north line of 18th Street to the southerly boundary line of the city. 
(Ord. 857 § 1, 1954)  
11.40.060 - Truck routes—Use required. 
All motor vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight of six thousand pounds are prohibited from using all other streets within said city, excepting commercial vehicles using any such street by direct route to and from the through routes for the movement of motor vehicles of more than six thousand pounds specified in Section 11.40.050, for the purpose of delivering or loading for transportation goods, wares or merchandise, and also excepting any vehicle which is subject to the provisions of Section 50 1/4 of the Public Utilities Act, and also excepting any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility. 
(Ord. 857 § 2, 1954)  
11.40.070 - Truck routes—Signs marking. 
Appropriate signs indicating the through traffic routes prescribed in Section 11.40.050 shall be erected by order of the city manager at such points as may be designated by the chief of police as being best to serve notice of such routes, and thereafter it shall be the duty of the superintendent of streets to see that said signs indicating such through traffic routes will best serve notice of Sections 11.40.050 through 11.40.080. 
(Ord. 857 § 3, 1954)  
11.40.080 - Truck routes—Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of Sections 11.40.050 through 11.40.070 is guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as prescribed in Section 1.20.010. 
(Ord. 1621, 1978; Ord. 1358 § 2 (part), 1973: Ord. 857 § 4, 1954)  
11.40.090 - Manchester Avenue—Trucks prohibited. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 11.40.060, pursuant to the authority given to city by the Vehicle Code of California, the use of Manchester Avenue by any commercial vehicle or by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of five tons is prohibited. This prohibition shall not apply to any vehicle which is subject to the provisions of Sections 1030 to 1036, inclusive, of the Public Utilities Code of California. 
(Ord. 1027 § 1, 1962; Ord. 857 § 8a, 1954)  
11.40.100 - Van Ness and Granger Avenues—Trucks prohibited. 
A.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 11.40.060, pursuant to the authority given to the city by Section 33701 of the Vehicle Code of California, the use of Van Ness Avenue from the southerly line of 20th Street to the northerly line of Leonard Street and of Granger Avenue from the southerly line of 24th Street to the northerly line of Leonard Street by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of five tons is hereby prohibited. This prohibition shall not apply to any vehicle which is subject to the provisions of Sections 1030 to 1036, inclusive, of the Public Utilities Code of California. 
B.  This section shall not be effective until appropriate signs are erected on Van Ness and Granger Avenue indicating that its use by the vehicles described in paragraph (a) is prohibited. 
(Ord. 1875, 1986: Ord. 857, 1954)  
11.40.110 - Transportation permit required. 
No person shall move or cause to be moved over or across any public right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the city, any oversized vehicle or load, which exceeds the height, width, length, size or weight of vehicle or load limitation provided for in Division 15 of the Vehicle Code of the state of California, without first obtaining a transportation permit from the office of the city engineer, which will be subject to the following regulations: 
A.  A transportation permit may be designated by the city engineer as either a single-move transportation permit for the movement of an oversized vehicle or load over a designated route, and for a move on a specified date or dates, or an annual or repetitive transportation permit issued for the period specified on the permit. Repetitive load transportation permit may be issued on the type of vehicle carrying the load in the case of nonself-propelled vehicles, and on the specific vehicle in the case of the nonself-propelled vehicles, and on the specific vehicle in the case of the self-propelled vehicles. Repetitive load permits shall authorize the movement of the vehicles, or loads specified on the permit; provided however, that the vehicle or load shall not exceed a width of thirteen feet, a height of sixteen feet, or a length of one hundred feet. If the load proposed under the repetitive load transportation permit exceeds the weight limits as prescribed in Division 15 of the Vehicle Code of the state of California by more than twenty-five percent, said move shall be subject to such route restrictions as are designated by the city engineer. 
B.  The city engineer shall use a standard transportation permit form established by the department of transportation. 
C.  The applicant for a transportation permit shall be a person licensed as a specialty contractor by the state to engage in the business of moving oversized vehicles or loads. 
D.  Application for a transportation permit shall be made to the office of the city engineer a minimum of twenty-four hours prior to the time proposed for the move. 
E.  The transportation permit application shall include a sketch showing the approved route for the particular vehicle or load being moved, and no other route shall be utilized. 
F.  At the time of making application for a permit pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall attach or have on file with the city a certificate of insurance showing comprehensive, general liability insurance with a minimum of one million dollars per single occurrence, covering all bodily injury and property damage arising out of its operation under this agreement, and vehicle insurance covering all bodily injury and property liability incurred during the moving period, with a minimum coverage of one million dollars per accident; such vehicle insurance shall include non-owned auto. 
If any insurance coverage required is provided on a "claims made" rather than "occurrence" form, such insurance coverage shall be maintained for three years after expiration of the term of this permit. 
The certificate of insurance shall show the city as an additional insured under the policy of the insurance in effect. The certificate of insurance shall further indicate the city will be entitled to at least ten days' written notice of cancellation of the policy of insurance. 
G.  Governmental agencies, including the state and its political subdivisions, will not be required to provide the insurance required by this section, but shall be required to indemnify and hold the city harmless from any loss arising out of injury to persons, or damage to property, resulting directly or indirectly from the operation permitted by the transportation permit, including the defense of any action arising therefrom, at no cost to the city. 
H.  The applicant shall submit at the time of the application or have on file with the city a copy of his policy of workers' compensation insurance, which shall be in force during the moving period. 
I.  The applicant shall submit at the time of application, a copy of his city business license and/or valid business license number. 
J.  The applicant shall comply at all times with the California Vehicle Code. 
K.  All moving operations under a transportation permit shall be in conformance with all general and special conditions set forth by the city engineer on said permit. 
L.  The permittee shall have the responsibility to ascertain the adequacy of the route requested for the move. When an over-height load is authorized (over thirteen feet, six inches), the permittee shall check all underpasses, bridges, overhead wires, and other limiting structures or facilities for adequate clearance. The permittee shall notify the owners of all overhead lines or structures subject to disturbances or damage by his move and shall make arrangements for the temporary removal or relocation of the conflicting facility if required. The permittee shall bear all costs for such relocation where the facility is located in accordance with state and local regulations. 
M.  For any move involving a load or vehicle whose vertical height is eighteen feet or over, or whose width is thirty feet or more, the permittee shall submit to the agencies whose facilities will be affected by such move the proposed route for approval at least seventy-two hours in advance of the move. No permit shall be issued until clearances have been received from the power company and telephone company. Applicant shall be responsible for obtaining such clearance. 
N.  Transportation permits shall be carried on the vehicle whose movement is authorized by such permit, and shall be available for inspection by any police officer, or any authorized agent of the city. Transportation permits issued pursuant hereto shall be nontransferable. 
O.  The city engineer shall not issue a transportation permit if any one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  If the overweight per axle exceeds the limits provided in Division 15 of the Vehicle Code of the state of California by fifty percent; 
2.  If the move is determined by the city engineer to be prohibitive from the standpoint of public safety or contrary to the public interest; 
3.  If the applicant has repeatedly violated conditions of previously issued permits, or the applicant has unsettled claims against him for damages resulting from past moves; 
4.  If the applicant has failed to obtain a permit on the next regularly scheduled working day following interim approval for an emergency move. 
P.  Permit fees required subject to the following regulations: 
1.  The fee for a transportation permit within/or through the city shall be fifteen dollars for a single move and seventy dollars for an annual or repetitive permit. The fee shall not exceed the fee schedule developed by the department of transportation. Special services necessitated by unusually large or heavy loads requiring engineering investigations, escorts, tree trimming, or other services shall be billed separately for each permit. 
2.  Permit fees required in this chapter shall be collected by the finance department in an amount as designated. 
3.  Governmental agencies, including the state and any of its political subdivisions, shall make application for permits under the provisions of this chapter, and shall be issued a no-fee permit in accordance with the provisions herein. A contractor working for a governmental agency shall not be considered to be acting on behalf of that governmental agency and shall not be exempt from the payment of fees. 
4.  An extension of the effective date or an amendment to a single-move permit may be made without payment of additional fees if approved by the city engineer, provided that the request for such extension or amendment is received before the expiration of the permit. 
Q.  Permittee shall provide "wide load" signs as necessary to be visible from both the front and rear of all loads in excess of ten feet in width. Signs shall be at least three feet by five feet in dimension; shall have a yellow background with black lettering; shall spell out "WIDE LOAD" in bold letters; and shall have an amber flasher mounted on each of the upper corners of the sign. 
R.  In case of damage to any street or other public improvement by reason of the moving of any vehicle or load covered by the transportation permit, the city shall cause such work to be done as may be necessary to restore the public street improvement to an equal condition as it was prior to such damage, and shall charge the cost thereof to the permit- tee. Such damages as occur may be recovered from the insurance required under subsection E of this section. 
S.  Movement of oversize loads and/or vehicles shall be prohibited during the hours of darkness (one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise), and between the hours of seven a.m. and nine a.m., and three p.m. and six p.m., unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
T.  For moves which, because of their emergency nature, require approval during periods other than the regularly scheduled working hours of the city engineer or chief of police, authorized representatives thereof may grant approval for such moves on the condition that a permit will be acquired during the next regularly scheduled working day. Failure to acquire such permits may result in disqualification for obtaining future permits. 
(Ord. 1998 § 2, 1990: Ord. 1940 § 2, 1988)  
Chapter 11.42 - SPECTATORS PROHIBITED AT ILLEGAL SPEED CONTESTS OR EXHIBITIONS OF SPEED 
Sections: 
 
11.42.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The city council for the city finds and declares that pursuant to California Vehicle Code section 23109, motor vehicle speed contests and exhibitions of speed conducted on public streets and highways are illegal. Motor vehicle speed contests and exhibitions of speed are more commonly known as street races or drag races. 
B.  Such street racing threatens the health and safety of the public, interferes with pedestrian and vehicular traffic, creates a public nuisance, and interferes with the right of private business owners to enjoy the use of their property within the city. When illegal street races occur on various streets within the city, racers and spectators gather on these streets late at night and in the early morning hours, blocking the streets and sidewalks to traffic, forming a racetrack area, placing bets, and otherwise encouraging, aiding, and abetting the racing process. 
C.  Illegal street racers can accelerate to high speeds without regard to oncoming traffic, pedestrians, or vehicles parked or moving nearby. The racers can drive quickly from street to street, race for several hours, and then move to other locations upon the arrival of the police. Participants in this illegal activity use cell phones, police scanners, and other electronic devices to communicate with each other to avoid arrest. Participants also use the Internet to provide information on where to race, and give advice on how to avoid detection and prosecution. 
D.  In many cases, illegal street races can attract hundreds of spectators. The mere presence of spectators at these events fuels the illegal street racing and creates an environment in which these illegal activities can flourish. 
E.  This chapter is adopted to prohibit spectators at illegal street races with the aim of significantly curbing this criminal activity. The division targets a very clear, limited population and gives proper notice to citizens as to what activities are lawful and what activities are unlawful. In discouraging spectators, the act of organizing and participating in illegal street races will be discouraged. 
F.  This chapter makes evidence of specified prior acts admissible to show the propensity of the defendant to be present at or attend illegal street races, if the prior act or acts occurred within three years of the presently charged offense. 
(Ord. 2214 § 1 (part), 2002)  
11.42.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Illegal motor vehicle speed contest" or "illegal exhibition of speed" means any speed contest or exhibition of speed referred to in California Vehicle Code sections 23109(a) and 23109(c). 
B.  "Preparations for the illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed" include, but are not limited to, situations in which: (1) a group of motor vehicles or individuals has arrived at a location for the purpose of participating in or being spectators at the event; (2) a group of individuals has lined one or both sides of a public street or highway for the purpose of participating in or being a spectator at the event; (3) a group of individuals has gathered on private property open to the general public without the consent of the owner, operator, or agent thereof for the purpose of participating in or being a spectator at the event; (4) one or more individuals has impeded the free public use of a public street or highway by actions, words, or physical barriers for the purpose of conducting the event; (5) two or more vehicles have lined up with motors running for an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed; (6) one or more drivers is revving the vehicle's engine or spinning its tires in preparation for the event; or (7) an individual is stationed at or near one or more motor vehicles serving as a race starter. 
C.  "Spectator" means any individual who is present at an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed, or at a location where preparations are being made for such activities, for the purpose of viewing, observing, watching, or witnessing the event as it progresses. Spectator includes any individual at the location of the event without regard to whether the individual arrived at the event by driving a vehicle, riding as a passenger in a vehicle, walking, or arriving by some other means. 
(Ord. 2214 § 1 (part), 2002)  
11.42.030 - Spectator at illegal speed contests or exhibitions of speed—Violation. 
A.  Any individual who is knowingly present as a spectator, either on a public street or highway, or on private property open to the general public without the consent of the owner, operator, or agent thereof, at an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed is guilty of a misdemeanor subject to a maximum of ninety days in jail and a fine of five hundred dollars. 
B.  Any individual who is knowingly present as a spectator, either on a public street or highway, or on private property open to the general public without the consent of the owner, operator, or agent thereof, where preparations are being made for an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a maximum of ninety days in jail and a fine of five hundred dollars. 
C.  An individual is present at the illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed if that individual is within two hundred feet of the location of the event, or within two hundred feet of the location where preparations are being made for the event. 
D.  Exemption: Nothing in this section shall prohibit or make illegal law enforcement officers or their agents from being spectators at illegal motor vehicle speed contests or exhibitions of speed in the course of their official duties. 
(Ord. 2214 § 1 (part), 2002)  
11.42.040 - Relevant circumstances to prove a violation. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, to prove a violation of Section 11.42.030, admissible evidence may include, but is not limited to, any of the following: 
A.  The time of day; 
B.  The nature and description of the scene; 
C.  The number of people at the scene; 
D.  The location of the individual charged in relation to any individual or group present at the scene; 
E.  The number and description of motor vehicles at the scene; 
F.  That the individual charged drove or was transported to the scene; 
G.  That the individual charged has previously participated in an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed; 
H.  That the individual charged has previously aided and abetted an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed; 
I.  That the individual charged has previously attended an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed; or 
J.  That the individual charged previously was present at a location where preparations were being made for an illegal speed contest or exhibition of speed or where an exhibition of speed or illegal motor vehicle speed contest was in progress. 
(Ord. 2214 § 1 (part), 2002)  
11.42.050 - Admissibility of prior acts. 
The list of circumstances set forth in Section 11.42.040 is not exclusive. Evidence of prior acts may be admissible to show the propensity of the defendant to be present at or attend an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed, if the prior act or acts occurred within three years of the presently charged offense. These prior acts may always be admissible to show knowledge on the part of the defendant that a speed contest or exhibition of speed was taking place at the time of the presently charged offense. Evidence of prior acts shall not be limited to those that occurred within the city, and may include evidence of such acts from other jurisdictions within the county of San Diego. 
(Ord. 2214 § 1 (part), 2002)  
11.42.060 - Enforcement. 
Enforcement of this chapter shall be under the jurisdiction of the chief of police. 
(Ord. 2214 § 1 (part), 2002)  
Chapter 11.44 - PEDESTRIANS 
Sections: 
 
11.44.010 - Crosswalks—Established. 
The city traffic engineer shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway as follows: 
A.  Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at all intersections within the central traffic district and at such intersections outside such district, and at other places within or outside said district where the city traffic engineer determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway subject to the limitation contained in subsection B of this section. 
B.  Other than crosswalks at intersections no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than four hundred feet in length. Elsewhere not more than one additional crosswalk shall be established in any one block and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at midblock. 
(Ord. 827 § 51, 1951)  
11.44.020 - Crosswalks—Use required. 
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in the central traffic district or in any business district, or on a through street when the required signs are erected giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. 827 § 52, 1951)  
11.44.030 - Crossing at right angles. 
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except in a marked crosswalk. 
(Ord. 827 § 53, 1951)  
11.44.040 - Standing in roadways. 
No person shall stand in any roadway other than in a safety zone or in a crosswalk if such action interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. This section shall not apply to any public officer or employee or employee of a public utility when necessarily upon a street in the line of duty. 
(Ord. 827 § 54, 1951)  
11.44.050 - Stopping, standing, sitting or lying down on public sidewalks. 
A.  No person shall stop or stand on a public sidewalk in any commercial zone between the hours of seven a.m. and ten p.m. except as near as reasonably possible to an adjacent building or curb line. 
B.  No person shall sit or lie down upon a public sidewalk, or upon a blanket, chair, stool or any other object placed upon a public sidewalk, between the hours of seven a.m. and ten p.m. in any commercial zone. 
C.  The prohibitions in subsections A and B of this section shall not apply to any person: 
1.  Stopping, standing, sitting or lying down on a public sidewalk due to a medical emergency; 
2.  Who, as the result of disability, utilizes a wheelchair, walker, or similar device to move about the public sidewalk; 
3.  Operating or patronizing a commercial establishment conducted on the public sidewalk pursuant to a temporary use permit; or a person participating in or attending a parade, festival, performance, rally, demonstration, meeting, or similar event conducted on the public sidewalk pursuant to a temporary use or other applicable permit; 
4.  Stopping or standing near, or sitting on a chair or bench located on the public sidewalk which is supplied by a public agency or by the abutting private property owner; 
5.  Stopping or standing near, or sitting on a public sidewalk within a bus stop while waiting for public or private transportation. 
D.  No person shall be cited under this section unless the person engages in conduct prohibited by this section after having been notified by a police officer that the conduct violates this section. 
(Ord. 2106 § 1, 1996: Ord. 827 § 55, 1951)  
Chapter 11.48 - PUBLIC NUISANCE VEHICLES 
Sections: 
 
11.48.010 - Findings. 
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city council makes the following findings and declarations: 
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property not including highways is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property not including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1433 § 1 (part), 1974)  
11.48.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Highway" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Highway includes street. 
B.  "Owner of the land" means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
C.  "Owner of the vehicle" means the last registered owner and legal owner of record. 
D.  "Public property" does not include "highway." 
E.  "Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. 1433 § 1 (part), 1974)  
11.48.030 - Exclusions. 
This chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building or behind a solid fence in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
B.  A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise. 
Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this chapter. 
(Ord. 1433 § 2, 1974)  
11.48.040 - Regulations not exclusive. 
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 1433 § 3, 1974)  
11.48.050 - Administration and enforcement. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the city manager. In the enforcement of this chapter such officer and his deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 1433 § 4, 1974)  
11.48.060 - Removal contractor—Property entry right. 
When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 1433 § 5, 1974)  
11.48.070 - Administrative costs determination. 
The city council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or parts thereof) under this chapter. 
(Ord. 1433 § 6, 1974)  
11.48.080 - Abatement—Authorization. 
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the city, the city manager shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1433 § 7, 1974)  
11.48.090 - Abatement—Notices. 
A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered or certified mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms: 
"NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND 
REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, 
DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE 
VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS 
A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
(Name and address of owner of the land) 
 As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to (section of ordinance or municipal code) has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle registered to ___________, license number ___________, which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of (ordinance or municipal code chapter number). 
 You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the City of National City and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located. 
 As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the City Clerk within such 10-day period, the City Manager shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such 10-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle, or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing. 
Notice Mailed 	___ 	s/ 	___ 
	(date) 		(City Manager)" 
 
"NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND 
REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, 
DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE 
VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS 
A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle—notice should be given to both if different) 
 As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle - make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to (section of ordinance or municipal code) has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of (ordinance or municipal code chapter number). 
 You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice. 
 As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the (hearing body or officer) within such 10-day period, the City Manager shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing. 
Notice Mailed 	___ 	s/ 	___ 
	(date) 		(City Manager)" 
 
(Ord. 1958, 1988; Ord. 1433 § 8, 1974)  
11.48.100 - Abatement—Hearing—Requests. 
Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the city manager within ten days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the city council on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located. 
If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such ten-day period, the statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within ten days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the city shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. 
(Ord. 1433 § 9, 1974)  
11.48.110 - Abatement—Hearing—Procedures. 
All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the city council which shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. The facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the private property or public property. The city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing, or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial. 
The city council may impose such conditions and take such other action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council may find that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the city council shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land. 
If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the city council but does not appear, he shall be notified in writing of the decision. 
(Ord. 1433 § 10, 1974)  
11.48.120 - Vehicle disposal. 
Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, five days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision if such notice is required by Section 11.48.110, or fifteen days after such action of the governing body authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable, unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates, pursuant to Section 5004 of the California Vehicle Code, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable. 
(Ord. 1886, 1986: Ord. 1433 § 11, 1974)  
11.48.130 - Notice to Department of Motor Vehicles. 
Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. 
(Ord. 1433 § 12, 1974)  
11.48.140 - Removal costs assessment. 
If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to Section 11.48.110 are not paid within thirty days of the date of the order or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. The assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. 
(Ord. 1433 § 13, 1974)  
Chapter 11.52 - BICYCLES 
Sections: 
 
11.52.010 - Bicycle defined. 
A "bicycle" is any device upon which a person may ride, which is propelled by human power through the assistance of belts, chains or gears and which has wheels at least twenty inches in diameter and a frame size of at least fourteen inches. 
(Ord. 1457 § 1, 1975: Ord. 1298 (part), 1972)  
11.52.020 - License—Required. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle upon any of the streets, alleys or highways in the city without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(Ord. 1298 (part), 1972)  
11.52.030 - License—Issuance—Term—Effect. 
The city is authorized and directed to issue, upon written application, a bicycle license which shall be effective during the period of time such licensee retains title to such bicycle, but, in no event longer than ten years, which license when issued entitles the licensee to operate such bicycle upon the streets, alleys and public highways in the city in accordance with traffic regulations. 
(Ord. 1298 (part), 1972)  
11.52.040 - License—Plates—Records. 
A.  The city shall obtain licenses from the California Department of Motor Vehicles in accordance with Vehicle Code Section 39001. 
B.  The metallic license plates or seals and registration cards shall have numbers stamped thereon. 
C.  Such metallic license plates or seals shall be stamped in numerical order and the letters N.C.P.D. stamped thereon. 
D.  Metallic license plates or seals shall be suitable for attachment upon the frames of bicycles. 
E.  One metallic license plate or seal shall be attached to the frame of each bicycle, and a corresponding registration card shall be issued to the licensee upon payment of the license fees herein provided. 
F.  The metallic license plate or seal shall remain attached during the existence of such license. 
G.  The chief of police shall keep a record of the date of issue of each license, to whom issued, and the number thereof. 
(Ord. 1457 § 2, 1975; Ord. 1298 (part), 1972)  
11.52.050 - License—Tampering prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the numbers of any bicycle frame licensed pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license plate, seal or registration card during the time in which such license plate is operative. 
C.  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the stamping of numbers on the frame of bicycles on which no serial number can be found, or on which said number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes. 
(Ord. 1298 (part), 1972)  
11.52.060 - License—Fees. 
A.  The license fee to be paid for registration and licensing of a bicycle shall be one dollar and forty cents. 
B.  For registration and licensing when there is a transfer of ownership, the new owner shall pay one dollar. 
C.  For lost or destroyed license plate or seal a new number shall be issued for which the owner shall pay fifty cents. 
D.  All fees shall be paid in advance. 
(Ord. 1374 § 1, 1973; Ord. 1298 (part), 1972)  
11.52.061 - License Fees—Revenues. 
All revenues from license fees shall be retained in a special fund established by the city to be used for the purpose of administering the city's bicycle licensing program, improving bicycle safety programs in the city and establishing bicycle facilities in the city. 
(Ord. 1457 § 3, 1975: Ord. 1298 (part), 1972)  
11.52.070 - Transfer of ownership—Report. 
It is the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership on any bicycle, to report such sale or transfer by returning to the chief of police the registration card issued to such person as licensee thereof, together with the name and address of the person to whom said bicycle was sold, or transferred, and such report shall be made within five days of the date of said sale or transfer. 
(Ord. 1298 (part), 1972)  
11.52.080 - Transfer of ownership—Registration. 
It is the duty of the purchaser or transferee of such bicycle to apply for a transfer of registration therefor, within five days of said sale or transfer. 
(Ord. 1298 (part), 1972)  
11.52.090 - Sales—Retail secondhand. 
Every person engaged in the business of buying or selling of new or secondhand bicycles in the city shall file with the chief of police a monthly report, giving: 
A.  The name and address of the person from whom or to whom a bicycle is purchased or sold; 
B.  The description thereof; 
C.  The frame number thereof; and 
D.  The number of the license plate, if any, attached to said bicycle. 
(Ord. 1298 (part), 1972)  
11.52.100 - Traffic regulations. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within any business or residence district of the city, with the exception herein stated. 
B.  The council may, by resolution duly adopted, authorize the riding of bicycles on the sidewalks of such residential districts or area with such limitations as to hours and specific purposes as they may deem proper. 
C.  It is a misdemeanor for any person to violate any of the terms or provisions of this chapter or to use a bicycle in and upon any street, alley, park or other public place in this city, or upon any path or lane set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles within this city, without complying in all respects with the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
D.  It is a misdemeanor for any parent or guardian of any child or of anyone who has the custody or control of any child in this city to knowingly permit such child to use a bicycle in this city in violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1298 (part), 1972)  
11.52.110 - Violation—Penalties. 
A.  Every person convicted of a violation of any provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and is punishable as prescribed in Section 1.20.010 or by removal or suspension of the license to operate a bicycle within this city for a period not to exceed thirty days, or by impounding the bicycle of the person convicted for a period not to exceed thirty days, or by any or all said penalties or any combination thereof. 
B.  The chief of police shall also have authority, in the event that any juvenile or person under the age of twenty-one years is found violating any provision of this chapter to take and impound the bicycle of such juvenile or minor so found violating such chapter, and to hold the same for a period not to exceed thirty days, during which said time the chief of police shall notify the parents or guardian or other person having the custody and control of said juvenile or minor of such offense. 
(Ord. 1621, 1978; Ord. 1358 § 2 (part), 1973; Ord. 1297 (part), 1972)  
Chapter 11.56 - TOW TRUCK REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
11.56.010 - Tow truck defined. 
A "tow car" or "tow truck" is a motor vehicle which has been altered or designed and equipped for, and exclusively used in the business of towing vehicles by means of a crane, tow bar, tow line or dolly or is otherwise exclusively used to render assistance to other vehicles. 
(Ord. 1168 (part), 1967)  
11.56.020 - Chapter purpose. 
It is the intent of this chapter to prescribe the basic regulations for the operation of tow cars, or tow trucks in police emergency situations in the removal of and towing away of motor vehicles which are illegally parked, apparently abandoned or involved in an accident, or which constitute an obstruction to traffic because of mechanical failure. It is the purpose of the council in enacting the ordinance codified in this chapter to provide a fair and impartial means of selecting private operators to engage in said business in the interest of the public as well as in the interest of efficient policing operations for the removal from the public streets of said vehicles. 
(Ord. 1168 (part), 1967)  
11.56.030 - Regulations. 
The city council shall, from time to time, by resolution, adopt policies for the selection and designation of tow car or tow truck services which shall be permitted to engage in emergency police towing upon notification of the need for such services by the police department. Any and all tow car or tow truck operators not so selected and designated pursuant to the policy of the city council are hereby prohibited from removing from the public streets and towing away any vehicles involved in the situations as set forth in Section 11.56.020 provided, however, that the owner of the vehicle so involved may designate any towing service to be used for the removal and towing away of such vehicle. The police department shall strictly adhere to the policies adopted by the city council and any administrative regulations instituted to efficiently carry out said policies. However, in the event that a towing service is contacted by the police department to perform said services, and performs said services in a manner not in accordance with the policies as established, the police department is held harmless from any and all liability or damages arising therefrom and shall not be accountable for, nor investigate, complaints of negligence and deviations from the policies unless said deviations are shown to be of a repeated and frequently recurring nature, and any complaints received from the tow car or tow truck services selected and designated to carry out such police towing operations and any complaints received concerning the quality and standards of service performed by said operators shall be deemed sufficient cause for cancellation and termination of any contract or operating agreement entered into for the performance of such service. 
(Ord. 1168 (part), 1967)  
Chapter 11.60 - INTERSTATE TRUCKS 
Sections: 
 
11.60.010 - Definitions—Generally. 
For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the words, phrases and terms included herein shall be deemed to have the meanings set out in Sections 11.60.020 through 11.60.070. 
(Ord. 1926 (part), 1987)  
11.60.020 - Terminal defined. 
"Terminal" means any facility at which freight is consolidated to be shipped or where full load consignments may be loaded and off-loaded or at which the interstate trucks are regularly maintained, stored or manufactured. 
(Ord. 1926 (part), 1987)  
11.60.030 - Interstate truck defined. 
"Interstate truck" means a truck tractor and semitrailer or trailer or truck tractor, semitrailer with unlimited length as regulated by the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 1926 (part), 1987)  
11.60.040 - Interstate truck service area defined. 
"Interstate truck service area" means an area within one-half of a lane mile of an interstate highway which provides lodging, food, fuel or servicing to interstate trucks. 
(Ord. 1926 (part), 1987)  
11.60.050 - CALTRANS defined. 
"CALTRANS" means the State of California Department of Transportation or its successor agency. 
(Ord. 1926 (part), 1987)  
11.60.060 - Trailblazer signs defined. 
"Trailblazer signs" means an approved traffic sign used to identify the city's terminal access routes. 
(Ord. 1926 (part), 1987)  
11.60.070 - Decision point defined. 
"Decision point" means any point on the city's terminal access routes where installation of a trailblazer sign is necessary to identify the routes. 
(Ord. 1926 (part), 1987)  
11.60.080 - Purpose—Interstate trucking regulated. 
The purpose of this section is to establish procedures for terminal designation and truck route designation to terminals for interstate trucks operating on the federally designated highway system and to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the public. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an interstate truck upon any street within the city outside of an interstate truck service area that has not been designated and marked in accordance with this chapter, unless the vehicle is exempt from the restrictions on interstate trucks pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 35401.5(c). 
(Ord. 1926 (part), 1987)  
11.60.090 - Application. 
A.  Any interested person requiring terminal access for interstate trucks from the federally designated highway system shall submit an application, on a form as provided by the city, together with such information as may be required by the city engineer and appropriate fees to the city. 
B.  Upon receipt of the application the city engineer will cause an investigation to be made to ascertain whether or not the proposed terminal facility meets the requirements for an interstate truck terminal. Upon his approval of that designation, he will then determine the capability of the route requested and/or alternate routes. Determination of route capability will include, without limitation, a review of adequate turning radii and lane widths of ramps, intersections and highways and general traffic conditions such as sight distance, speed and traffic volumes. No access off a federally designated highway system will be approved without the approval of CALTRANS. 
C.  Should the requested route pass through the city to a terminal located in another jurisdiction, the applicant shall comply with the jurisdiction's application process. City route designation approval will be required for those portions of the route located within the city. Cost for trailblazer signs shall be as provided in Section 11.60.100(B) below. 
(Ord. 1926 (part), 1987)  
11.60.100 - Fees and costs. 
A.  The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application fee, as established by the city, sufficient to pay the cost of review of the terminal designation and the review of the route and alternate route. 
B.  Upon the approval of the terminal designation and route by the city and by CALTRANS, the applicant shall deposit with the city, sufficient funds as estimated by the city engineer to pay for the purchase and installation of terminal trailblazer signs. Trailblazer signs will be required at every decision point in the city on the route to the terminal. Upon completion of the installation of the signs, the actual cost shall be computed and any difference between the actual and the estimated cost shall be billed or refunded to the applicant, whichever the case may be. No terminal or route may be used until such signs as are required are in place. Costs for trailblazer signs may be proportioned in accordance with procedures in Section 11.60.110(C). 
(Ord. 1926 (part), 1987)  
11.60.110 - Retrofitting. 
A.  If all feasible routes to a requested terminal are found unsatisfactory by the city engineer, the applicant may request retrofitting the deficiencies. All costs of engineering, construction and inspection will be the responsibility of the applicant except when retrofitting deficiencies is within the jurisdiction of CALTRANS, the actual construction will be done by the city or by a contractor acceptable to the city. 
B.  When the work is to be done by the city, the applicant shall deposit with the city the estimated cost of retrofitting. Adjustment between the estimated and actual cost shall be made after completion of the work and any difference between the actual and the estimated cost shall be billed or refunded to the applicant as the case may be. When the work is done by the applicant, the applicant may file with the city engineer, on a form satisfactory to the city engineer, a statement detailing the actual costs of the retrofitting. 
C.  If at any time within five years from the date of completion of the retrofitting by the applicant, should any applicant seek terminal approval which would use the route upon which such retrofitting was accomplished, any such applicants' fee may include that applicants' proportionate share of the retrofitting, as determined by the city engineer, which fee shall be disbursed by the city to the applicant who paid for the original retrofitting as well as to any applicant who contributed to the cost of retrofitting under this subsection. Nothing herein shall require the payment of a proportionate fee if the applicant doing the work failed to file the applicant's report of costs with the city engineer as described in subsection B of this section. 
(Ord. 1926 (part), 1987)  
11.60.120 - Revocation of route. 
The city engineer may revoke any approved terminal or route if the terminal or route becomes a traffic safety hazard for vehicular traffic. A safety hazard includes the inability of interstate trucks to negotiate the route or interstate trucks creating unsafe driving conditions for other vehicular traffic or pedestrians. 
(Ord. 1926 (part), 1987)  
11.60.130 - Appeal process. 
A.  If the city engineer denies terminal designation, route feasibility or revokes a previously approved terminal or route, the applicant/terminal owner, within ten working days following the date of the receipt of the decision of the city engineer may appeal the decision to the city council in writing. An appeal shall be made on a form prescribed by the engineering department and shall be filed with the city clerk. The appeal shall state specifically wherein there was an error or abuse of discretion by the city engineer or wherein his decision is not supported by the evidence in the record. Within five days of the filing of an appeal, the city engineer shall transmit to the city clerk the terminal application, the sketches of the revoked route and all other data filed therewith, the report of the city engineer, the findings of the city engineer, and his decision on the application. 
B.  The city clerk shall make copies of the data provided by the city engineer available to the applicant and to the appellant (if the applicant is not the appellant) for inspection and may give notice to any other interested party who requested notice of the time when the appeal will be considered by the city council. 
C.  If CALTRANS and not the city engineer denies or revokes terminal access from federally designated highways, no appeal may be made to the city council, but must be made to CALTRANS as may be permitted by CALTRANS. 
(Ord. 1926 (part), 1987)  
Chapter 11.64 - SKATEBOARDS 
Sections: 
 
11.64.010 - Prohibitions and restrictions on use of skateboards, roller skates, coasters and similar toy vehicles. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person upon a skateboard, roller skates, a coaster or any similar toy vehicle or device to enter and travel upon, along or across any roadway within the city. 
B.  Any person upon a skateboard, roller skates, a coaster or any similar toy vehicle or device on any sidewalk or right-of-way not open to public vehicular traffic shall exercise due caution and shall yield the right-of-way to and not interfere with pedestrians. 
(Ord. 1947 (part), 1988)  
11.64.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 1947 (part), 1988)  
Chapter 11.68 - CRUISING 
Sections: 
 
11.68.010 - Cruising defined. 
"Cruising" means the repetitive driving of a motor vehicle two or more times within a four-hour period, in the same direction, past a traffic-control point in traffic which is congested at or near the traffic-control point, as determined by the ranking police officer on duty within the affected area, and after the vehicle operator or passenger has been given an adequate written notice that further driving past the control point will be a violation. 
(Ord. 2025 (part), 1992)  
11.68.020 - Signs designate cruising control zone. 
Signs shall be placed at the beginning and end of the portion of any street determined to be subject to cruising controls which briefly and clearly state the appropriate provisions of Section 11.68.050 of this code, and of Section 21100(k) of the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 2025 (part), 1992)  
11.68.030 - Traffic-control point—Establishment authority. 
The ranking police officer on duty within an area affected by traffic congestion may establish one or more traffic-control points at or near the area of traffic congestion. 
(Ord. 2025 (part), 1992)  
11.68.040 - Traffic-control point—Written notice of violation. 
Any person who, as the operator of, or passenger in, any motor vehicle driven in a particular direction past a traffic-control point established pursuant to Section 11.68.030 may be given written notice that further driving past the control point within a four-hour interval will be a violation of Section 11.68.050. 
(Ord. 2025 (part), 1992)  
11.68.050 - Cruising prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person, as a driver or a passenger of a motor vehicle, to engage in the activity known as "cruising," as defined in Section 11.68.010, on the public streets or alleys of the city in any area which has been posted pursuant to Section 11.68.020. Each successive trip within a four-hour period past the traffic-control point established pursuant to Section 11.68.030 shall constitute a separate violation, and no additional written notice shall be required for such separate violation. 
(Ord. 2025 (part), 1992)  
11.68.060 - Exceptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to persons who, according to DMV records, reside within a designated no-cruising area; nor to authorized emergency vehicles as defined in Section 165 of the California Vehicle Code; nor to vehicles licensed for public transportation; nor to publicly owned vehicles of any city, county, district, state or federal agency. 
(Ord. 2025 (part), 1992)  
11.68.070 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 2075, 1994: Ord. 2025 (part), 1992)  
Chapter 11.70 - TAXICABS AND OTHER FOR-HIRE VEHICLES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-2434, adopted April 4, 2017, amended Ch. 11.70 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said chapter to read as set out herein. The former Ch. 11.70, §§ 11.70.010—11.70.140, pertained to regulation and licensing of transportation services and derived from Ord. 2256 (part), 2004. 
 
11.70.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulation of taxicabs and other for-hire vehicles within the city of National City through adoption of San Diego Metropolitan Transit System (MTS) Codified Ordinance No. 11, and to implement the provisions of Public Utilities Code Section 120266 by contract with MTS to license or regulate transportation services with the city of National City. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2434, 4-4-2017)  
11.70.020 - Definitions. 
The definitions set forth in Section 1.1 of San Diego Metropolitan Transit System Codified Ordinance No. 11 shall govern this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2434, 4-4-2017)  
11.70.030 - Regulatory administration by contract with Metropolitan Transit System. 
Notwithstanding the city's right to regulate taxicabs and other for-hire vehicles within its jurisdiction, the city council, by resolution currently in effect or as may be adopted from time to time, has authorized a contract with San Diego Metropolitan Transit System ("MTS") for the administration and enforcement by MTS of regulations, policies and ordinances for taxicabs and other for-hire vehicles operated within the city, including collection and administration of all applicable regulatory fees, fines and forfeitures. While that contract is in effect, the applicable regulations, policies and ordinances of MTS, including MTS Codified Ordinance No. 11, as now in effect or as may be amended from time to time, shall govern the operation of taxicabs and other for-hire vehicles within the city. Licensing of a taxicab and other for-hire vehicle or the operator or owner by MTS does not exempt the licensee from city business tax license requirements and payment of fees pursuant to Chapter 6.04. A copy of MTS Codified Ordinance No. 11 is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2434, 4-4-2017)  
Title 12 - NOISE CONTROL 
Chapters:  
Chapter 12.02 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
12.02.010 - Title. 
The ordinance codified in this title shall be known and may be cited as "The Noise Control Ordinance" of the city of National City. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.02.040 - Declaration of findings and policy. 
Whereas, excessive noise and vibration are a serious hazard to the public health and welfare and the quality of life; and 
Whereas, the people have a right to and should be ensured an environment free from noise and vibration that may jeopardize their health or welfare or degrade the quality of life. 
Now, therefore, it is the policy of the city to prevent noise and vibration that may jeopardize the health or welfare of its citizens or degrade the quality of life. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.02.060 - Criteria. 
As criteria for this chapter, Table I is a chart showing sound levels and their expected impact in terms of human response. Table II is a list of National Goals for Noise Reduction as set forth by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency in their publication "Toward a National Strategy for Noise Control" April 1977. 
TABLE I 
SOUND LEVELS AND HUMAN RESPONSE 
Common Sounds 	Noise Level (dB) 	Effect 
Carrier deck 
Jet operation 
Air raid siren 	140 	Painfully loud 
Jet takeoff (200 feet) 
Thunderclap 
Discotheque 
Auto horn (3 feet) 	130 	
	120 	Maximum vocal effect 
Pile drivers 
Chain saw (2 feet) 	110 	
Garbage truck 
767.10 Power lawn mower 
(4 feet) 	100 	
Heavy truck (50 feet) 
City traffic 	90 	Very annoying 
Hearing damage (8 hrs) 
Alarm clock (2 feet) 
Hair dryer 
Vacuum cleaner 	80 	Annoying 
Noisy restaurant 
Freeway traffic 
Man's voice 	70 	Telephone use difficult 
Air conditioning unit (20 feet) 	60 	Intrusive 
Light auto traffic (100 feet) 	50 	Quiet 
Living room 
Bedroom 
Quiet office 	40 	
Library 
Soft whisper (15 feet) 	30 	Very quiet 
Broadcasting studio 	20 	
	10 	Just audible 
	0 	Hearing begins 
 
This decibel (dB) table compares some common sounds and shows how they rank in potential harm to hearing. Note that seventy dB is the point at which noise may begin to harm hearing, that sixty dB is the threshold of stress response and forty-five dB disturbs sleep. To the ear, each ten dB increase seems twice as loud. 
TABLE II 
A. To take all practical steps to eliminate hearing loss resulting from noise exposure; 
B. To reduce environmental noise exposure to an Ldn value of no more than seventy-five dB immediately; 
C. To reduce noise exposure levels to Ldn sixty-five dB by vigorous regulatory and planning actions; 
D. To strive for an eventual reduction of noise levels to an Ldn of fifty-five dB. 
 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
Chapter 12.04 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
12.04.020 - Terminology. 
All terminology used in this title, not defined in this chapter shall be in conformance with the American National Standards Institute standards ANSI S1.1-1971, or most current revision. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.040 - A-weighted sound level. 
"A-weighted sound level" means the sound level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is often designated dlB(A) or dBA. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.060 - Ambient noise level. 
"Ambient noise level" means the composite of noise from all sources near and far. In this context, the ambient noise level constitutes the normal or existing level of environmental noise at a given location and time. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.080 - Code enforcement officer. 
"Code enforcement office(r)" means any city employee and/or police officer having lead responsibility for enforcing this chapter; and, the city employee having responsibility for making noise surveys, noise analyses, noise investigations and the administration of this chapter, other than enforcement. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.100 - Construction. 
"Construction" means any site preparation, assembly, substantial repair, alteration or similar action, for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property or similar activity upon public or private structures or land. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.120 - Continuous sound. 
"Continuous sound" means sound that is of a steady and uninterrupted nature of a specified time period. For the purposes of this title, the minimum time period shall be one hour, unless otherwise provided. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.140 - Cumulative period. 
"Cumulative period" means an additive period of time composed of individual time segments that may be continuous or interrupted. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.160 - Day/night average sound level (Ldn). 
"Day/night average sound level (Ldn)" means a twenty-four hour average of the A-weighted sound level, with the level during the period ten p.m. to seven a.m. increased by ten dB before averaging. It is denoted "Ldn." It is typically used for assessing noise impacts from transportation noise sources. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.180 - Decibel. 
"Decibel" (also "dB") means a unit for measuring the amplitude of sound, equal to twenty times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty micropascals. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.200 - Demolition. 
"Demolition" means any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces, or similar property. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.220 - Eqiuivalent sound level (Leq). 
"Equivalent sound level (Leq)" means the average sound level of an event measured over a stated time period, typically one hour, in which case it may also be represented as "Leq(h)." 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.240 - Emergency work. 
"Emergency work" means any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.260 - Environmental Noise. 
See "Noise disturbance - environmental" as defined in Section 12.04.480(A). 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.280 - Fixed Noise Source. 
"Fixed noise source" means a stationary device that creates sounds while fixed or motionless, including but not limited to residential, agricultural, industrial and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, air conditioners, and refrigeration equipment. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.300 - Impulsive sound. 
"Impulsive sound" means sound of short duration, usually less than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive sound include explosions, drop forge impacts, and the discharge of firearms. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.320 - Intermittent sound. 
"Intermittent sound" means sound which is not continuous or which is of a cyclic or repetitive nature. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.340 - Intrusive noise. 
"Intrusive noise" means that noise which intrudes over and above the existing ambient noise at a given location. The relative intrusiveness of a sound depends upon its amplitude, duration, frequency and time of occurrence, and tonal or informational content as well as the prevailing ambient noise level. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.360 - Licensed. 
"Licensed" means the possession of a formal license or a permit issued by the appropriate jurisdictional authority; or, where no permits or licenses are issued, the sanctioning of the activity by the jurisdiction as noted in public record. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.370 - Loudspeaker. 
"Loudspeaker" - see "Sound amplifying equipment." 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.380 - Message. 
"Message" means any voice, music, sound or other audible stimulation. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.400 - Mobile noise source. 
"Mobile noise source" means any noise source other than a fixed noise source. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.420 - Motor vehicle. 
"Motor vehicle" means any and all self-propelled vehicles as defined in the California Motor Vehicle Code, including all on-highway type motor vehicles subject to registration under the code, and all off-highway type motor vehicles subject to identification under the code. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.440 - Motorboat. 
"Motorboat" means any vessel propelled by machinery, whether or not such machinery is the principal source of propulsion, but shall not include a vessel which has a marine document issued by the Bureau of Customs of the United States government or any federal agency successor thereto (Section 651(d), Harbors and Navigation Code). 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.460 - Muffler or sound dissipative device. 
"Muffler or sound dissipative device" means a device consisting of a series of chambers or baffle plates, or other mechanical design, for the purpose of receiving exhaust gas from an internal combustion engine to reduce exhaust noise. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.480 - Noise disturbance. 
Any noise exceeding the noise level limits for a designated receiving land use category specified in Table III, or the noise emanating from any of the prohibited actions specified in Chapters 12.08, 12.10 or 12.14 is a noise disturbance. Noise disturbances are classified as either environmental or nuisance, or, in some cases, both. 
A.  Noise disturbance—environmental. Those noises resulting from land use activity normally permitted under the land use code, but which exceed the noise level limits set by this code for that particular land use. Environmental noise sources are specified in, but not limited by, the list in Appendix A of Chapter 12.22. 
B.  Noise disturbance—nuisance. Those intrusive noises, other than environmental noises, which, because of their unusual presence, are or may be considered harmful to health and well-being, due to their raucous, annoying, or obnoxious and unpleasant nature and characteristics. A nuisance noise is a noise that constitutes a "public nuisance," as defined in Civil Code section 3479. Types of nuisance noise disturbances are further specified in, but not limited to, the examples in Chapter 12.10 and Appendix A of Chapter 12.22. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.500 - Noise sensitive zone. 
"Noise sensitive zone" means an area designated by the planning commission for the purpose of ensuring noise control. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.520 - Powered model vehicle. 
"Powered model vehicle" means any self-propelled, airborne, waterborne or landborne plane, vessel, or vehicle, which is not designed to carry persons, including but not limited to any model airplane, boat, car, or rocket. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.540 - Public right-of-way. 
"Public right-of-way" means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, bikeway, sidewalk or alley or similar place that is owned or controlled by a government entity. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.560 - Public space. 
"Public space" means any real property or structures thereon which are owned or controlled by a governmental entity, other than the public rights of way. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.580 - Pure tone. 
"Pure tone" means any sound that is audible as a single pitch or a set of single pitches. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.600 - Real property boundary or real property line. 
"Real property boundary" or "real property line" means an imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person, but not including intra-building real property divisions. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.620 - Sound amplifying equipment. 
"Sound amplifying equipment" means any machine or device using electronic, mechanical or combination means for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound. This includes handheld or portable loudspeakers and remotely located loudspeakers attached to and/or operated from a vehicle. Sound amplifying equipment, as used in this title, shall not include standard automotive audio systems installed as factory or dealer original equipment, warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles, or horns or other warning devices on other vehicles used only for traffic and public safety purposes. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.640 - Sound level meter. 
"Sound level meter" means an instrument, including a microphone, and amplifier, and output meter, and frequency weighing networks for the measurement of sound levels, which meets or exceeds the requirements pertinent for Type 2 or S2A sound level meters, per American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters, S1.4-1983, or more current revision. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.660 - Sound Truck. 
"Sound truck" means any motor vehicle, or any other vehicle regardless of motive power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon or attached thereto, any sound-amplifying equipment. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.680 - Vibration perception threshold. 
"Vibration perception threshold" means the minimum ground-borne or structure-borne vibrational motion necessary to cause a normal person to be aware of the vibration by such direct means as, but not limited to, sensation by touch or the visual observation of moving objects. The perception threshold shall be presumed to be a motion velocity of 0.01 in/sec over the range of one to one hundred HZ. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.04.700 - Weekday. 
"Weekday" means any day, Monday through Friday, which is not a legal holiday. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
Chapter 12.06 - EXTERIOR NOISE LIMITS 
Sections: 
 
12.06.020 - Maximum permissible sound levels by receiving land use. 
A.  The noise stands presented in Table III of this chapter for various categories of land uses defined in Chapter 18.10 of the city land use code, shall, unless otherwise specifically indicated, apply to each property or portion of property substantially used for a particular type of land use reasonably similar to the land use types shown in Table III. Where two or more dissimilar land uses occur on a single property, the more restrictive noise limits shall apply. 
B.  Additional land use classifications may be added by resolution of the planning commission to reflect both lower and higher existing ambient levels than those shown. 
C.  Where doubt exists when making identification of receiving land use, the planning commission may make an interpretation in the manner provided by Section 18. 134.020 of the land use code. 
D.  No person shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound at any location within the city' or allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person, which causes the noise level to exceed the environmental noise level or nuisance noise level, or both, of the applicable limits given in Table Ill of this chapter at any point on or beyond the boundaries of the property on which the sound is produced. 
E.  1.  Environmental noise shall be assessed by the A-weighted equivalent sound level (Leq) for any hour (Leq(h)). 
2.  Nuisance noise shall be assessed as an A-weighted sound level not to be exceeded at any time. Nuisance noise is not subject to hourly averaging as Leq(h). The sound level of an event may be assessed by sound level meters or recording devices, or by other objective methods. However, failure or inability to conduct measurements of the sound level shall not bar enforcement or abatement. 
3.  Sound levels by receiving land. use shall be measured at the boundary of the property on which the sound is produced (generated) or at any point within the boundary of the property affected. 
4.  Fixed location public utility distribution or fixed transmission facilities, located on or adjacent to a property line shall be subject to noise level limits of this section measured at or beyond six feet from the boundary of the easement upon which the equipment is located. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.06.040 - Corrections to exterior noise level limits. 
A.  If the noise is continuous as defined in Section 12.04.120, the Leq for any hour can be represented by any lesser time period within that hour. Noise measurements of a few minutes only will thus suffice to define the noise level. 
B.  If the noise is intermittent as defined in Section 12.04.320, the Leq for any hour may be represented by a time period typical of the operating cycle. Measurement should be made of a representative number of noisy/quiet periods. A measurement period of not less than fifteen minutes is, however, strongly recommended when dealing with intermittent noise. 
C.  In the event the alleged offensive noise contains a steady, audible sound such as a whine, screech or hum, or contains a repetitive impulsive noise such as hammering or riveting, or contains music or speech, the standard limits set forth in Table III shall be reduced by five dB. 
D.  If the measured ambient level exceeds that permissible in Table III, the allowable noise level standard shall be the ambient noise level. The ambient level shall be measured when the alleged noise violation source is not operating. 
TABLE III 
EXTERIOR ENVIRONMENTAL NOISE LIMITS 1,2, 3 
Receiving Land Use Category 	Allowable Noise Level (db (A)) 
	10 p.m. to 7 a.m. 	7 a.m. to 10 p.m. 
All residential (less than 9 dwelling units) 	45 	55 
Multi-unit residential (Consisting of 9 dwelling units or more and Public Space) 	50 	60 
Commercial 	60 	65 
Light Industry (Industry east of I-5) 	70 	70 
Heavy Industry (Industry west of I-5) 	80 	80 
 
1. Environmental Noise—shall be measured as Leq in any hour (Leq(h)). 
2. Nuisance Noise—shall be measured as a decibel level not to be exceeded at any time. 
3. Except when other hours are specified in Chapter 12.10. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
Chapter 12.08 - INTERIOR NOISE LIMITS 
Sections: 
 
12.08.020 - Maximum permissible dwelling interior sound levels. 
A.  No person shall operate or cause to operate any source of sound within a residential dwelling unit within a multifamily residential structure consisting of two or more dwelling units, or allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person, which thereby causes the noise level at the adjacent interior boundary wall of an affected property to exceed the applicable noise level limits given in Table IV. 
B.  If the ambient noise level inside the receiving dwelling unit exceeds that permissible within any of the noise limit categories in Table IV, the allowable noise exposure standard in that category shall be the measured ambient for a cumulative period of five minutes in any hour, ambient plus five dB(A) for one minute in any hour and shall not exceed the ambient plus ten dB(A) at any time. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.08.040 - Correction for character of sound. 
In the event an alleged offensive noise event contains a steady, audible tone such as a whine, screech, or hum, or is an impulsive and repetitive noise such as hammering or riveting, or contains music or speech, the standard limits set forth in Table IV shall be reduced by five dB. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001) 
TABLE IV 
Type of Land Use 	Time Interval 	Maximum Allowable Interior Noise Level (dbA) 
		No Time 	1 min in 1 hour 	5 or more min in 1 hour 
Multifamily Residential 
(Consisting of two or more units) 	10 p.m. - 7 a.m. 	> 45 	<=40 	<=35 
Multifamily Residential (Consisting of two or more units) 	7 a.m. - 10 p.m. 	> 55 	<=50 	<=45 
(> greater than) 
(<= less than or equal to) 
  
Chapter 12.10 - PROHIBITED ACTS 
Sections: 
 
12.10.020 - Noise disturbances prohibited—General prohibition. 
A.  It is unlawful to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any noise disturbance. 
B.  Violations of this title may be charges under this section, or as a violation of a more specific section delineated elsewhere in this chapter or title. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.10.040 - Prima facie evidence of violation. 
A.  Except where a higher noise limit is specified in this Chapter 12.10 or Table II of Chapter 12.06, any noise that is audible at a distance of fifty feet or more from the source of the sound, shall be prima facie evidence of a noise disturbance. 
B.  The acts set forth in this chapter and the causing or permitting thereof are declared to be specific examples constituting noise disturbances in violation of this title. 
C.  The decibel levels specified in Table III of Chapter 12.06 when assessed for nuisance noise shall be measured pursuant to section 12.06.020(E)(2) as a noise level not to be exceeded at any time, and shall not be subject to hourly averaging as Leq(h). 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.10.060 - Radios, television sets, musical instruments and similar devices. 
It is unlawful to operate, play or permit the operation or playing of any radio, television set, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, or similar device which produces or reproduces sound: 
A.  Between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. at a level that exceeds the interior noise limits of Table IV of Chapter 12.08 across the interior wall or boundary separating attached multifamily dwelling units from each other, or the exterior noise limits of Table III of Chapter 12.06 across a residential or commercial real property line; or, at any time to violate the provisions of Section 12.06.020, except for activities for which an exception has been issued pursuant to Chapter 12.16; or 
B.  In such a manner as to exceed the levels set forth for public space in Table III of Chapter 12.06, measured at a distance of at least twenty-five feet from such device operating on a public right-of-way or within or upon a public space. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.10.080 - Loudspeakers (Amplified sound) (Sound-amplifying equipment). 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 12.14 for sound trucks, it is unlawful to use or operate outdoors for any purpose any sound amplifying equipment, including a loudspeaker, loudspeaker system, or similar device, between the hours of nine p.m. and eight a.m. outdoors in a residential or commercial zone; and at any other time so as to violate the noise level provisions of Section 12.06.020. 
B.  This prohibition shall not apply to any activity for which an exception has been issued pursuant to Chapter 12.16 for environmental noise. 
C.  It is unlawful to operate any sound amplifying equipment that is not provided with an operable volume limiting control device or switch. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.10.090 - Projection of telephone sound. 
The use of sound-amplifying equipment to project telephone sound in or to any outdoor area is expressly prohibited. Any such system m existence upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall immediately be removed. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.10.100 - Reserved.  
12.10.120 - Animals and birds. 
It is unlawful to allow any animal or bird to howl, bark, meow, squawk, or make a sound characteristic of that species which creates a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line or within a noise sensitive zone between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. daily for more than three minutes, or at other times for more than ten consecutive minutes or for more than a total of fifteen minutes within any sixty minute period. This provision shall not apply to public zoos. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.10.140 - Loading and unloading. 
It is unlawful to load, unload, open, close or otherwise handle boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans, or similar objects between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. daily in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property line, or that at any time violates the provisions of Section 12.06.020. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.10.160 - Construction/demolition. 
A.  Except as provided in Section 12.10.160 B, it is unlawful to operate or to allow or cause the operation of any tools or equipment used in construction, drilling, repair, alteration, or demolition work between weekday hours of seven p.m. and seven a.m., or at any time on weekends or holidays, such that the sound therefrom creates a noise across a residential or commercial real property line that violates the provisions of section 12.06.020. 
B.  Subsection A shall not apply to: emergency work performed by public service utilities; work on private property that is necessary for fire and life safety; work permitted pursuant to Chapter 12.16; or, to the use of domestic power tools as allowed in Section 12.10.300. 
C.  Noise from construction demolition activities shall not exceed the maximum noise levels at or within the boundaries of affected properties listed in the following schedule at all other times. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001) 
Mobile Equipment 
Maximum noise levels for nonscheduled, intermittent, short-term operation (less than ten days) of mobile equipment: 
	Type I Areas 
Residential 	Type II Areas 
Semi- 
Residential/Commercial 
Daily, except Sundays and legal holidays, between seven a.m. to seven p.m. 	75 dBA 	85 dBA 
 
Stationary Equipment 
Maximum noise levels for repetitively scheduled and relatively long-term operation (periods of ten days or more) of stationary equipment: 
	Type I Areas 
Residential 	Type II Areas 
Semi-Residential/Commercial 
Daily, except Sundays and legal holidays, between seven a.m. to seven p.m. 	60 dBA 	70 dBA 
  
12.10.180 - Vibration 
It is unlawful to operate or permit the operation of any device that creates a vibration which exceeds the vibration perception threshold at or beyond the property boundary of the source originates on private property, or at a distance of one hundred fifty feet or more from the source if originating from a location on a public space or public right-of-way. Vibration that occurs as an incidental result of sound generation shall not be governed by this section only, but also by the prohibitions or restrictions applicable to the source of the sound. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.10.200 - Powered model vehicles. 
It is unlawful to operate or permit the operation of powered model vehicles: 
A.  Between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. daily so as to create a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line, or at any time to violate the provisions of Section 12.06.020; or 
B.  In such a manner as to exceed the levels set forth for public space use in Table II of Chapter 12.06 measured at a distance not less than one hundred feet from any point along the path of the particular model vehicle being operated on the public space or public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.10.220 - Stationary non-emergency signaling devices. 
A.  Except as provided in section 12. 10.220B, it is unlawful to sound or permit the sounding of any electrically operated or electronically amplified signal from any stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle, or similar device, designed primarily for non-emergency purposes, from any place, for more than ten seconds continually in an hourly period, or intermittently over one thirty-second cumulative period in any hour. 
B.  Sound sources covered by this provision may be exempted or modified by special authorization pursuant to Chapter 12.16. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.10.240 - Emergency signaling devices. 
A.  Except as provided in section 12. 10.240(B), it is unlawful to intentionally sound or permit the sounding outdoors of any fire, burglar, or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle, or similar stationary emergency signaling device, except for emergency purposes. 
B.  1.  Testing of a stationary emergency signaling device is only permitted after seven a.m. and before seven p.m. Any such testing shall use only the minimum cycle test time. In no case shall such test time exceed sixty seconds. 
2.  Testing of the complete emergency signaling system, including the functioning of the signaling device, and the personnel response to the signaling device, shall not occur more than once in each calendar month. Such testing shall not occur before seven a.m. or after ten p.m. The time limit specified in subsection B(l) shall not apply to such complete system testing. 
C.  Sounding or permitting the sounding of any exterior security or fire alarm or any motor vehicle security alarm for more than fifteen minutes is prohibited. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.10.260 - Motorized off-road vehicles operating off public right-of-way. 
It is unlawful to operate or cause to be operated any motorized off-road vehicle off a public right-of-way or on private property in such a manner that the sound levels emitted therefrom violate the provisions of Section 12.06.020. This section shall apply to all motorized vehicles, whether or not duly licensed and registered or identified, including, but not limited to, commercial or noncommercial racing vehicles, motorcycles, go-carts, three-wheelers, amphibious craft, campers, snowmobiles and dune buggies, but not including motorboats. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.10.280 - Noise sensitive zones. 
It is unlawful to: 
A.  Create or cause the creation within any noise sensitive zone of any sound that exceeds the specified land use noise standards set forth in Section 12.06.020, provided that conspicuous signs are posted on each corner of the public right of way at the perimeter of the zone indicating the presence of the zone; or 
B.  Create or cause the creation of any sound within or adjacent to any noise sensitive zone containing a hospital, nursing home, school, court or other designated occupancy, so as to be audible at the exterior wall of a designated structure within that zone, provided chat conspicuous signs are posted on each corner of the public right of way at tile perimeter of the zone indicating the presence of the zone. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.10.300 - Domestic power tools and machinery. 
It is unlawful to: 
A.  Operate or permit the operation of any mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder, lawn or garden tool, or similar tool between ten p.m. and seven a.m. so as to create or allow the creation of a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial property line exceeding the limits in Section 12.06.020. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.10.320 - Residential air conditioning or air handling equipment. 
It is unlawful to operate or permit the operation of any air conditioning or air-handling equipment in such a manner as to exceed any of the sound levels specified in Section 12.06.020. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
Chapter 12.12 - SPECIAL PROVISIONS AND EXEMPTIONS 
Sections: 
 
12.12.020 - Warning devices. 
Warning devices on public transportation and public vehicles that are necessary for the protection of public safety, as for example, police, fire and ambulance sirens, and train horns, are exempted from the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.12.040 - Outdoor activity exemptions. 
The provisions of this title shall not apply to occasional outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows, and sporting and entertainment events conducted pursuant to a permit or license issued under Chapter 15.60; to regularly scheduled school activities conducted by a community college or school district; or, to activities for which noise control parameters and regulations have been adopted pursuant to Chapter 18.116 of the land use code. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.12.060 - Exemptions from exterior noise standards. 
The provisions of Section 12.06.020 shall not apply to activities covered by the following sections: 
A.  Section 12.10.220, stationary non-emergency signaling devices; 
B.  Section 12.10.240, emergency-signaling devices; 
C.  Chapter 12.14, sound trucks; 
D.  Section 12.16.020(G), wherein noise limit exceptions or allowances are specifically provided for in the issuance of any temporary use permit pursuant to Chapters 15.60 or 18.116, or in other city council approvals of parades, civic functions or gatherings for which noise control is specifically provided for or regulated. 
E.  Automotive noise generated by vehicles properly equipped and operating on public rights of way in accordance with California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.12.080 - Federal or state preempted activities. 
Any other activity to the extent noise regulation thereof has been preempted by state or federal law is exempted from the provisions of this Title 12. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
Chapter 12.14 - SOUND TRUCKS 
Sections: 
 
12.14.020 - Sound trucks—Sound-amplifying equipment. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate a sound truck or any vehicle equipped with sound-amplifying equipment without a valid sound truck operating license as provided for in this chapter or in any manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
Section 12.14.040 - Reserved.  
Section 12.14.060 - Reserved.  
12.14.080 - Applications for license. 
Persons applying for sound truck operating licenses shall make written application to the police department. The form and content of applications for sound truck licenses shall be prescribed by the city manager. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.14.100 - Reserved.  
12.14.120 - Inspections and equipment conditions required for issuance of sound truck operating license. 
A.  All sound-amplifying equipment regulated under this chapter shall be inspected and certified by the police department for compliance with this section before a license can be issued, and may be inspected at any other time by the chief of police or designee whenever there is a reasonable basis for concluding that a violation of this title or chapter has occurred. Such inspection shall be made at time and place designated by the police department. 
B.  The vehicle upon which the sound amplifying equipment is installed must meet all safety and equipment requirements of the vehicle code, and a current certificate of insurance evidencing the public liability requirements for that vehicle shall be presented. 
C.  Exterior sound-amplifying equipment shall be securely mounted to the body of the vehicle by means of bolts or other fastening devices of sufficient strength to prevent loss of the equipment during vehicle operation. 
D.  The sound-amplifying equipment shall be mounted on the vehicle so as to project sound forward along the path of vehicle travel, with the equipment axis more or less parallel to the centerline of the vehicle, not to exceed fifteen degrees to either side of the centerline. 
E.  The interior of the vehicle shall be equipped at all times with a volume control-limiting device that is marked and calibrated to not allow the sound levels that are prescribed by this chapter for mobile and stationary operation to be exceeded. The police department shall conduct acoustic measurements and ensure that the marks and calibration registered on the volume control-limiting device meet the requirements of this title, including the operating noise limits. The volume control-limiting device must be capable of controlling the sound level at all times during operation. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.14.140 - Issuance of sound truck operating license. 
A.  The city treasurer shall issue a sound truck operating license for each application certified by the chief of police to be in compliance with Section 12.14.120. Each sound truck operating license shall be for a specific duration as stated thereon. A business license shall also be required for all sound trucks for hire that are or will be conducting business within the city pursuant to Chapter 6.04. 
B.  In no case shall a sound truck operating license be in effect for more than thirty days, unless otherwise specified by city council action pursuant to Chapter 15.60. 
C.  Any sound truck operating license application denied by the city treasurer shall be promptly returned to the applicant with a statement of reasons for that denial. 
D.  Copies of all sound truck operating licenses issued or denied shall be sent to the chief of police and city manager. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.14.160 - Possession and display of sound truck operating license. 
A license shall keep the sound truck operating license in his or her possession in the sound truck during the time the sound truck's sound-amplifying equipment is in operation. The sound truck operating license shall be promptly displayed and shown to any code enforcement officer or policeman of the city, upon request. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.14.180 - Surrender and suspension of sound truck operating license. 
Whenever inspection or investigation reveals that sound-amplifying equipment is being operated in violation of this chapter or in violation of the terms and conditions attached to a sound truck operating license, the investigating officer may suspend and demand the immediate surrender of the sound truck operating license. Upon such demand for suspension of sound operations and surrender of the license, the licensee shall immediately stop using the sound-amplifying equipment and surrender the license. Failure to stop the sound operation shall authorize the impoundment of the sound-amplifying equipment, including the vehicle if the sound amplifying equipment cannot be conveniently removed, pending an administrative hearing. The operator shall be advised verbally or in writing of the right to an administrative appeal under section 12.14.200. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.14.200 - Administrative hearing. 
Within the next succeeding business day following the suspension of a sound truck operating license, the licensee shall upon verbal or written demand be given the opportunity for an administrative hearing and review before the city manager or his designate. The designate shall not be a member of the department of the officer ordering the suspension. At the time of such hearing, the city manager or designate may reverse the suspension, or affirm or modify it upon making a finding that preservation of public health, safety and welfare warrants such action. Such determination shall thereafter be administratively final. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.14.220 - Regulations for use. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any sound truck or sound-amplifying equipment mounted on a sound truck in violation of the following regulations: 
A.  The only sounds permitted shall be music or human speech, or combination. 
B.  Sound operations are prohibited after nine p.m. and before eight a.m. in all zones, and may be allowed after nine p.m. in other than residential zones only pursuant to a temporary use permit issued under Chapter 15.60. Sound operations may be ordered suspended by the chief of police or designate whenever sound truck operations are impeding traffic. 
C.  Sound-amplifying equipment shall not be operated unless the sound system is provided with an operating volume-limiting device meeting the requirements of section 12.14.120, and all the other operating and equipment conditions set forth in that section are met. 
D.  Sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated within one hundred yards of hospitals, schools, or churches at any time. 
E.  The volume of sound shall not exceed a sound level of sixty-five dBA at a distance of fifty feet from the sound-amplifying equipment as measured by a sound level meter. When the sound truck is stopped in traffic or for more than one minute, the sound level shall be adjusted so as not to exceed fifty dBA at a distance of fifty feet. 
F.  Sound-amplifying equipment shall not be operated unless the equipment is mounted facing forward and no more than fifteen degrees to either side of the centerline of the sound truck. 
G.  No sound truck with sound-amplifying equipment in operation shall be driven on the same street past the same point more than twice in a period of one hour. 
H.  Sound-amplifying equipment shall not be operated on a sound truck unless a valid sound truck license issued pursuant to section 12.14.140 is in existence. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
Chapter 12.16 - EXCEPTIONS 
Sections: 
 
12.16.020 - Special permit exceptions for environmental noise. 
A.  The planning commission is authorized to grant exceptions for any environmental noise provision of this title, subject to limitations as to area, noise levels, time limits, and other terms and conditions as the planning commission determines are appropriate to protect the public health, safety, and welfare from the noise emanating therefrom. This section shall in no way affect the duty to obtain any permit or license required by law for such activities, nor shall it apply to nuisance noises. 
B.  Any person seeking an exception pursuant to this section shall file an application with the planning director. The application shall be submitted and processed in the same manner as conditional use permits as provided in Section 18.116.060 through 18.116.090. The application shall contain information that demonstrates that bringing the source of sound or activity for which the exception is sought into compliance with this title would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community, or on other persons. The fee prescribed in the National City Fee Schedule shall accompany the application. A separate application shall be filed for each noise source; provided, however, that several mobile sources under common ownership, or several fixed sources on a single property may be combined into one application. Notice of an application for an exception shall be published according to Section 18.130.080 of the National City Land Use Code. Any individual who claims to be adversely affected by allowance of the exception may file a statement with the planning commission containing any information to support his claim. 
C.  In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the planning commission shall balance the hardship on the applicant, the community, and other persons of not granting the exception against the adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of persons affected, the adverse impact on property affected, and any other adverse impacts of granting the exception. Applicants for exceptions and persons contesting such exceptions may be required to submit such information as the planning commission may reasonably require, including sound level studies. In granting or denying an application, the planning commission shall keep on public file a copy of the decision and the reasons for denying or granting the exception. 
D.  Exceptions shall be granted by notice to the applicant containing all necessary conditions including a time limit on the permitted activity. The exception shall not become effective until the applicant agrees to all conditions. Noncompliance with any condition of the exception shall terminate the exception and subject the person holding it to those provisions of this title for which the exception was granted. 
E.  An exception will not exceed three hundred sixty-five days from the date on which it was granted. Application for extension of time limits specified in exceptions or for modification of other substantial conditions shall be treated like applications for initial exceptions under subsection B of this section. 
F.  The planning director will issue guidelines defining the procedures to be followed in applying for an exception and the criteria to be considered in deciding whether to grant the exception. 
G.  Noise limit exceptions or allowances specifically provided for in the issuance of any exception granted under this chapter or the city council approval of a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 15.60 for parades, civic functions or other special events, shall not be considered a noise disturbance. 
H.  Estoppel. An application for exception shall have no effect until properly granted hereunder. Enforcement of violations shall be proper at any time prior to such granting. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.16.040 - Exceptions for time to comply. 
The owner of any commercial or industrial source of an environmental noise or sound source may apply to the planning commission for an exception in the length of time allotted to achieve compliance with the provisions of this title. The planning commission shall have the authority, consistent with this section, to grant an exception not to exceed one year from the effective date of the ordinance codified or amended in this title. The same procedures and considerations as followed under Section 12.16.020 shall apply. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
Chapter 12.18 - ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
12.18.020 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  Violation of this title by making or allowing a nuisance noise disturbance shall be an infraction for a first violation. 
B.  Repeat violations may be prosecuted as misdemeanors under the provisions of section 1.20.020. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.18.040 - Environmental noise. 
A.  Classification of environmental noise. The planning director or designate is responsible for administration and enforcement of environmental noise, and making determinations that any given obtrusive noise condition falls within the definition of environmental noise disturbance, pursuant to Section 12.04.480(A), as an environmental noise. Appendix A of Chapter 12.22 shall be used as an aid in such determinations. The planning director may make determinations pursuant to Section 18.104.030 for classifying noise sources not specifically mentioned in Appendix A. Sound level meters shall be used, when practicable or available, to measure the level of a noise disturbance. The duration of the noise event should be assessed, as applicable. Failure to do so shall not bar enforcement action to prosecute or abate violations, and the planning director may use other available evidence to justify such action. 
B.  Responsibility. The planning director shall be responsible for investigation and enforcement of environmental noise disturbances. 
C.  Guidelines. The planning director may, from time to time, promulgate additional guidelines for administration and enforcement of the provisions of this title pertaining to noise violations. 
D.  Abatement. The officer responsible for enforcement of any provisions of this section shall first issue an order requiring abatement of a sound source alleged to be in violation of this Title 12. Orders of abatement may be written or verbally administered. The order to abate an environmental noise disturbance may allow a reasonable time for abatement, not to exceed thirty days, and nuisance noise disturbances may be ordered abated immediately. If the source of the noise is equipped with a volume control device, the violator shall be allowed to adjust the volume until the volume complies with lawful sound levels. Failure to comply within the time specified may thereafter be enforced criminally or civilly, or both, as a violation of this title. Abatement of the noise disturbance shall terminate further enforcement action regarding a particular environmental noise disturbance, unless the event is repeated. No complaint or further action shall be taken in the event that the cause of the violation has been removed, the condition abated or fully corrected within the time period specified by the planning director or designate. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.18.060 - Nuisance noise. 
A.  Classification of nuisance noise. The chief of police or designate is responsible for administration and enforcement of any obtrusive noise condition that falls within the definition of nuisance noise disturbance defined under Section 12.04.480(B) or Chapter 12.10. Appendix A of Chapter 12.22 may be used as an aid in making such determinations. At the request of the chief of police, the planning director may make determinations as provided for under National City Land Use Code, Section 18.104.030 for classifying nuisance noise sources not specifically mentioned in Appendix A. 
B.  Responsibility. The chief of police shall be responsible for investigation and enforcement of nuisance noise disturbances. 
C.  Guidelines. The chief of police may, from time to time, promulgate guidelines for administration and enforcement of the provisions of this title pertaining to nuisance noise violations. Sound level meters shall be used, when practicable or available, to measure the level of the noise disturbance. The duration of the noise event should be assessed, as applicable. Failure to do so shall not bar enforcement action to prosecute or abate violations, provided there is other objective evidence available to justify such action. 
D.  Abatement order. The officer responsible for enforcement of any provisions of this section shall first issue an order requiring abatement of a sound source alleged to be in violation of this Title 12. Orders of abatement may be written or verbally administered. The order to abate an environmental noise disturbance may allow a reasonable time for abatement, not to exceed thirty days; nuisance noise disturbances may be ordered abated immediately. If the source of the noise is equipped with a volume control device, the violator shall be allowed to adjust the volume until the volume complies with lawful sound levels. Failure to comply within the time specified may thereafter be enforced criminally or civilly, or both, as a violation of this title. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.18.080 - Enforcement of noise disturbances that are both environmental and nuisance. 
A.  Where investigation reveals that offending noise violates both the environmental noise regulations and the nuisance noise regulations, the offense shall be enforced as a nuisance noise violation unless the planning director, upon consultation by the chief of police, makes a specific finding that the environmental noise regulations more nearly apply, in which case the environmental noise regulations shall then apply. 
B.  Nothing contained in this provision shall limit the city's ability to prosecute or abate noise violations as both environmental and nuisance noise. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.18.090 - Noise disturbance measurement procedure. 
Upon receipt of a complaint, the code enforcement officer shall investigate the complaint, measure the sound level using a sound level meter whenever practicable, and gather non-acoustic data to adequately define the noise problem. 
A.  Non-acoustic data. Non-acoustic data shall consist of the following: the type of noise source; location of the source relative to the affected property; time period(s) and duration during which the noise source is considered to be a disturbance; and the date and time(s) of the noise measurement survey. 
B.  Exterior noise measurement procedure. Noise measurement procedure using a sound level meter defined in 'Section 12.04.640 shall use the "A" weighting scale and the "slow" meter response, except that the "fast" response shall be used for impulsive type sounds. Measurements shall be taken at any point on the receiving property with the microphone located at a height between four to five feet above the ground, and at least ten feet from the source and any nearest reflective surface, if possible. The microphone shall be placed so as to take into account any relevant topography or any acoustical aberration or irregularity. 
C.  Interior noise measurement procedure. If the complaint is related to interior noise, the "A" weighted scale, "slow" response (or "fast" if impulsive) shall be used, and measurements shall be taken within the affected dwelling unit at a point at least four feet from the wall, ceiling or floor nearest the noise source, with the windows open or closed in normal seasonal configuration. 
D.  Calibration. The sound level meter shall be calibrated both immediately before and after recording any noise data, using an acoustic calibrator. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.18.100 - Violations: Additional remedies—Injunctions. 
As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery which causes or creates sound levels or vibration exceeding the allowable limits specified in this title is declared to be a public nuisance, and shall be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction, or through administrative means pursuant to Chapters 1.44 or 1.48. Additionally, no provision of this title shall be construed to impair any common law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any person or injury or damage arising from any violation of this title or from other law. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
Chapter 12.20 - NOISE CORRIDOR(S) MAP 
Sections: 
 
12.20.010 - Preparation and maintenance. 
The planning director shall prepare and maintain a noise corridors map showing noise contours of sixty dB(A) Ldn or higher along all public streets, highways, and freeways, for use in designing noise insulation systems for new buildings and as a guideline for administration of this title. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.20.020 - Contents and use. 
This map shall be based upon assessment of community noise survey data. It may also show designated noise sensitive zones, and related data for administrative use. A copy of the current noise corridor map shall be posted in the planning department for public use. A copy shall be provided to the department of building and safety. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
Chapter 12.22 - APPENDICES 
Sections: 
 
12.22.020 - Description, effect and adoption. 
Appendices as described in Chapter 18.136 may be adopted to supplement this title. The effect of such appendices as well as adoption, amendment, and other administrative procedures shall also be as provided in Chapter 18.136. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.22.040 - Appendix A—Adoption. 
Appendix A to this title, codified in Section 12.22.060, is adopted concurrently with the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title. 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
12.22.060 - Appendix A—Designated. 
APPENDIX A TO TITLE 12 
CLASSIFICATION OF NOISE SOURCES 
ENVIRONMENTAL NOISE 	NUISANCE NOISE 
Air-conditioning units (fixed) 	Air-conditioning units (improperly maintained) 
	
Animal shelters 	Animals, pets 
	
Auto and vehicle repair in conjunction with permitted commercial or industrial activity 	Auto and vehicle repairs on residential sites 
	
	Carbide igniters and similar devices producing impactive noise 
	
Commercial activities normally found in connection with a permitted activity 	Commercial activities, other than those permitted which are causing a nuisance. . Also, outdoor commercial sales activities 
	
Industrial activities normally found in conjunction with a permitted activity 	Industrial activities, other than environmental 
	
Loose shutters, squeaky gates, clattering drain covers, and other conditions resulting from inadequate property 	
	
Machinery and compressors (fixed or maintained in conjunction with a permitted activity 	Machinery and compressors other than environmental 
	
	Off-road vehicles 
	
	Outcrying, shouting, screaming, whistling singing 
	
	Powered model toys, devices, vehicles and equipment 
	
Power tools normally found in conjunction with permitted uses 	Power tools, other than environmental. Also, hobby activities 
	
Lawn mowers 	
	
Pumps—Same as machinery and compressors 	Pumps - Same as machinery and compressors 
	
	Private parties, gathering, assemblages of limited duration 
	
Public address and public assembly, indoor and outdoor, as permitted 	Public address and public assembly, indoor and outdoor, as "temporary use" or as an assembly other than use environmental 
	Radios, stereos, televisions, sound amplifiers, musical instruments, drums 
	
Signaling devices (non-emergency) radio stationary 	Signaling devices (non-emergency) mobile utility truck speakers 
	
Outside phone bells 	
	
School Bells 	Emergency Burglar alarms 
	
	Auto theft alarms 
	
	Sound trucks 
 
(Ord. 2188 § 2, 2001)  
Title 13 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 13.04 - CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 
 
13.04.010 - Construction—Specifications. 
All sidewalks and curbs hereafter constructed within the city, the construction of which is financed either in whole or in part by funds derived from gas tax revenue shall be constructed according to the standard specifications of the state of California, Department of Public Works, Division of Highways existing and in force at the time the project is advertised for bids. Except as heretofore provided, all other sidewalks and curbs hereafter constructed within said city shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications designated in this chapter. 
(Ord. 790 § 1, 1950: Ord. 734 § 2, 1947)  
13.04.020 - Construction—Work. 
The work to be done shall include the furnishing of all labor, material and equipment necessary for or appurtenant to the construction and completion of all sidewalk and curb shown on, and in accordance with, the plans, profiles and cross sections, approved by the city council of said city and on file in the office of the city engineer, and to conform to the lines, levels and official grade of the street upon which said work is to be constructed. The work shall be done in a thorough workmanlike manner and to the satisfaction of the superintendent of streets. 
(Ord. 734 § 3, 1947)  
13.04.030 - Construction—Ground examination. 
If work is to be done under a public contract bidders must examine and judge for themselves as to the location of the proposed work, the nature of the material to be excavated, and the work to be done. 
(Ord. 734 § 4, 1947)  
13.04.040 - Construction—Setting stakes. 
The contractor shall give twenty-four hours notice in writing when he will require the services of the city engineer for laying out any portion of the work. The contractor shall preserve all stakes set for lines, grades or measurement of the work or any street monuments encountered, in their proper places until authorized to remove them by the city engineer. Any expense incurred in replacing said stakes, which the contractor may have failed to preserve, shall be borne by the contractor. 
(Ord. 734 § 5, 1947)  
13.04.050 - Construction—Inspectors. 
The contractor shall prosecute work only in the presence of an inspector or authorized representative of the superintendent of streets, and any work done in the absence of said inspector will be subject to rejection. The contractor shall make written application for an inspector at least twenty-four hours before his services are required on the work. The contractor shall furnish the engineer and inspector reasonable facilities for obtaining full information respecting the progress and manner of the work. 
(Ord. 734 § 6, 1947)  
13.04.060 - Construction—Materials—Samples. 
All materials must be of specified quality and fully equal to samples and the contractor shall furnish to the city engineer for test, whenever requested and free of charge, samples of all materials proposed to be used in the work. Any rejected material must be immediately removed from the work by the contractor and shall not again be brought upon the work. 
(Ord. 734 § 7, 1947)  
13.04.070 - Construction—Labor. 
Any superintendent, foreman, laborer or other person employed on the work by the contractor, who fails or refuses to perform the work in the manner specified herein, shall be discharged immediately and shall not again be employed on the work. 
(Ord. 734 § 8, 1947)  
13.04.080 - Construction—Obstructions—Removal. 
The contractor shall remove, at his own expense, all trees, stone, debris or other obstructions of whatever kind or character, either natural or artificial, where required for the proper completion of the work. 
(Ord. 734 § 9, 1947)  
13.04.090 - Construction—Obstructions—Creation. 
The contractor shall observe all the ordinances of the city in relation to the obstruction of streets, keeping open passage-ways and protecting the same where they are exposed or dangerous to travel. He shall also comply with all applicable federal and state laws under which he is operating, including those concerning the inspection of equipment and insurance regulations. 
(Ord. 734 § 10, 1947)  
13.04.100 - Construction—Warning devices. 
The contractor shall take all necessary measures to protect the work and prevent accidents during construction. He shall provide and maintain all necessary barriers, guards, temporary bridges and lights. 
(Ord. 734 § 11, 1947)  
13.04.110 - Construction—Interference with public utility. 
In case it should be necessary to move the property of any owner of a public utility or franchise, such owner will, upon proper application by the contractor, be notified by the superintendent of streets to move such property within two days, and the contractor shall not interfere with said property until after the expiration of the time specified. 
(Ord. 734 § 12, 1947)  
13.04.120 - Construction—Damage provisions—Cleanup. 
The contractor shall care for all work until final completion and acceptance. All damage done to existing improvements by the contractor shall be repaired by him. He shall remove all surplus material and rubbish from the work after its completion, and before he makes application for acceptance of the work. 
(Ord. 734 § 13, 1947)  
13.04.130 - Construction—Defective work. 
No work which is defective in its construction or in any of the requirements of these specifications will be considered as accepted in consequence of the failure of any employee of the city, or inspector connected with the work, to point out said defects or deficiency during construction. The contractor shall correct any imperfect work whenever discovered, before the final acceptance of the work. In case the contractor neglects or refuses to remove any rejected work or material, after written notice from the superintendent of streets to do so, such rejected work or material shall be removed and replaced by the superintendent of streets at the expense of the contractor. 
(Ord. 734 § 14, 1947)  
13.04.140 - Construction—Damage or loss—Liability. 
All loss or damage arising from any unforseen obstruction or difficulties either natural or artificial which may be encountered in the prosecution of the work, or from any action of the elements prior to the final acceptance of the work, or from any act or omission not authorized by these specifications, on the part of the contractor or any agent or person employed by him, shall be sustained by the contractor. 
(Ord. 734 § 15, 1947)  
13.04.150 - Construction—Final inspection. 
The contractor shall notify the superintendent of streets when he desires a final inspection of the work. The superintendent of streets will, as soon thereafter as possible, make the necessary examination. If the work is found to be in compliance with these specifications, and to his satisfaction, he will furnish the contractor with a certificate to that effect. 
(Ord. 734 § 16, 1947)  
13.04.160 - Screen size—Definitions. 
A.  The screens one-fourth inch and larger, herein specified, shall be held to have round openings and all screens smaller than one-fourth inch shall be held to have square openings, as: 
1.  One inch and one-fourth inch screens shall have, respectively, one inch and one-fourth inch diameter round openings; and 
2.  Twenty mesh, thirty mesh, one hundred mesh and two hundred mesh screens shall have respectively, four hundred, nine hundred, ten thousand and forty thousand square openings per square inch. 
B.  Whenever the word "contractor" is used in these specifications it refers to the party or parties of the second part in the agreement for the construction of the work. 
C.  The words "superintendent of streets" or "city engineer" refer respectively, to the superintendent of streets or the city engineer of the city of National City or their authorized agents or inspectors. 
(Ord. 734 § 17, 1947)  
13.04.170 - Materials—Specifications. 
A.  Cement. The cement used shall be Portland cement, shall conform to the following conditions and be subject to the following tests: 
1.  Fineness. It shall leave by weight, a residue of not more than eight percent on the one hundred mesh screen and not more than twenty-five percent on the two hundred mesh screen. 
2.  Time of Setting. It shall develop initial set in not less than thirty minutes and hard set in not less than one hour, nor more than ten hours. 
3.  Constancy of Volume. Pats of neat cement about three inches in diameter, one-half inch thick at the center, and tapering to a thin edge, shall be kept in moist air for a period of twenty-four hours and then subjected to the following tests: One pat shall be kept in air at normal temperature and observed for at least twenty-eight days; one pat shall be kept in water maintained at as near seventy degrees Fahrenheit as practicable, and observed at intervals for at least twenty-eight days; one pat shall be exposed in an atmosphere of steam, above boiling water, in a loosely closed vessel for five hours. These pats, to satisfactorily pass the requirements shall remain firm and hard and show no signs of distortion, checking, cracking or disintegrating. 
4.  Tensile Strength. The minimum requirements for tensile strength for briquettes one-inch square in section shall be within the following limits, and shall show no retrogression in strength within the periods specified. 
a. Neat Cement. 	
24 hours in moist air ..... 	150-200 lbs. 
7 days (1 day in moist air, 6 days in water) ..... 	450-500 lbs. 
28 days (1 day in moist air, 27 days in water) ..... 	550-650 lbs. 
b. One Part Cement Co Three Parts Sand. ..... 	
7 days (1 day in moist air, 6 days in water) ..... 	150-200 lbs. 
28 days (1 day in moist air, 27 days in water) ..... 	200-300 lbs. 
c. The sand in this test shall be standard Ottawa sand or clean sharp fresh water sand and pass a twenty mesh screen and be retained on a thirty mesh screen. 	
 
5.  Cement shall be received on the job—in sacks filled at the cement factory and each containing not less than ninety-four pounds net, of cement. Said sack of cement shall be deemed to have a volume of one cubic foot. The city engineer shall have authority to require any lot of cement to be held in storage until seven day tests can be completed. 
B.  Sand. The sand used shall be clean, sharp, fresh water sand free from loam, oil, mica, clay, vegetable matter or dirt. To be satisfactory the sand shall not contain more than five percent, by volume, of silt. Any material which will pass a one hundred mesh screen will be considered as silt. 
C.  Gravel or Crushed Rock. The gravel or crushed rock shall be clean, hard and shall be retained on a one-fourth inch mesh screen and shall all pass through a one inch mesh screen. It shall be well graded from the fine to the coarse. 
(Ord. 734 § 18, 1947)  
13.04.180 - Construction—Procedure. 
A.  Mixing Materials. Concrete materials shall be mixed in approved mixing equipment of the stationary plant type, paver type or truck mixer type. Neither speed nor volume capacity of the mixer shall exceed those recommended by the manufacturer. Mixing shall continue a minimum of one minute after all materials are in the mixer. 
B.  Grading. Grading shall include all cuts or fills necessary to bring the area occupied by the sidewalk and curb to the proper subgrade. The space over which fills are to be made shall be broken up in order to allow new material to unite with the old. All filling shall be done with good sound earth and no material of a lumpy, perishable, spongy or otherwise improper nature shall be used. Fills shall be placed in layers not exceeding four inches in thickness, dampened, and then compacted with heavy iron tampers. The contractor shall remove all roots encountered to a depth of six inches below subgrade and to a similar distance on all sides. When mud or other soft or spongy material is encountered it shall be removed and the space refilled with good earth which shall be placed in layers and compacted as above specified for fills. The contractor will not be required to excavate mud or soft material to a depth greater than two feet below grade. 
C.  Sidewalks. 
1.  Dimensions. All sidewalks shall be four inches thick and five feet in width, excepting adjoining property used for business purposes, where at the option of the property owner the walk may extend in width from the property line to the curb. Whenever the owner of business property exercises the option herein provided for, such option shall be exercised by communication signed by such property owner and filed with the city council prior to the passage of the resolution of intention. All sidewalks, except adjoining business property shall be placed two feet from the property line, unless otherwise approved by the city council. 
2.  Concrete Proportions. Sidewalks shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete in one course. The concrete shall .be made of the following proportions: 
a.  One part of Portland cement, 
b.  Two and one-half parts of sand, 
c.  Four parts of gravel or broken stone. 
All proportions of materials shall be made by actual measurements in boxes or wheelbarrows. 
3.  Mixing and Placing Concrete. The concrete shall be mixed as specified in Section 13.04.190 and enough water shall be used to make a fairly sloppy mixture. It shall then be spread upon the prepared subgrade, well spaded next to the side forms and then lightly tamped and struck off with a straight edge resting on the tops of the side forms. The surface shall then be floated with a steel float to remove irregularities and secure an even and uniform surface. After sufficient time to allow the concrete to reach the proper consistency the surface of the walk shall be jointed transversely approximately every three feet. After all water has left the surface of the concrete it shall be lightly brushed with a soft hair brush to secure as smooth and uniform a surface as possible. Before placing any concrete sidewalk on an adobe subgrade a cushion of one half inch of sand shall be spread over same. All subgrade shall be thoroughly wet before placing concrete. Expansion joints shall be placed in sidewalks not to exceed twenty-one feet apart and shall be formed by inserting a one-fourth inch preformed asphalt impregnated joint material. Sidewalks shall be cured by ponding the surface with water or by covering with earth and keeping them wet for a period of ten days. 
4.  Side Grade. There shall be a drop of one-fourth inch per foot in the grade of the sidewalk from the property line to the top of the curb. 
D.  Curb. 
1.  Dimensions. All curb shall be six inches wide on top, eight inches wide on the bottom and sixteen inches deep, having a batter of two inches on the street side, unless otherwise approved by the city council. 
2.  Concrete Proportions. Curbs shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete and a cement plaster finishing coat. The concrete for the body of the curb shall be composed of materials in the same proportions as specified for sidewalks. The cement plaster finishing coat shall be made of the following proportions: One part Portland cement and two parts of sand. 
3.  Mixing and Placing Concrete. The concrete and plaster shall be mixed as specified in Section 13.04.190. The concrete of the body of the curb may be mixed with less water than specified for sidewalk; but enough water shall be used to secure a workable mix such that free water will rise to the surface when the concrete is tamped into the forms. 
It shall then be placed into substantial forms and well tamped. After the concrete has set sufficiently to be uninjured, the forms shall be removed and a plaster coat at least one-quarter of an inch thick shall be placed on the street face and the top of the curb and well troweled to secure a smooth and uniform finish. The curb shall then be jointed off into blocks approximately three feet long. The upper edge of the curb, next to the street, shall be tooled rounded to one-inch radius. 
(Ord. 734 § 19, 1947)  
13.04.190 - Non-concrete surface—Permit required. 
Any person desiring to install a surface other than concrete, such as a surface composed of a plastic or other substance, upon a sidewalk adjacent to or across property located within the city shall first obtain a permit from the city council. Such permit shall not be granted until the surfacing proposed to be installed shall first meet such requirements and pass such tests as may be required by the director of public works and approved by the city council, and shall not be granted until the owner of the real property adjacent to or upon which the sidewalk proposed to be so surfaced shall have filed with the city clerk a notarized statement verifying that such person is the owner of the said real property; that he shall meet and satisfy all installation instructions and directions specified by the manufacturer of such surfacing; that such person, his heirs or assigns, shall indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees, from any and all liabilities arising from or as a result of the installation of such surfacing; and further, that such person shall take immediate corrective measures in the event the installation of such surfacing or the condition of such surfacing, should become a hazard to the public safety as determined by the director of public works and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. 1047 § 1, 1962: Ord. 734 § 19a, 1947)  
13.04.210 - Commercial or homeowners' driveway, sidewalk and/or curb public improvement permit—Required when. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cut, break, remove, construct or install any curb, gutter, sidewalk or driveway on any public street or alley in the city without first obtaining either a commercial or homeowners' driveway, sidewalk and/or curb public improvement permit from the city engineer to do so. 
(Ord. 1473 § 1, 1975)  
13.04.220 - Permits—Issuance restrictions. 
No such improvement permit issued under Section 13.04.210 shall be in conflict with the following regulations: 
A.  The maximum width of any driveway shall be not more than thirty-five feet, as measured at the top of the curbing. 
B.  The minimum distance between driveways serving the same lot or parcel of land shall be not less than twenty-five feet, as measured at the top of the curbing. 
C.  No driveway shall exceed forty percent of the frontage upon any street of the lot or parcel of land to be served. 
D.  No driveway shall be located so as to interfere with intersecting sidewalks, traffic signals, lampposts, fire hydrants or utility poles. No driveway shall be placed nearer than five feet, as measured from beginning of the curb depression, to the beginning of a curb return at an intersecting street. 
E.  No driveway curb depression shall begin nearer than eleven feet from the property line projected to the curb, other than the minimum width driveways in residential areas. 
F.  No permit shall be issued to remove any curbing where it is the intent of the applicant to install a curb depression, unless between curb and property line a concrete driveway of six-inch thickness is to be installed. 
G.  Upon issuance of a driveway public improvement permit the permittee agrees as a condition to accepting said permit that he, his assigns or successors owning or having owned the property to be served thereby shall replace such driveway with standard curb and sidewalk, if and when abandoned. 
Any abandoned driveway shall be removed and replaced with curb and sidewalk upon direction of the city engineer; provided, however, that the council may, in special cases, by resolution, order the issuance of a public improvement permit to construct and maintain driveways in excess of the limitations contained in subsections A, B, C, D and E, of this section. Applications for such special permits shall be made to the city manager who shall recommend to the city council the granting or denial of same. A fee as established in the fee schedule adopted by the city council shall accompany each application for such special permit. No application shall be considered unless the fee has been paid. 
H.  All concrete work shall be done in accordance with the city standard specifications in effect at the time of such work and on file with the city clerk. 
(Ord. 2018 § 8, 1991; Ord. 1473 § 2, 1975)  
13.04.230 - Commercial public improvement permit—Issuance—Fee. 
Before any commercial public improvement permit is issued to a licensed contractor under Sections 13.04.210 through 13.04.255, a public improvement permit fee shall be paid to the city. 
A.  Such fee shall be ten dollars plus ten cents per linear foot of work in excess of twenty-five feet as measured along the curb line. The city engineer's determination of locations, length and measurements of curb line shall be final. 
B.  Commercial public improvement permits shall be obtained by contractors who are licensed by the state to do this form of work. The licensed contractor shall have a valid city business license. 
(Ord. 1473 § 3, 1975)  
13.04.240 - Homeowners' driveway, sidewalk and/or curb public improvement permit—Fee—Conditions for issuance. 
Any property owner occupying property solely as his own home or constructing a house to be occupied solely as his own home, may obtain a homeowners' sidewalk, curb and/or driveway public improvement permit upon the following conditions: 
A.  Homeowner applicant shall be the owner occupant, or constructing the house for his own occupancy. 
B.  Homeowner applicant shall construct the curb, gutter, sidewalk and/or driveway to official grade and in accordance with standard plans for curb, gutter, sidewalk and/or driveways, on file in the office of the city engineer, a copy of which will be furnished applicant upon request. 
C.  Construction forms shall be inspected by the city engineer before any concrete is placed or poured under authority of said public improvement permit. 
D.  Homeowner applicant shall furnish a cash deposit in the amount of one hundred dollars, guaranteeing completion of the curb, gutter, sidewalk and/or driveway in a workmanlike manner. Final determination of what is and what is not workmanlike, for work commenced or completed under said public improvement permit shall be at the sole discretion of the city engineer. Homeowner applicant upon satisfactory completion of all work commenced under this permit may make application in writing to the city engineer for return of his deposit. 
E.  The fee for the homeowners' public improvement permit shall be as established in the fee schedule adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. 2018 § 9, 1991; Ord. 1473 § 4, 1975)  
13.04.250 - Permits—Requirements. 
Requirements for both commercial and homeowners public improvement permits for curb, gutter, sidewalk and/or driveway are as follows: 
A.  Applicant shall maintain the premises in a safe manner, shall provide adequate barricades and lights at his own expense to protect the safety of the public using the adjacent streets or sidewalks and shall hold the city free from any damages incurred by his operations. 
B.  All debris and surplus material shall be promptly removed upon completion of the work. 
C.  In the event the applicant does not complete the work, including the removal of debris and surplus material within a period of ten days from the date of inspection of forms, the street superintendent shall complete the construction and/or removal of debris and material and shall recover from the cash deposit the actual cost of the work, including overhead, plus a surcharge of fifty percent. 
(Ord. 1473 § 5, 1975)  
13.04.255 - Permits—Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation as principal, agent or employee violating any of the provisions of Section 13.04.210 through 13.04.250 is guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as set forth in Section 1.20.010. 
(Ord. 1621, 1978; Ord. 1473 § 6, 1975)  
13.04.260 - Closures—Authority. 
If, at any time it appears necessary to the superintendent of streets to close any street, road, alley, avenue or highway within the corporate limits of the city by reason of its being out of repair or dangerous for public travel, or to close the same so as to permit of proper completion of work which is being performed thereon, said superintendent of streets may close or cause to be closed the whole or any portion of any such street, road, alley, avenue or highway deemed necessary to be excluded from public travel. While any such street, road, alley, avenue or highway or any portion thereof is so closed, or which the same or any portion thereof is out of repair, or is dangerous for public travel, or is in process of construction, repair or maintenance, said superintendent of streets, or any contractor who has been awarded the contract for doing the work of construction, repair or maintenance thereon, may erect or cause to be erected, suitable barriers or obstructions thereon, and may post or cause to be posted, conspicuous notices to the effect that such street, road, alley, avenue or highway, or portion thereof, is closed to public travel, or directing the traffic, and may place or cause to be placed thereon, warning lights and lanterns. 
(Ord. 457 § 1, 1916)  
13.04.270 - Closure—Barrier removal—Penalty. 
Whenever such street, road, alley, avenue or highway is closed to the public or is in process of construction, repair or maintenance, as provided in Section 13.04.260, any person who wilfully breaks down, removes, injures or destroys any such barriers or obstructions, or tears down, removes or destroys any such notices, or extinguishes, removes, injures or destroys, any such warning lights or lanterns, so erected, posted or placed by such superintendent of streets, or by or under his direction and authority, or by any duly authorized contractor as hereinabove provided, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof is punishable as prescribed in Section 1.20.010. 
(Ord. 1358 § 2 (part), 1973; Ord. 457 § 2, 1916)  
13.04.280 - Sidewalk maintenance—Responsibility—Lien. 
Any person owning, or having charge of any properties in the city is charged with the duty of maintaining sidewalks, curbs and gutters adjacent to or contiguous to said properties free and clear of all dirt, rocks, debris and other materials which would tend to obstruct said sidewalks, curbs and gutters. Said persons shall also be liable for the proper maintenance of street lines and sidewalks, as required by Section 5610 of the Streets and Highways Code of the state. In the event that said persons fail to maintain sidewalks, curbs, gutters and streets in accordance with the requirements of this section and the Streets and Highways Code of the state, notice shall be given, as provided in the Streets and Highways Code, and in the event the city is required to perform such maintenance, a lien shall be imposed to cover the cost of such work. Said lien shall be collected as a part of the assessment of the regular tax bill levied against the lot or parcel of land as provided in Section 5628 of the Streets and Highways Code of the state. 
(Ord. 1379 § 1, 1973)  
Chapter 13.08 - UNDERGROUND UTILITY INSTALLATIONS PROCEDURE*  
I. - Subdivision and Redevelopment Requirements 
 
13.08.010 - Definitions. 
"Redevelopment" refers to planning, development, redesign, etc., of all or part of lands of five acres in area, based on general welfare, and may include rehabilitation of existing structures, open space type uses (streets, parks, recreation areas, etc.), development of undeveloped areas which are either stagnant due to faulty street and lot layout or need replanning and land assembly due to scattered ownership or tax delinquency, but does not exclude continuance of existing structures. 
"Subdivision" refers to improved or unimproved land or lands divided or proposed to be divided, for the purpose of sale or lease or financing, whether immediate or future, into five or more lots or parcels, and condominium projects of five condominiums or more and community apartment projects of five parcels or more as defined in Section 11535.1 of the Subdivision Map Act of the state, whether such projects are new or are conversions from other forms of ownership. 
(Ord. 1506 § 2, 1976; Ord. 1181 § 2, 1967)  
13.08.020 - Subdivision—Installation. 
In conjunction with the approval of all subdivisions, the following shall be required: 
A.  Underground Utilities. All existing or proposed electrical, telephone or similar distribution utility facilities shall be placed underground. Transformers, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, concealed ducts and other facilities necessarily pertinent to such underground utilities or any required street lighting system may be placed above ground. 
All water distribution and sewer collection facilities shall be installed in conformance with the specifications of the city. 
B.  Ornamental Street Lighting. Ornamental street lighting may be required in all locations and design as approved by the city council, upon recommendation of the planning commission. All such lighting on streets to be offered for dedication shall be electric. 
C.  Fire Alarm Boxes. Provisions shall be made with the city for the installation of fire alarm boxes and wiring for same, in accordance with the fire alarm system of the city. 
D.  Responsibility. The subdivider shall be responsible for complying with the requirements of this section and shall make all the necessary arrangements with each of the serving utility companies and the city for the installation of all required facilities. 
(Ord. 2283, 2006: Ord. 1181 § 3, 1967)  
13.08.030 - Multiple dwelling—Commercial—Industrial—Installation. 
Within the boundary lines of all property upon which is constructed or moved in a multiple-family dwelling of five units or more, a commercial, manufacturing or industrial structure, the following conditions on installation of public utility facilities shall be required: 
A.  Underground Utilities. All electrical telephone and similar distribution service wires shall be placed underground. Transformers, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, concealed ducts and other facilities necessarily pertinent to such underground facilities may be placed above ground. 
All sewer collection and water distribution facilities shall be installed in conformance with specifications of the city. 
B.  Responsibility. The property owner is responsible for complying with the requirements of this section and shall make all the necessary arrangements for the installation of such facilities with each of the serving utility companies and the city. 
C.  Existing Utilities and Structures. This section shall not apply to existing utilities, existing structures, nor to the alteration, extension or enlargement of an existing structure. 
(Ord. 1181 § 4, 1967)  
13.08.040 - Redevelopment—Installation. 
Within the exterior boundary lines of all property and within the half of all streets bounding a redevelopment project, publicly or privately controlled, of five acres or more, the following conditions shall be required: 
A.  Underground Utilities. All existing utility facilities within the exterior boundary line of the redevelopment project and within the half of all streets bounding the redevelopment project shall be relocated and installed underground. 
All electrical, telephone and similar distribution utility facilities to be installed within the exterior boundary lines and within the half of all streets bounding the redevelopment project shall be placed underground. 
All water distribution and sewer collection facilities shall be installed in conformance with specifications of the city. 
Transformers, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, concealed ducts and other facilities necessarily pertinent to such underground utilities or any required street lighting system may be placed above ground. 
B.  Ornamental Street Lighting. Ornamental street lighting shall be required in all locations and design as approved by the city council, upon recommendation of the planning commission. All such lighting on streets dedicated or to be offered for dedication shall be electric. 
C.  Television and Radio Antennas or Cables. Television and radio reception shall be provided by concealed antennas or by an underground or other concealed cable and one central antenna. 
D.  Fire Alarm Boxes. Provisions shall be made with the city for the installation of fire alarm boxes and wiring the same, in accordance with the fire alarm system of the city. 
E.  Responsibility. The property owner and/or developer shall be responsible for complying with the requirements of this section and shall make all the necessary arrangements with each of the serving utility companies and the city for the installation of all required facilities. 
(Ord. 1181 § 5, 1967)  
13.08.050 - Applicability—Exceptions. 
The provisions of Sections 13.08.010 through 13.08.040 shall not apply to the installation or maintenance of overhead electric transmission lines and overhead communication long distance trunk and feeder lines. If the planning commission finds that exceptional circumstances or conditions apply to any portion of a proposed development as outlined in Sections 13.08.010 through 13.08.040 and the requirement of the installation of any of the improvements required herein would be impractical or unreasonable because of the topography, soil, exceptional drainage conditions or other condition, or it is not economically feasible to install the required installation, the city council, upon recommendation of the planning commission may grant specific modifications or waivers of the improvement required. 
(Ord. 1181 § 6, 1967)  
II. - Installation Specifications 
 
13.08.060 - Title. 
This article may be cited as the "National City underground utilities procedural ordinance." 
(Ord. 1414 § 1, 1974)  
13.08.070 - Construction of article. 
This article shall be liberally construed in order to effectuate its purposes, and no error, irregularity, or informality, and no neglect or omission of any officer in any procedure taken under this article which does not directly affect the jurisdiction of the council to order the work and improvement shall avoid or invalidate such proceeding. 
(Ord. 1414 § 2, 1974)  
13.08.080 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this article to provide for the creation of underground utility districts in the city in which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures, as hereinafter defined, shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. 1414 § 3, 1974)  
13.08.090 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this article the following words or phrases are used, they shall mean: 
A.  "City" means the city of National City, a municipal corporation in the state of California. 
B.  "Commission" means the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California. 
C.  "Council" means the city council of the city. 
D.  "Underground utility district" or "district" means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area as described in a resolution or resolutions adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.08.130. 
E.  "Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures" means poles, towers, supports, wires, cables, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above ground upon, along, across or over the streets, alleys and ways of the city and used or usable in supplying electric, communication, community antenna television or similar or associate service. 
F.  "Utility company" means and includes all persons and entities supplying electric, communication, community antenna television or similar or associated service. 
G.  "Affected persons" means the owners of real property located within the district, or proposed district, as shown on the last equalized San Diego County assessment roll and each occupant of real property located within the district or proposed district. 
(Ord. 1414 § 4, 1974)  
13.08.100 - Exceptions. 
Unless otherwise provided in the resolution creating the district, this article and any resolution adopted pursuant thereto shall not apply to the following types of facilities: 
A.  Poles, and associated overhead structures, used exclusively for street lighting or signalization; 
B.  Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited; 
C.  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street; 
D.  Electric transmission lines of sixty thousand volts phase-to-phase and above; 
E.  Radio antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures for such antennae, used by a utility company for furnishing communication services; 
F.  Pad mounted transformers, junction boxes and service terminals on pedestals above ground used to distribute electrical, communication and community antenna television or similar or associated service, in the underground systems; 
G.  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures located on private property, used solely during the course of construction on that private property; 
H.  Overhead wires to provide temporary or emergency service installed subject to the provisions of Section 13.08.150; 
I.  New or existing pole to anchor guy wires within the district necessary to support overhead facilities outside the boundary of the district or poles within the district which have been specifically excepted in the resolution creating the district. 
(Ord. 1414 § 5, 1974)  
13.08.110 - Public hearing by council. 
By appropriate resolution the council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public health, safety or general welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within the designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, community antenna television or similar or associated service. Each hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 1414 § 6, 1974)  
13.08.120 - Notice of hearing. 
A.  The city clerk shall notify all affected persons and each utility company concerned of the time and place of the hearings at least fifteen days prior to the date thereof. 
B.  Notices given under this section may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail, each notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid. Each notice to an owner of real property in a district, or proposed district, shall be addressed as such owner's name appears, and at the address listed for such owner, on the last equalized assessment roll of the county of San Diego. Each notice to an occupant of real property in any district, or proposed district, shall be addressed to occupant at the street address or addresses located on the real property. Notice given by mail shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof. 
C.  The city clerk shall cause the resolution calling a public hearing as set forth in Section 13.08.110 to be published in a newspaper of general circulation as defined in Section 6000 of the California Government Code. Publication of the resolution shall be for one time, not less than five days prior to the date of the public hearing stated in the resolution. 
(Ord. 1414 § 7, 1974)  
13.08.130 - Districts designated by resolution. 
If, after the public hearing, the council finds that the public health, safety or general welfare requires removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures and underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, community antenna television or similar or associated service within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution declare the designated area an underground utility district and order the removal and underground installation. Immediately following its adoption, the city clerk shall cause a certified copy of the resolution to be recorded in the office of the county recorder. The resolution shall include a description and map of the area comprising the district. It shall also provide that the council shall by subsequent resolution fix the time within which: 
A.  Property in the district must be ready to receive underground service; and 
B.  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures shall be removed. 
A reasonable time shall be allowed for removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
(Ord. 1414 § 8, 1974)  
13.08.140 - Unlawful acts. 
Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 13.08.130, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility company to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, own, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district on and after the date when overhead facilities are required to be removed by the resolution, except as otherwise provided in this article. Commencing upon the date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed, the continued existence, presence or maintenance of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district shall be and the same is declared to be contrary to the health, safety and general welfare of the public and unlawful, and the same may be abated summarily or as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. 1414 § 9, 1974)  
13.08.150 - Exception for emergency service. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed thirty days, without authority of the council, in order to provide emergency service. The council may grant special permission, on such terms and for such durations as the council may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, and where not detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare and without discrimination as to any person or utility company, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within the district. 
(Ord. 1414 § 10, 1974)  
13.08.160 - Notification of affected persons and utilities. 
A.  Within fifteen days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.08.130, the city clerk shall notify all affected utility companies and all affected persons of the provisions of the resolution. The city clerk specifically shall notify the affected persons that if they desire to continue to receive electric, communication, community antenna television or similar or associated service, they shall provide, at their own expense, all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive underground service from the lines relocated underground of the supplying utility company subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility company on file with the Commission and to all other applicable requirements of state laws and city ordinances. 
B.  Within fifteen days of adoption by the council of the resolution fixing the time within which conversions on private property and pole removal must be accomplished, the city clerk shall further notify all affected utilities and affected persons that the work required to change the facilities on the premises so as to receive electric, communication, or community antenna television or similar or associated service provided or to be provided by the utility company shall be accomplished on or before the applicable date set forth in the resolution. This notice shall also state the date all poles and related overhead structures are to be removed from within the district. 
C.  Notices given under this section may be given either by personal service or by mail and in accordance with the provisions of Section 13.08.120. 
D.  Within fifteen days of adoption of the resolution fixing the conversion and pole removal times of the district, the city manager shall cause copies of the notice, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size and headed "Notice of Pole Removal" in letters of not less than one inch in height, to be posted conspicuously on every pole to be removed within the district. 
(Ord. 1414 § 11, 1974)  
13.08.170 - Responsibility of utility companies. 
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.08.130, any utility company engaging in such underground construction shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under the applicable orders, rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the Commission. 
(Ord. 1414 § 12, 1974)  
13.08.180 - Responsibility of property owners. 
The owner or owners of real property within a district shall be obligated to and shall be responsible for the commencement and completion of work as may be necessary to provide for the continuance of electric, communication, community antenna television or similar or associated service to the premises between the facilities referred to in Section 13.08.170 and the termination of service connection facilities on or within the building or structure being serviced, all in accordance with applicable orders, rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility companies on file with the Commission as of the effective date of the resolution creating the district, and in accordance with the applicable requirements of state laws and city ordinances. 
(Ord. 1414 § 13, 1974)  
13.08.190 - Noncompliance—Discontinuance of overhead service. 
A.  In the event the owner or owners of real property within a district do not comply with the provisions of Section 13.08.180 within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.08.130, the respective utility companies concerned shall advise the city manager in writing of the location of such property and thereupon the city manager shall cause to be posted on such property a written notice on the property being served. 
B.  The notice required by subsection A of this section shall include the statement that thirty days after posting of the notice all utility companies are authorized to discontinue electric, communication, community antenna television or similar or associated service from poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. 
C.  Thirty days after such posting, all utility companies are authorized to discontinue electric, communication, community antenna television or similar or associated service from poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures. 
(Ord. 1414 § 14, 1974)  
13.08.200 - Responsibility of city. 
The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner of the poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures to remove them within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.08.130. 
(Ord. 1414 § 15, 1974)  
13.08.210 - Extension of time. 
In the event that any act required by this article or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.08.130 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(Ord. 1414 § 16, 1974)  
Chapter 13.12 - ENCROACHMENT PERMITS FOR INSTALLATION, MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL OF FACILITIES IN STREETS, RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY* 
* Prior ordinance history: Ords. 900, 1621 and 2180. 
 
13.12.010 - Findings, purpose and intent. 
A.  Private work in the public streets, rights-of-way and other public property is regulated through the encroachment permit process in order to protect the public safety and provide for the orderly administration and maintenance of public roadways and other public property for the benefit of the community. The encroachment permit is a process for clearance by the city to allow excavation work in public venues with minimum disruption to traffic or public safety. The process also applies to clearances for work to be performed under grants of franchise. 
B.  It is the further intent of the city council to require public utility providers, other public and governmental agencies and private parties who are permitted to install facilities in the public streets and rights-of-way to restore the street surfaces in the interests of traffic safety and, where applicable and allowable by law, pay fair and reasonable compensation for the use of public property. 
C.  It is the intent of the council to not require applicants for encroachment permits to disclose proprietary information or trade secrets applicable to their technology, systems or facilities, except to the extent reasonably necessary to evaluate the installation or operation of the facility in terms of its impact on public safety. 
D.  Administration of this chapter shall be under the direction and control of the city manager, and as may be delegated to the city engineer under this chapter. 
(Ord. 2227 (part), 2003)  
13.12.020 - Definitions. 
Within this chapter, the following terms and expressions shall mean and be interpreted as follows: 
A.  "Facility" means and includes, without limitation, any object, pole, light or signal standard, traffic or irrigation controller, standpipe, sign, pipe, conduit, cable, fiber optics, manhole, duct, tunnel, trench, utility cabinet or similar appurtenance. 
B.  "Person" means and includes any natural person, corporation, firm, agency, partnership, joint venture or association, and the singular and plural or the masculine or feminine gender. It also includes a public utility or a public or governmental agency. 
C.  "Public right-of-way" means and includes any public street, alley, sidewalk, driveway, curb, pavement, gutter or parkway. 
D.  "Improvement" means and includes any addition, alteration or modification to an existing facility. 
E.  "Public property" includes land, easements and other interests in real property owned, leased by or otherwise belonging to the city, other than "public rights of-way." 
F.  "Applicant" and "permittee" means the person or entity that is to benefit from the facility and its installation, and can also include the contractor or entity doing me actual installation. It also includes, as applicable, an entity performing excavation and installation pursuant to a franchise. The term shall also include, without limitation, telecommunications providers subject to the Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended and any other commercial entity that sells or provides services or facilities to the public or selected subscribers through installations utilizing public rights of way or public property. 
G.  "Encroachment" means a facility or other physical object installed within, under, over or upon the public right of way or public property. The term shall also include the line-of-sight aerial passage of a beam of light or laser through the airspace over such real property. It shall not include any wireless, microwave or radio transmission over such real property. 
H.  "Encroach" refers to the act of installing or maintaining an "encroachment." It includes excavation. 
I.  "Encroachment permit" refers to a permit or form of clearance issued by the city engineer for purposes of excavation, grading and placement of facilities in the public right of way or public property, or any combination thereof. 
(Ord. 2227 (part), 2003)  
13.12.030 - Encroachment permits—Required. 
A.  Except as provided within franchise or subsection (F) of this section, it is unlawful to construct, install, place, maintain or remove improvements or facilities, or to grade, excavate or encroach within, upon, under or over, any public right-of-way or public property of the city without a valid encroachment permit or clearance issued pursuant to this chapter. Notwithstanding, rights granted under a franchise shall be subject to the procedures specified in this chapter for the reasonable regulation and clearances applicable to the commencement of excavation or installation of facilities, or both, within the public rights of way and property. 
B.  An encroachment permit allows only the designated permittee(s) and their authorized contractors to excavate, grade and install, maintain or remove approved facilities within the boundaries and under the terms and conditions specified in the encroachment permit. The permit may be for a specific duration or unlimited duration, conditional upon the removal or relocation of the facility when necessary for reasons of the public health, safety and welfare or public convenience. No person or permittee, including a franchisee or licensee, shall assign or enlarge the scope of an approved encroachment permit or allow another person to install an additional facility within the permitted encroachment without the prior written authorization of the city engineer or, when applicable, the city manager or council, which authorization shall not be unreasonably withheld or denied. 
C.  The city engineer shall require the benefiting entity or its duly authorized representative to apply for all requisite permits. Financial obligations imposed by this chapter shall relate primarily to and be the responsibility of the permittee who benefits from the installation of the facility. 
D.  Issuance of an encroachment permit includes a condition that a permittee shall remove or relocate the permitted facility or encroachment at the permittee's sole expense when determined necessary by the city engineer under the exercise of the city's police power for the public health, safety and welfare or convenience. This shall include the right of the city to regrade or realign the streets or install its own facilities, and to require the permittee to remove or relocate its facility at the permittee's expense when necessary to accommodate the public facility or improvement. A permittee may be required to pay for the cost of relocating other previously permitted encroachments when necessary to accommodate its facility. 
E.  The permittee, or its contractor on behalf of the permittee, shall obtain any business licenses and other permits or licenses, including construction permits, required by code, statute or regulation pertaining to the installation of the facility, and shall be responsible for complying with all other applicable provisions of law and this code notwithstanding the issuance of an encroachment permit. 
F.  Nothing in this chapter shall prevent excavation for emergency repairs to public utility service connections or other work that is necessary for the immediate protection of life or property, provided the entity first notifies the city engineer by telephone or other means reasonably calculated to promptly apprise the city engineer of the location and nature of the emergency and applies for a permit no later than the end of the third business day following the commencement of work. 
G.  The city engineer shall have the authority to promulgate rules and regulations necessary to implement this chapter, and to negotiate and issue annual master encroachment permits to repetitive users with due allowance for the requirements of this chapter. A "repetitive user" shall refer to any public agency, public utility or other entity with a franchise or license from the city that contemplates repetitive facility installations in the public rights of way or public property. 
H.  Except where an exemption pursuant to Section 13.12.060(G) exists, the city reserves the right to charge applicants fair and reasonable compensation allowable by law for the use of public right of way or property for an encroachment or any future enlargement of an existing encroachment, in addition to all other fees and processing costs required under Section 13.12.090. 
(Ord. 2227 (part), 2003)  
13.12.040 - Encroachment permits—Bonds and insurance. 
Proof of a performance bond and liability insurance shall be posted by the permittee for each individual or master encroachment permit issued to ensure timely completion of work and to cover damages caused by the work to public right-of-way and property. Comprehensive general liability insurance with a minimum of one million dollars combined single limit per occurrence coverage shall be maintained throughout the term of the permit, except that the city engineer may require a greater amount of insurance when justified by accepted risk management standards. Statutory liability provisions pertaining to permissibly self-insured entities and joint power agreements or similar agreements with the city meeting the requirements of this chapter respecting performance and maintenance criteria satisfy these requirements. 
(Ord. 2227 (part), 2003)  
13.12.050 - Encroachment permits—Application. 
Before an encroachment permit may be issued, the applicant must file a written application with the city engineer. The permit shall be subject to all provisions contained and approved within the application, the City of National City Standard Specifications, Regional and City Standard Drawings, Special Provisions, and Design Standards, and such other conditions as may be imposed by the city engineer based on accepted engineering practice as shall be necessary to protect the public health, welfare and safety. 
(Ord. 2227 (part), 2003)  
13.12.060 - Encroachment permits—Authority and responsibility of city engineer. 
A.  The city engineer shall issue a permit to excavate or encroach upon, within or over the public right-of-way or other public property of the city only if an applicant for such a permit can demonstrate that: 
1.  There is a compelling need to use the public right-of-way or property for the applicant's proposed use; 
2.  The issuance of a permit will not be detrimental to public safety or welfare, nor interfere with access required under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA); 
3.  The applicant can comply with all the terms, conditions and restrictions incorporated in the permit and this ordinance; 
4.  The applicant has complied or will comply with all applicable state and federal laws and has obtained other applicable permits and certifications required under state and federal law; and 
5.  The applicant has reviewed city and other public records pertaining to existing and proposed encroachments and has coordinated, to the maximum extent reasonably practicable, the details of its proposed facility installation with existing and previously approved proposed facilities and permittees. 
B.  Except with respect to proprietary information regarding the technology of the facility to be installed, customer lists or financial information which could adversely affect an applicant's competitive advantage, the city engineer shall have the authority to require the applicant to disclose information deemed necessary to the city's decision making process in order to make suitable provisions in a reasonable manner regarding: 
1.  The applicant's proposed methods for installation of any lines, wires, cables, conduits and other equipment in the right-of-way, and any pertinent technical details which are necessary to determine the impact upon public safety in the venue of installation; 
2.  The quantity and dimensions of applicant's proposed lines, wires, cables, conduits and other equipment to be installed in the right-of-way; 
3.  The specific date(s) applicant proposes to install or begin using any lines, wires, cables, conduits and other equipment in the right-of-way; 
4.  The location of all proposed installations, if known, by the applicant and all existing lines, wires, cables, conduits and other equipment in the pertinent vicinity of the applicant's proposed installation in the city right-of-way; 
5.  The specific traffic safety and environmental measures the applicant proposes to use while excavating, grading or obstructing any right-of-way; 
6.  Any time limitations applicable to the installation, use or removal of the facilities; 
7.  The coordination of the proposed facility installation with anticipated or existing encroachments and other construction in the venue of installation; and 
8.  Traffic and pedestrian access, safety and control. 
C.  Except as to those matters regulated by the Public Utilities Commission, the Federal Communications Commission or other state or federal agency, the city engineer shall have the authority to coordinate and prescribe conditions for the installation, use, duration and removal of the facilities and other encroachments by the permittee and its assigns. These conditions may include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Submittal of record drawings; 
2.  Notification to Underground Service Alert (USA/SC) and "Dig-alert" subscription; 
3.  Joint trench cost sharing, and screening of aboveground utility cabinets; 
4.  Coordination of work with other agencies or projects; 
5.  Full cost reimbursement for city's actual costs for reasonable and necessary city inspection services during construction; 
6.  Underground installation in lieu of an aerial or surface placement, when determined to be feasible by the city engineer and as required by law; and 
7.  Prohibition or restrictions on the placement of permanent auxiliary power generators which impede pedestrian or vehicular access or safety within the right-of-way. 
D.  The applicant shall be responsible for reviewing city and other public records and contacting existing city permittees and public utility companies to determine the location of existing facilities that will impact upon or be impacted by the proposed installation and providing any necessary assurances or provisions regarding noninterference with prior permitted facilities and encroachments. The permittee shall comply with Government Code Section 4216 et seq. regarding notification to Underground Service Alert of any pending excavation work, and shall be responsible for the removal or obliteration of markouts upon completion of work. The city reserves the right to require the permittee to pay for or reimburse the reasonable costs of hiring an inspector or supervisor to oversee the work to protect the city's interests during facility installation. 
E.  Issuance of a permit does not constitute a representation by the city that subsurface conditions are accurately reflected in the records of the city, and the city accepts no liability for any inaccuracies. Each permittee assumes the complete risk and responsibility for damage to previously installed permitted facilities, regardless of any inaccuracy of records. Each permittee shall be responsible for repair or reimbursement for damage to or relocation of previously installed facilities necessitated by the installation of its facility. The permittee shall notify the city engineer and any affected prior permittee(s) should repair or relocation become necessary. 
F.  Issuance of an encroachment permit includes a condition that the permittee: 
1.  Shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city from all liability occasioned from or caused by the installation or operation of the facility, except that arising from the sole negligence or willful misconduct of the city; and 
2.  Shall maintain the encroachment and any required conditions of the permit during the life of the encroachment, except as otherwise agreed or specified. 
G.  The city engineer shall host periodic coordination meetings with potential applicants and current permittees regarding pending applications and proposed construction in the various rights-of-way and public places. The format of such meetings may be as provided for by existing franchise or license agreements or as may be determined feasible by the city engineer. The city engineer shall not be responsible for obtaining information for any applicant, but shall make existing public information available to an applicant for appropriate research and coordination. 
H.  Whenever an exemption or exception from the requirements of this chapter is claimed by an applicant or permittee under the terms of a statute, franchise, license, agreement, regulatory preemption or final judicial decision, the applicant or permittee shall be responsible for establishing the authority, scope or extent of that exemption or exception to the reasonable satisfaction of the city engineer. The city engineer shall accept particular provisions from franchises and related agreements that are in substantial conformity with the various requirements of this chapter as complying with the procedures for the administration and issuance of encroachment permits. 
I.  Notwithstanding the general rights granted in a franchise to use the public rights of way for installation and maintenance of facilities, no excavation in a public right of way shall commence by or on behalf of a franchisee without prior notification to and clearance from the city engineer, except as provided in Section 13.12.030(F) for emergency work. 
(Ord. 2227 (part), 2003)  
13.12.070 - Resurfacing of streets. 
A.  Except for new service or an emergency, or as allowed by franchise, it is city policy to prohibit major excavation in any street that was resurfaced within the preceding three years. When permitting major excavation in a city street resurfaced within the preceding three years, the city engineer may require the permittee to resurface the entire lane of travel for the length of the cut for reasons of traffic safety. The travel lane shall be resurfaced with a minimum one inch asphalt overlay or slurry seal overlay to create a smooth interface between the old and new pavement surfaces. Slurry seal may be used only on streets resurfaced by slurry seal. For purposes of this subsection, "major excavation" shall be any trench cut greater than four inches in width, or any point of repair that exceeds four feet by four feet. The dimensions of the lane of travel to be resurfaced shall refer to a pavement width of no less than eight feet or more than twelve feet. 
B.  The city engineer may require two or more permittees who are allowed to excavate separate trenches or points of repair of minor dimension in the same lane of travel to resurface the entire lane of travel for the length of the cuts if the excavations, when accumulated, create an impact to the road surface comparable to or greater than that described in subsection (A). Each permittee shall post a security deposit or surety bond guaranteeing resurfacing of the lane of travel. All permittees shall be jointly and severally responsible for correcting pavement deformities caused by the permittee's work, as determined by the city engineer. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall apply equally to franchisees and public and governmental agencies desiring to excavate in the public right-of-way, except as provided otherwise in a franchise or related agreement pertaining to street maintenance and repair. Determinations made by the city engineer under this section shall be based on best engineering and management practice, and shall take into account any fiscal considerations that affect the overall public interest. 
D.  Notwithstanding subsection (A), permittees shall be required to repair and share pro-rata in the ongoing costs of repair and street maintenance directly caused by the installation and maintenance of their respective facilities in the right-of-way. All permittees shall be jointly and severally responsible for correcting pavement deformities due to their work, as determined by the city engineer. All repair and resurfacing shall maintain a smooth interface between the repaired portion and the uncut pavement. 
E.  Nothing contained in this section or chapter shall limit the city or any permittee from seeking reimbursement or contribution from another responsible party for its fair share of corrective costs. 
(Ord. 2227 (part), 2003)  
13.12.080 - Encroachment permits—Revocation—Penalty for violation of terms. 
A.  The city engineer is authorized to revoke an encroachment permit for cause upon determining that the permittee is proceeding in a hazardous manner, has failed to comply with one or more of the material terms, conditions or restrictions incorporated in the permit; or has provided materially false or misleading information to the city engineer regarding the encroachment or its installation. The city engineer may revoke or modify an encroachment permit without cause when necessary for the installation of a public improvement by the city, or when necessary to remove an encroachment extending onto public property from private property that interferes with public convenience or safety. 
B.  Upon revocation of an encroachment permit, the permittee shall immediately discontinue work and cease and desist from further encroachment upon the public right-of-way or property of the city. The permittee may be required to premeditate the site to an as-near original condition as may be feasible under the supervision and direction of the city engineer in accordance with code and legal requirements in effect at the time of remediation. Installed facilities shall be removed by the permittee, unless authorized by the city engineer to be abandoned in place when feasible. 
C.  Any permittee who shall violate any of the terms, conditions or restrictions of an encroachment permit and thereby materially and adversely affect the public health and safety shall be ineligible to receive another encroachment permit from the city engineer for a period of one year following the date of such determination. This restriction may be waived by the city engineer for good cause. 
(Ord. 2227 (part), 2003)  
13.12.090 - Encroachment permit fee. 
Unless exempted by law, franchise or contractual agreement, every applicant shall pay the permit fee established in the National City fee schedule prior to the issuance of an encroachment permit. Permit fees will not be charged for the removal or relocation of an encroachment required by the city under Section 13.12.100(B). 
(Ord. 2227 (part), 2003)  
13.12.100 - Nonexclusive use of right-of-way. 
A.  Encroachment permits are nonexclusive. Any permit issued by the city under this chapter is subject to the city's use of the right-of-way for public purposes during the period of the applicant's use. The city may condition the time period of the applicant's proposed use of the right-of-way to coincide with city's own use for public projects. The city engineer may require a permittee to allow others to utilize an excavation for placement of their separately permitted facilities when justified and necessary, upon payment to the permittee of the proportional share of avoided expense and with any additional expenses necessitated by such accommodation, provided such accommodation is feasible and does not delay or adversely impact the permittee. Joint trench agreements under this section can be required prior to commencement of construction. 
B.  Permittees shall not interfere with facilities installed under prior permits, unless arrangements satisfactory to the city engineer and the prior permittee are made to protect or relocate the prior facilities at the expense of the subsequent permittee. Notwithstanding, the city has the right to cause the removal, relocation or displacement of any previously permitted encroachment without liability to a permittee when necessitated by public emergency or other city exercise of its police power. 
C.  Permittees who fail to provide accurate record drawings to the city engineer shall be financially liable to the city for any of the city's construction delay costs directly caused by misidentified facility locations installed by the permittee or its contractors. 
(Ord. 2227 (part), 2003)  
13.12.110 - Appeal. 
Except as to appeal procedures established pursuant to franchise, any person aggrieved by the city engineer's decision with respect to the issuance, denial, or revocation of an encroachment permit or the imposition of a fee or condition under this chapter may appeal to the city council within ten calendar days after receiving written notification of the city engineer's decision. The written request for appeal shall be filed with the city clerk, and a hearing before the city council will be scheduled within a reasonable time after the filing of the appeal. 
(Ord. 2227 (part), 2003)  
13.12.120 - Assignment or enlargement of encroachment permits or facilities. 
Any assignment or enlargement of an encroachment permit or the encroachment itself without authorization of the city is void. Assignment shall not negate the obligation of the assignor to perform all terms and conditions of the permit and this ordinance, notwithstanding an assignee's assumption of the same, except with city approval. 
(Ord. 2227 (part), 2003)  
13.12.130 - Safeguarding of proprietary information. 
Applicants shall provide all information required by the city, except that which is exempted by Section 13.12.060(B)(1). Except for maps and construction drawings showing the location and dimensions of proposed and installed facilities, an applicant may declare any other portion of required information to be proprietary information by identifying the same by notation in the applicable sections of the application or questionnaire and providing that information to the city engineer in a separate sealed envelope or container clearly identified as proprietary information. Maps or construction drawings showing location and dimensions of facilities being processed for a permit under this chapter may not be designated proprietary information. A non-disclosure agreement may be executed by the city as a condition of requiring proprietary information. The city will either retain properly identified proprietary information separately, or return it to the applicant without retention of a copy after having conducted its analysis. Pursuant to Evidence Code Section 1060, properly identified proprietary information in its possession will not be released by the city under the Public Records Act (Government Code Sec. 6250, et seq.) without authorization from the applicant, except upon receipt of a duly authorized court order. Applicants or permittees will be offered the opportunity by the city to intervene to protect their interests against the release of proprietary information. If the opportunity is declined, the city thereafter shall have no further obligation to protect or defend the non-release of the designated proprietary information or portions thereof. When proprietary information is returned to a permittee after being relied upon by the city in issuing a permit, then the terms and conditions of that permit shall be conclusive and binding in any subsequent administrative or judicial proceeding between the permittee and the city involving that permit. 
(Ord. 2227 (part), 2003)  
13.12.140 - Possessory interest taxes. 
By accepting a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the permittee acknowledges that notice has been given pursuant to California Revenue and Taxation Code Section 107.6 that use, occupancy or interest in any public property conferred by permit or otherwise may cause a possessory interest tax to be levied upon such interest. The permittee shall be solely liable for, and shall pay and discharge prior to delinquency, any possessory interest taxes and other taxes that may be levied against its right to possession, occupancy or use of any public right of way or property that is conferred by permit, franchise or license. 
(Ord. 2227 (part), 2003)  
13.12.150 - Violations and enforcement. 
A.  Violation of Section 13.12.030 or 13.12.080(B) is a misdemeanor. Each day a violation exists is a separate violation, and each violation may be charged as a separate offense. Violations may be enforced by civil, criminal or administrative measures, or combination, as provided for in Title 1. 
B.  The city engineer is authorized to remove illegal encroachments. Costs shall be charged to a responsible party in accordance with law and the procedures established in the municipal code when an illegal encroachment is not voluntarily removed following reasonable notice to the responsible party. In an emergency illegal encroachments may be summarily removed and costs charged without prior notice to the responsible party or parties. 
(Ord. 2227 (part), 2003)  
Chapter 13.18 - STREET TREES AND PARKWAY LANDSCAPING 
 
13.18.010 - Generally. 
No landscaping, maintenance of landscaping or construction may be done by any person within any parkway of the city or cause or permit the same to be done except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1426 § 2 (part), 1974)  
13.18.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Parkway" means that part of the public street right-of-way between the curb, or edge of paved roadway where there is no curb, and the property line separating the street right-of-way from abutting private property. Parkways are generally used for public sidewalks, public utility poles, fire hydrants, street signs and other public facilities. The remaining parkway area is generally "landscaped." 
B.  "Landscaping" means the use of architectural and horticultural materials to provide control of erosion, dust, weeds and accumulation of litter in a manner complementary to the purpose of adding natural environmental quality to a premises. Landscaping also includes trees, shrubs, ground covers and other planting materials providing shade, visual screening, aesthetic enhancement, soil conservation, and reduction of fire hazards, reduction of harborages of rodents, reduction of vermin and reduction of disease-bearing creatures. 
C.  Maintenance of Landscaping. "Landscaping maintenance" includes sufficient irrigation, fertilization, pruning, trimming and training to keep plants in a healthy, vigorous condition. Removal of dead materials, weeds and accumulated litter, rubble or other foreign substances is required. Maintenance also includes re-seeding, replacement of dead plants and planting where necessary to restore a landscaped area to the level of "coverage" required of a new installation. 
Trees located within public street parkways will be pruned and trimmed by city forces and not by private property owners. Public utility companies may prune and trim such trees, if the existence of the tree creates a significant possibility that the continuation of safe, efficient and reliable service to the customers being served may be impaired. Pruning and trimming work shall be done in a professional manner and shall result in an aesthetically desirable contour. 
D.  "Director" means the National City director of parks and recreation. 
E.  "Citizens' committee" means the National City street tree and parkway committee. 
F.  "Official tree" means those trees designated and determined by the director and approved by the citizens' committee to be best suited to plant within or adjacent to the street rights-of-way because of their desirable characteristics of growth and beauty, with reference to their crown, root structure and adaptability to local climatic, soil and street conditions. The director shall maintain a list of official trees on file at his office available to the public during working hours. 
G.  "Designate tree" means those official trees that have been placed or designated to be placed as elements in the planting design within or adjacent to particular street rights-of-way by the director and approved by the citizens' committee. The director shall maintain a record of the location, species and age of designated trees at his office available to the public during working hours. 
H.  "Interim tree" means those trees and shrubs planted along city streets prior to the enactment of the ordinance codified herein which do not qualify as official trees or designate trees because of certain undesirable characteristics of growth with reference to their crown or root structure, or are not adaptable to specific climatic, soil or street conditions unique to their existing location. 
I.  "Ground cover" means grass, turf or perennial plants that normally grow in a prostrate manner so as to conceal, or with the purpose of concealing, the ground surface, that do not normally exceed eight inches in height, and that will tolerate light pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. 1426 § 2 (part) 1974)  
13.18.030 - Permits required. 
All landscaping work within parkways shall be done pursuant to permission obtained from the director. 
A.  Street Trees. Any person desiring permission to plant, cut down, trim, prune, remove or in any way interfere with the natural growth of any tree planted within any parkway, city street rights-of-way, or on other city property, shall make application to the director for a permit therefor. The director shall provide advice and consultation to aid in the elimination of any hazard, undesirable landscape effect, or disease infestation where such action is beneficial to the overall street or block in which the tree is located. If the desired action by the applicant is refused, the applicant may request a hearing before the citizens' committee for further review. 
The director is authorized to require all, or any part of, approved work to be performed by or under the supervision of city employees. 
Public utility companies may trim any tree growing in, on or along any city street, without a permit, if the existence of the tree creates a significant possibility that the continuation of safe, efficient and reliable service to the customers being served may be impaired. Public utilities may not remove a street tree without obtaining a permit to do so. 
Pruning and trimming work shall be done in a professional manner and shall result in an aesthetically desirable contour. If the director finds the quality of the pruning and trimming work not to be satisfactory, he may revoke the permission of the utility company granted above. 
B.  Shrubs and Ground Cover. Maintenance of shrubs and ground cover shall not require a permit. 
(Ord. 1426 § 2 (part), 1974)  
13.18.040 - Landscaping required. 
Whenever sidewalks are required in conjunction with the issuance of any building permit, parkway landscaping shall also be installed, and such landscaping shall become a part of the building permit except that this requirement shall not apply to properties used for single family and two family residences. 
(Ord. 1426 § 2 (part), 1974)  
13.18.050 - Maintenance required. 
A.  Street Trees. No person shall perform, or cause to be performed any maintenance except for watering and fertilizing, upon any tree planted along a city street, or on any other city property, except under emergency conditions, and upon the written approval of the director; a person or firm determined to be qualified by the director may perform such maintenance on such trees as may be designated by the director. The city will, except for watering and fertilizing, maintain all official and designate trees planted within street rights-of-way. Maintenance of interim trees planted within city street rights- of-way shall be similar to that given designate trees, except designate trees shall have priority over interim trees in the city's maintenance program. 
B.  Shrubs and Ground Cover. It shall be the responsibility of the adjoining property owner to adequately maintain the parkway area. All landscaped parkways shall be continuously maintained. 
C.  Guards During Construction. In the erection, alteration, construction or repairing of any building or structure, the owner thereof shall place, or cause to be placed, such guards around all nearby trees located along the street, alley, court or other public place as shall effectively prevent injury to them. 
(Ord. 1426 § 2 (part), 1974)  
13.18.060 - Prohibitions. 
A.  Street Trees. No person shall place, or cause to be placed, any stone, cement or other substance about any tree planted along any street, or on other city-owned property, which shall impede the free entrance of water or air to the roots of such tree, without leaving an open space of ground around the trunk of such tree of not less than eighteen inches clearance all around. No person shall deface, mutilate or attach or place any rope, wire, sign, poster, handbill or other thing to or on any tree growing along any city street or public place, or to cause any wire charged with electricity to come in contact with such tree. Provided, further, no person shall allow any brine, oil, liquid, dye, salt or other substances injurious or harmful to plant life to lie, leak, flow, drip into or onto, or to come into contact with, the tree or the soil about the base of such plant. 
B.  Shrubs and Ground Cover. No person shall plant, or cause to be planted, any tree, shrub, or plant or ground cover in the area between the sidewalk and curb, except as provided in this subsection. Grass, turf or other ground cover plantings shall be permitted, provided that such plantings shall not be allowed to attach themselves to or ascend the trunk of any tree. Planting, cutting, mowing, watering, fertilizing and all other maintenance of grass, turf or other ground cover in such parking strips will be performed by the adjacent property owner, subject to the restrictions in this subsection. 
(Ord. 1426 § 2 (part), 1974)  
13.18.070 - Duties of director. 
A.  Planting and Removal. The director may plant or remove or regulate and control the planting or removal of any and all trees planted within the street rights-of-way of any city street. The director shall coordinate with adjacent owners and the citizens' committee to establish planting plans for the placement of official trees within any block or along any street of the city. Following review of this plan by the citizens' committee and approval by the director, the director may identify specific trees as designated trees for inclusion in the city street tree and beautification program. 
B.  Enforcement. The director shall make inspections of all parkway landscaping. Where he finds that landscaping is not properly installed or maintained he shall give written notice to the property owner responsible for such work. The notice shall include a description of the required improvements and shall set a reasonable time for compliance. Appeals may be taken from such written notice by filing a written appeal with the city street tree committee. After considering the evidence the committee shall decide the property owner's appeal and issue its order on the appeal. If any work required by an "order to comply" is not satisfactorily completed within the time specified therein, the city park department crews, or a private contractor employed by the city may do the necessary work and charge the cost of such work to the property owner. Such a charge shall become a lien against that property. 
(Ord. 1426 § 2 (part), 1974)  
13.18.080 - Nonconforming uses. 
Parkways that are not landscaped shall be leveled to the grade of adjoining sidewalks, or adjoining curbs where there are no sidewalks, and shall thereafter be maintained free of weeds and accumulation of litter. Such work shall be the responsibility of the adjoining property owner. Such leveling shall be done within a one year period following the adoption of the ordinance codified herein. Maintenance shall be continuous thereafter, except that this requirement shall not apply to properties used for single family and two family residences. 
(Ord. 1426 § 2 (part), 1974)  
Chapter 13.22 - STREET IMPROVEMENTS 
 
13.22.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "City engineer" or "street superintendent" means the city engineer of the city; 
B.  "Deferral" means to postpone; 
C.  "Director of building and housing" means the director of building and housing of the city; 
D.  "Exemption" means to release from requirement; 
E.  "Property" means land shown on the latest San Diego County tax assessor's map as a "parcel"; 
F.  "Structures" or "buildings" as defined in the current adopted edition of the Uniform Building Code; 
G.  "Valuation" and "building permit valuation" mean the estimated costs of construction as determined by the director of building and housing, based upon the current adopted policy of the city council. 
H.  All references to street improvements, including but not limited to curbs, gutters, sidewalks and paving, refer to the minimum standards of public improvements installed in public right-of-way adopted by city council resolution. 
(Ord. 1491 § 1, 1976)  
13.22.020 - Standards—Compliance required—Additional authorized when. 
All work done pursuant to this chapter shall comply with the city's adopted minimum standards for public improvements, except where the city engineer finds by certified testing that more stringent specifications are necessary to accomplish the same results, in which case the work shall be done in compliance with the city engineer's instructions. 
(Ord. 1491 § 2, 1976)  
13.22.030 - Compliance required—City engineer administration authority. 
A.  Compliance with this chapter is the responsibility of the owner of the property involved. The city engineer shall be responsible for the administration of these regulations. 
B.  The department of building and housing shall withhold certification of occupancy until the required property owner compliances have been certified in writing by the city engineer. 
C.  On appeals, the decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. 1491 § 3, 1976)  
13.22.040 - Record keeping, agreements and bond requirements. 
A.  The city engineer shall maintain all records of action taken pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  Whenever fifty percent of fronting properties on a public street or alley between intersecting streets is either improved or falls within agreements to improve, as required herein, the city engineer shall transmit that information to the city council with comments or recommendations pertaining to a potential assessment improvement act. 
C.  All agreements shall be transmitted to the city council for approval and thereafter to the city clerk for recording with the county recorder. 
All bonds, fees or other sureties shall be transmitted to the city treasurer for accounting purposes. The city clerk and city treasurer shall acknowledge actions taken regarding elements of this chapter by written notice to the city engineer within five days of such action. Upon receipt of the city engineer's certification of compliance and recommendation, the city treasurer may release and refund such bonds, fees or other sureties. 
(Ord. 1491 § 4, 1976)  
13.22.050 - Building permit—Issuance prerequisites. 
A.  Before any building permit is issued for any work covered by this chapter, there shall be certification of compliance herewith made by the city engineer, or, the execution of an agreement between the property owner and city guaranteeing such compliance before the work allowed by said permit is completed. Such agreement shall be approved by the city engineer, and shall provide for the posting of a bond or other security acceptable to the city engineer to secure the performance of the work required by this chapter and for the payment of suppliers of labor and materials. A copy of such certificate or agreement shall be filed with the director of building and housing. The making of such an agreement shall not limit the property owner's right to seek deferrals or exemptions hereunder. If such deferrals or exemptions are allowed, the prior agreement for that work shall be superseded. 
B.  The city engineer shall furnish to the property owner, upon the property owner's written request, an estimate of the quantity, type and cost of improvements to be made per this chapter. 
(Ord. 1927, 1987; Ord. 1491 § 5, 1976)  
13.22.060 - Work required—Exemptions—Conveyance of property. 
A.  1.  Portland cement concrete curbs, gutters, driveway aprons, pedestrian curb ramps, sidewalks, and one-half width of local street permanent paving shall be constructed along all contiguous street frontages, including replacement of all damaged or broken public improvements, except where such damages have been determined by the city engineer to have been caused by city-owned street trees. Such work to be done shall not exceed, in costs, ten percent of the valuation of the building improvement permits as determined by the building official. 
2.  Additional exemptions to the requirements of this chapter, are as follows: 
a.  Single-building permits with a valuation, as estimated by the building official, of one hundred thousand dollars or less; 
b.  Permits for signs only; 
c.  Permits for new construction and/or tenant improvements that do not increase occupancy for persons or vehicles; 
d.  Permits for construction of accessory structures for single-family dwellings such as garages, swimming pools, decks or patios; and 
e.  Permits for work required to repair a property after an accident, natural disaster, or act of God. Repair in this instance is defined as that work necessary to return the property to its conditions it existed just prior to the accident, natural disaster, or act of God. 
3.  In all cases, such building permit valuations shall be the sum of all such valuations shown on all building permits issued for that property within the immediately preceding twenty-four-month period, as determined by the building official. 
B.  When the city engineer determines that the required public improvements are to be placed upon property for which there are no street easements nor reservations, and when the necessary property therefor is shown as future street widening on a specific plan adopted by the city, the property owner shall present properly prepared and executed documents granting the required right-of-way to the city. Such document(s), prepared to the satisfaction of the city engineer and real property officer shall be accompanied by a current and complete title examination report. The city will require conveyance of all property hereunder to be free and clear of all liens prior to accepting title. The grantor shall obtain all reconveyances, partial reconveyances or other such releases as may be required at his expense. Legal inability to deliver such documents as determined by the city may be grounds for deferral or exemptions hereunder. 
The grantor shall obtain all reconveyances or partial reconveyances at his expense. Where the front property line, abutting the public street for which improvements are required, is not in a common line with the prolongation of fifty percent or more of the property lines of the other lots in the block, and where no specific plan applies thereto, dedication of public street right-of-way to meet such prolongation is required. 
C.  When the city engineer determines that the cost to construct the required public improvements exceeds the ten percent valuation limit established hereinabove, and that the ten percent valuation amount is insufficient to construct a viable section of any portion of the required public improvements, the city engineer may accept a cash deposit in lieu of constructing the improvements, the deposit to be placed in the city general fund. 
(Ord. 1954, 1988; Ord. 1814, 1984; Ord. 1734, 1981; Ord. 1628 § 1, 1981; Ord. 1491 § 6, 1976) 
(Ord. No. 2018-2449, § I, 7-24-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-2449, § I, adopted July 24, 2018, amended § 13.22.060 and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Work required—Exclusions—Conveyance of property" to "Work required—Exemptions—Conveyance of property," as set out herein.  
13.22.070 - Deferrals permitted when—Procedures. 
A.  The city engineer may allow deferral for a maximum period of five years of the improvement work required hereunder when it is shown to his satisfaction that: 
1.  It would be impractical to install the improvements because of temporary inadequacy of the physical conditions of the property; or 
2.  An authorized, budgeted or scheduled public project or assessment project would provide the same improvements; or 
3.  The installation of such improvements would cause dangerous or defective conditions of the property that would not exist at the end of the term of deferral. 
B.  All deferrals authorized by the city engineer shall be for a maximum period of five years. The property owner shall execute an agreement promising to install the deferred improvements within the time provided in the deferral and shall deposit with the city a sum equal to the estimated cost of the improvements plus ten percent of such cost, or in lieu thereof, shall post a bond in said amount as approved by the city attorney. If it is determined that the requirements for the installation of said public improvements will not be necessary within a reasonable and feasible time period, the property owner may grant to the city, in lieu of said cash deposit or bond, a lien upon his property in an amount estimated by the city engineer to be sufficient to install such public improvements at such time as they shall be required, and said lien shall also provide for reasonable attorney fees and costs in the event that it becomes necessary for the city to foreclose upon such lien. 
C.  The city council may grant deferrals pursuant to Section 13.22.090 when it finds that: 
1.  It would be impractical to install the improvements because of permanent inadequacy of the physical conditions of the property to accommodate those improvements; or, 
2.  A planned public project or assessment project would provide the same improvements; or, 
3.  The installation of such improvements would cause dangerous or defective conditions of the property for an indefinite period beyond five years; 
4.  There is factual evidence that such improvements would not be in the public interest because of incompatibility with neighborhood design such as interference with open space, yards, trees, fences, walls, or parkways, or when a suitable alternate method of providing the same amenities has been assured or when it is obvious that less than fifty percent of the street frontage in the same block, between intersecting streets, will be similarly improved within the next five years. 
D.  In granting a deferral pursuant to subsection C herein, the city council may defer installation of improvements for more than five years and may require the agreement and the requirements listed in subsection B herein and may require: 
1.  The payment on an in-lieu fee equal to the city engineer's estimate of the value of the exempted work. All such in-lieu fees shall be held in trust by the city for payment of future construction of the work required herein; 
2.  The recording of a "covenant running with the land," providing: 
a.  The property owner will not protest the installation of any of the required improvements under a 1911 Improvement Act program whether initiated by the property owners or the city, and, 
b.  The property owners will install said improvements in conjunction with an overall improvement program of the area whether initiated by the property owners or the city, 
c.  The property owner will install the required improvements within thirty days of a demand to do so by the city council or its authorized representative, 
d.  The cost of enforcing such a covenant including attorney's fees will be added to the lien amount due the city and shall be collectable as any other money claim. 
(Ord. 1491 § 7, 1976)  
13.22.080 - Exemption from compliance granted when. 
A.  The city council may grant an exemption from compliance with these regulations when it finds that: 
1.  It would be impractical to install the improvements because of permanent inadequacy of the physical conditions of the property to accommodate those improvements; or, 
2.  The installation of such improvements would cause dangerous or defective conditions of the property for an indefinite period beyond five years; 
3.  There is factual evidence that such improvements would not be in the public interest because of incompatibility with neighborhood design such as interference with open space, yards, trees, fences, walls or parkways. 
B.  Requests for exemptions, accompanied by a filing fee as established in the fee schedule adopted by the city council, shall be filed with the city engineer. The city engineer may then request reports and recommendations by other city departments and, within three weeks, forward the request with the recommendations to the city council for action. The action of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. 2018 § 10, 1991; Ord. 1491 § 8, 1976)  
13.22.090 - Appeals—City council authority. 
A.  Any decision or failure to act by the city engineer, hereunder, may be appealed to the city council. The city council shall hear the appeal within thirty days of the date of filing and shall render a decision within thirty days thereafter. 
B.  Appeals may be filed by the property owner who is subject to these regulations or by the city council. Property owner appeals shall be filed with the city engineer and transmitted, by him, with his report and recommendations and all pertinent evidence on file, to the city council for action. The city council may grant a deferral or exemption in response to appeals but only upon finding sufficient grounds therefor, under the specifications of Sections 13.22.060 and 13.22.070 hereof. 
C.  The exemption, if granted by the city council upon appeal, shall become effective upon payment of the fee therefor, as stated in Section 13.22.080. 
D.  In the absence of such a deferral or exemption, the work shall be done as otherwise required. 
E.  The action of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. 1491 § 9, 1976)  
13.22.100 - Certificate of occupancy issuance prerequisites. 
Before the department of building and housing issues any certificate of occupancy for any work subject to Section 13.22.050 hereof, there shall be certification of compliance, made by the city engineer, showing that either the required work has been satisfactorily completed or that a deferral or exemption therefor has been authorized. 
(Ord. 1491 § 10, 1976)  
13.22.110 - Defaults. 
Whenever a person has made an agreement with the city to do street improvement work hereunder and, after notification to comply has been directed by the city council, failed to fulfill that agreement, it shall be cause for the city to foreclose upon the bond therefor and/or to install the work and place a lien upon the property for all expenses incurred by the city. 
(Ord. 1491 § 11, 1976)  
Chapter 13.26 - PARK AND LAUNCHING FACILITY REGULATIONS 
 
13.26.010 - Boat launching facility—Violations designated. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to enter or occupy any of the area of the National City boat launching facility as the same is described in the map attached to Ordinance 1608, on file in the city clerk's office, and as further described in Exhibit A attached to Ordinance 1608, and made a part hereof as though set forth in full, between the hours of six p.m. and ten a.m., unless such person is actively engaged in fishing, launching a boat or parking a motor vehicle related to the proper use of said facility. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to have or possess any open container of an alcoholic beverage on the described facility, or to consume any alcoholic beverage on or in the facility. 
(Ord. 1608 § 1, 1977)  
13.26.020 - City parks—Entrance unlawful when. 
It is unlawful for any person to enter or occupy any city park between the hours of nine p.m. and seven a.m. without the consent of the city, first obtained and granted by the city council, the city manager, or their designated authorized agents. 
(Ord. 1608 § 2, 1977)  
13.26.030 - Signposting. 
The director of public works shall immediately post the perimeter of the area described by the ordinance codified in this chapter with signs advising of the restrictions and limitations on the use and occupancy of the facility. 
(Ord. 1608 § 3, 1977)  
13.26.040 - Violation deemed infraction. 
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction shall be punishable as set forth in Section 1.20.010. 
(Ord. 1621, 1978; Ord. 1608 § 4, 1977)  
Chapter 13.28 - PROPRIETARY USE OF CITY PROPERTY 
 
13.28.010 - Title. 
This chapter may be referred to as the city property sign ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2373, 7-17-2012)  
13.28.020 - Capacity. 
In adopting this chapter the city council acts in its proprietary capacity as to city property. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2373, 7-17-2012)  
13.28.030 - Scope. 
This chapter states city policies and rules for the display of signs on city property, as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2373, 7-17-2012)  
13.28.040 - Intent as to forum. 
The city declares its intent that all city property shall not function as a designated or limited public forum for sign display, unless some specific portion of city property is designated as a public forum of one particular type; in such case, the declaration as to public forum type shall apply strictly and only to the specified area and the specified time period. By adopting this chapter, the city council intends to balance the rights of free speech, protected by the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and corollary provisions of the California Constitution, against the city's own speech rights, its own property rights, and the public interests in reducing the visual clutter and safety risks that can result from excessive or inappropriate signage. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2373, 7-17-2012)  
13.28.050 - Definitions. 
For purposes of interpreting and enforcing this chapter, the following words have the special definitions given. For words not defined in this chapter, definitions from the regulatory sign ordinance may be used. 
"Administrator" means the person authorized by the city council to enforce and interpret this chapter; in the absence of a contrary authorization by the city council, the administrator shall be the city manager or his/her designee. 
"City" means, for purposes of this chapter, the City of National City, California and any other legal entity for which the members of the city council also act as the legislative or policy-making body, when such other entities formally adopt or approve this chapter as applicable to their properties and facilities. Without limitation, such other legal entities include the city as successor agency to the city redevelopment agency, the community development commission - housing authority, the city parking authority, and the joint powers financing authority. 
"City property" means land or other property or facilities in which the City of National City (as defined herein) is the legal owner or has the present right of possession and control (even if only temporarily), as well as areas that are either designated as public rights-of-way or which have long been used as such. 
"Permit" means a written authorization from the city for third party display of a sign on city property. 
"Personally attended" means that a living person is physically present within five feet of the sign at all times that the sign is on public display. 
"Sign ordinance" means Chapter 18.47 of the National City Municipal Code, as it may be amended from time to time. 
"Traditional public forum" means the surfaces of city-owned streets, surfaces of parks that are open to the public, surfaces of city-owned plazas, surfaces of sidewalks that are connected to the city's main pedestrian circulation system, and the exterior surface of pedestrian areas immediately surrounding City Hall. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2373, 7-17-2012)  
13.28.060 - Enforcement. 
The administrator is authorized and directed to enforce this chapter. Any violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance which may be abated by any means provided by law, including but not limited to any remedy for illegal signs as set forth in the sign ordinance, other city law, or any remedy available under state law, including but not limited to Penal Code 556, may also be used. Legal remedies under this section are cumulative and discretionary, and are not exclusive. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2373, 7-17-2012)  
13.28.070 - General prohibition. 
Private persons and governmental agencies other than the city may not display signs on city property unless such display is specifically authorized by this chapter or by state or federal law or court order. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2373, 7-17-2012)  
13.28.080 - Signs exempt from the permit requirement. 
The signs described in this section may be mounted, installed, or displayed on city property without a permit, but remain subject to all other applicable laws, rules, regulations, and policies. 
A.  Government Signs. Signs posted by the city on city property to express its own message(s) to the public; traffic control and traffic directional signs erected by the city or another governmental entity in fulfillment of their official duties; official notices required or authorized by law or court order; signs placed in furtherance of the city's governmental functions. 
B.  Picketing in Traditional Public Forum Areas. The personal carrying of signs or "picketing," displaying constitutionally protected noncommercial speech messages, is allowed in traditional public forum areas, except in the roadway when it is open to normal vehicular traffic; picketers may not interfere with public ingress or egress or free use of sidewalks or public right-of-way. All picket signs must be worn on the person, hand held, or personally attended at all times, and may not exceed a cumulative total of six square feet. (In the case of double-sided signs, only one side counts toward the area total; if two sides are not equal in size, then the larger shall be used to calculate sign size.) For safety reasons, picketing is allowed only from 7:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m.; however, on evenings when there is a public hearing at city hall, picketing may continue until thirty minutes after the meeting for such hearing has closed. This subsection does not authorize the display of commercial messages on city property, nor does it authorize the posting of inanimate signs on city property, regardless of message type. This section does not apply to personally held signs displayed inside city buildings. 
C.  San Diego Metropolitan Transit System ("MTS") Bus Benches and Shelters. Signs, including but not limited to advertisements, posted by MTS on city property, including but not limited to bus benches and shelters, where MTS executes an agreement with the city for placement of such signs on city property. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2373, 7-17-2012; Ord. No. 2019-2457, § 3, 5-7-2019; Ord. No. 2019-2460, § 1, 6-18-2019)  
13.28.090 - Permanent, private party signs on city property. 
A.  Permanent Signs on City Property. Notwithstanding Chapter 18.47, in order to realize the revenue potential of city properties, and to provide a method for city messages to be presented to the public, the city council may allow qualified private parties to place permanent signs on city property in exchange for rent and other considerations to be negotiated and included in a lease and/or development agreement. Such permanent signs may use digital display and may be operated as billboards, i.e., be used for general advertising for hire. Before entering into any arrangement for private party permanent signs on city property, a request for qualifications ("RFQ") or request for proposals ("RFP") will have been issued and thereafter considered by administrator and/or city. The city retains all discretion to reject all proposals and terminate the prospective program. 
B.  Proposals. In reviewing any proposed lease, the council shall consider the following factors, weighted as the city council deems appropriate: 
1.  The degree to which the lease maximizes the economic value of the city's property; 
2.  The degree to which the lease will contribute revenue to the city's general fund; 
3.  The degree to which the lease will allow dissemination of the city's own messages, public service messages, and/or emergency messages to the public; and 
4.  The degree to which the lease will encourage economic activity in the city. 
C.  Location and Limitations. Any permanent sign located on city property pursuant to this section must satisfy all other applicable legal requirements, including but not limited to Caltrans rules; and, may be located only alongside I-5, I-805, or State Highway 54. No more than three such new sign structures may be constructed in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2373, 7-17-2012)  
Chapter 13.30 - VENDING ON CITY SIDEWALKS AND PEDESTRIAN PATHWAYS 
 
13.30.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The City of National City hereby finds and determines that the unrestricted use of the city's public rights-of-way, parks, and facilities by both stationary and roaming sidewalk vendors poses a serious and objective threat to the health, safety, and welfare of persons utilizing such public facilities for their intended purposes. Such threats include the potential of fires with unregulated cooking or heating of food; blocking or otherwise restricting use of sidewalks by pedestrians; blocking or impeding the use of driveways, pedestrian access ramps, doorways, and safe parking of vehicles; interfering with the intended and designated recreational uses of parks and playgrounds; conflicts with those persons with disabilities and traveling on sidewalks and pedestrian paths, and recreating in city parks; and noise in residential zones at unreasonable hours. Accordingly, the city finds that those regulations, established by this chapter, are directly related to addressing such objective health, safety, and welfare concerns. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2458, § 11, 5-21-2019)  
13.30.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall be applicable when the following words or phrases are used hereafter in this chapter whether the words or phrases are capitalized or not. 
"Beginning of curb return" means the area that includes the intersection of two sidewalks bounded by the adjoining corner. 
"Driveway" means any approved curb cut designed to allow vehicular traffic ingress from or egress to or from a street or alley. 
"Healthy food" means food which provides vital nutrients with limited fats cholesterol, sodium and added sugar, as defined in the Food Action Plan. 
"Immediate vicinity," for the purposes of this chapter, means the public sidewalk or pedestrian path area next to, and having access to an area being used by a properly permitted certified farmers' market, swap meet, parade, or other event having obtained a temporary special use permit for the occupation of an area in a park, on city property, or in a city street or alley. 
"Pedestrian path" means an improved pathway within a city park designed and constructed to allow pedestrian traffic to circulate within the park from a public sidewalk or parking lot, to other locations within the park. 
"Public sidewalk" means that portion of public right-of-way improved with an impervious surface to allow pedestrian traffic, including wheelchairs (whether motorized or self-propelled), to traverse adjacent to a street or alley. Public sidewalk does not include any portion of a street or alley, and (except as otherwise provided in this chapter) does not include improved walkways located on public property used to access public buildings, not otherwise located in a dedicated right-of-way. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a public sidewalk shall include any pedestrian path located in any park owned or operated by the city. 
"Ramp" means any transition from the street to a public sidewalk designed to allow the safe movement of wheelchairs and pedestrians. 
"Roaming sidewalk vendor" means a sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place, stopping only to complete a transaction. 
"Sidewalk vendor" means a person who sells food or merchandise from a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack or other non-motorized conveyance, or from one's person, upon a public sidewalk or other pedestrian path. A sidewalk vendor is either a stationary sidewalk vendor or a roaming sidewalk vendor. 
"Sidewalk vendor's license," or "license" shall mean that certain regulatory license established under subdivision (B) of Section 13.30.030. The license shall be in addition to any other licenses or permits required by the city or San Diego County. 
"Stationary sidewalk vendor" means a sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed location on a public sidewalk or pedestrian path. 
"Temporary use permit" means a temporary use permit as defined by Chapter 15.60. Any holder of a temporary use permit that is required to provide notice, business interruption mitigation, or other rights to affected businesses and property owners must also provide the same notice, business interruption mitigation, or other rights to properly licensed sidewalk vendors. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2458, § 11, 5-21-2019)  
13.30.030 - Licenses required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, carry on, or allow to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on, any business as a stationary sidewalk vendor or a roaming sidewalk vendor without having first obtained a business license pursuant to Chapters 6.04 of this code, a sidewalk vendor's license from the public works department pursuant to Section 13.30.030(B); and a seller's permit issued by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration. If the sidewalk vendor is selling food, it shall also comply with Chapter 9.04 and obtain the necessary health-related permit from the County of San Diego Department of Environmental Health. 
B.  In order to regulate the activities of sidewalk vendors in the city, a sidewalk vendor's license is hereby created. 
1.  A sidewalk vendor's license shall be issued by the public works department upon application of any person. 
2.  The cost of a sidewalk vendor's license shall be set forth by resolution of the city council from time to time, and may be included in the city's list of rates, fees, and charges. 
3.  The director of public works, or such person designated by the director of public works, shall issue the license to an applicant upon receipt of such fees, information, and copies of such documents required in this chapter. 
4.  The license shall at all times be prominently displayed on the person, pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack or other non-motorized conveyance. 
5.  If a license is lost, stolen, or damaged, the sidewalk vendor shall not conduct business without first obtaining a replacement license from the public works department to be displayed as described in paragraph (4), above. The department may charge a fee for the replacement of a lost, stolen, or damaged license, which fee shall not exceed the costs of the department in processing the temporary and replacement licenses. 
6.  Each license shall be valid for a period of twelve months. 
C.  In issuing a business license to a sidewalk vendor, the department of finance shall accept either a California driver's license or identification number, or an individual taxpayer number in lieu of a social security number if the department of finance otherwise requires a social security number prior to the issuance of a business license. 
D.  This chapter does not relieve any license holder from compliance with any requirement of any ordinance, rule, regulation, or specification of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2458, § 11, 5-21-2019)  
13.30.040 - Sidewalk vending operating requirements. 
All stationary sidewalk vendors or roaming sidewalk vendors shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, stationary sidewalk vendors and roaming sidewalk vendors may only conduct transactions on public sidewalks in the public right-of-way, and on pedestrian paths in parks owned or operated by the city. 
B.  Stationary sidewalk vendors shall only be located on public sidewalks and pedestrian paths of not less than ten feet in width measured from the street-side edge of the sidewalk or from edge to edge of the path. 
C.  Roaming sidewalk vendors may travel on public sidewalks and pedestrian paths of not less than four feet in width measured from the street-side edge of the sidewalk or from edge to edge of the path while moving. Roaming sidewalk vendors stopping to conduct a transaction must do so only where the sidewalk or path is ten feet in width or must yield to pedestrian traffic in conflict with the conduct of their business. 
D.  Operations of stationary sidewalk vendors on a public sidewalk shall only occur during the hours of eight a.m. and ten p.m. 
E.  Vending food or merchandise on city sidewalks shall be prohibited: 
1.  Within five feet of a marked crosswalk. 
2.  Within five feet of the beginning of curb return of an unmarked crosswalk. 
3.  Within five feet of any fire hydrant or other emergency facility. 
4.  Within five feet ahead and forty-five feet to the rear of a sign designating a bus stop. 
5.  Within a marked bus zone. 
6.  Within five feet of a bus bench. 
7.  Within ten feet of a transit shelter. 
8.  Within five feet of an area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs, trees or street tree well. 
9.  Within five feet of a driveway or driveway apron. 
10.  Within four feet of an outdoor dining or patio dining area. 
11.  Within eighteen inches from the edge of the curb. 
12.  Where placement impedes the flow of pedestrian traffic by reducing the clear space to less than six feet, or impedes access to or the use of abutting property, including, but not limited to, residences and places of business. 
F.  Notwithstanding any specific prohibitions in this subsection, no vendor shall be located where operation endangers the safety of persons or property. 
G.  Operations of stationary sidewalk vendors are prohibited in the OS, OSR, RS-1, RS-2, RS-3, RS-4, RM-1, RM-2, RM-3 zones, and in the CZ and MHP overlays. 
H.  Operations of roaming sidewalk vendors may occur in the OS, OSR, RS-1, RS-2, RS-3, RS-4, RM-1, RM-2, RM-3 zones, and in the CZ and MHP overlays, but only occur during the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
I.  Vending within five hundred feet of any K-12 school is prohibited from 6:00 a.m. through 6:00 p.m., unless the vendor is selling exclusively healthy food. 
J.  Operations of sidewalk vendors in public parks shall only occur on the pedestrian path, or a public sidewalk, and only during the period that the park is open. In order to protect the fragile nature of greenspace in parks, sidewalk vendors shall conduct all activities from a public sidewalk or pedestrian path. 
K.  In order to limit obstructions caused by a congregation of customers during periods of operations, and to clearly delineate responsibilities in operation, sidewalk vendors shall be located not closer than twenty feet from another sidewalk vendor. 
L.  In order to reduce vector, rodent, and other pest infestations, stationary sidewalk vendors shall be responsible for the cleanliness of the area within ten feet of their operations. Stationary sidewalk vendors shall provide a means to collect and properly dispose of all trash and recycling materials, including owning and making available appropriate trash and recycling receptacles. Roaming sidewalk vendors shall have trash bags attached to their cart or carried by the vendor sufficient to provide for the collection of such trash or recycling materials generated by the type of goods, produce, pre-packaged goods, etc., being sold from the vendor. All sidewalk vendors shall provide the city with an acceptable plan for collection and disposal of wastes at the time that an application for those permits required by this chapter, which plan must be approved by the director of public works or such person designated by the director of public works. Such plans must include the means for avoiding the use of city-owned trash and recycling receptacles. 
M.  No sidewalk vending is allowed within the immediate vicinity of any permitted certified farmers' market or permitted swap meet in the city. No sidewalk vending is allowed within the immediate vicinity of any street or alley, park, plaza, parking lot, or city-owned property, in any event that is being used by the city or a third party under a temporary use permit. No sidewalk vending is allowed in any park where the city has signed an agreement with a concessionaire for the exclusive right to sell food or merchandise in the park. 
N.  No sidewalk vendor shall sell any alcohol-related beverage; tobacco or electronic smoking devices; cannabis products; weapons, including knives, guns, or explosive devices; pharmaceuticals; items described in the definition of adult entertainment activities in Section 18.30.030 of Chapter 18.30 of this code; or such other products identified in a list adopted by resolution or ordinance of the city council as prohibited for sidewalk vending based on public health, safety, or welfare concerns. 
O.  In order to maintain public safety and visibility in front of buildings which front directly on a public street, stationary sidewalk vendors shall not occupy the area directly in front of a transparent window or within three feet of an entry or exit. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2458, § 11, 5-21-2019)  
13.30.050 - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the fire marshal, any police officer, any code compliance officer, and any other city official authorized to enforce any provision of the municipal code. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2458, § 11, 5-21-2019)  
13.30.060 - Violation; penalties. 
A.  Notwithstanding any provisions in Chapter 1.20 of this code, no person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution as a result of a violation of this chapter. 
B.  Except as provided in subsections (C) and (D), in this section, any person violating any provision of this chapter may be issued an administrative citation for each and every violation, in the manner as prescribed in Sections 1.44.010 through 1.44.040 of Chapter 1.44 of the National City Municipal Code. 
C.  Notwithstanding any provisions in Section 1.44.050 of Chapter 1.44, no administrative fine shall exceed five hundred dollars for any violation of Section 13.30.040. 
D.  Notwithstanding any provisions in Section 1.44.050 of Chapter 1.44, for any violation of Section 13.30.030, the amount of administrative fine, which may be imposed for each separate violation of the same provision of the code, shall be established by resolution of the city council within the following limits: 
1.  For a first violation, a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars per day, per violation; 
2.  For a second violation of the same code section within a twelve-month period, a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars per day, per violation; and 
3.  For any additional violation of the same code section within a twelve-month period, a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars per day, per violation. 
E.  Sections 1.44.060 through 1.44.120 shall apply to any administrative citation issued to enforce this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2458, § 11, 5-21-2019)  
13.30.070 - Public nuisance and abatement. 
The placement of any vending cart on any sidewalk in violation of the provisions of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance. The director of public works, director of neighborhood services, and/or any police or code enforcement officer may cause the removal of any vending cart found on a sidewalk in violation of this chapter and is authorized to store such vending cart until the owner thereof shall redeem it by paying the removal and storage charges established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2458, § 11, 5-21-2019)  
Title 14 - WATER AND SEWERS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 14.04 - SEWER SYSTEM* 
Sections: 
* Prior history: Ords. 1069, 1719, 2030 and 2061. 
 
14.04.010 - Sewer service revenue fund. 
A.  There is established a fund to be designated the sewer service revenue fund. 
B.  All revenue derived from the following service charges and from sewer department operations shall be deposited into the sewer service revenue fund: 
1.  Sewer permits; 
2.  Sewer rentals; 
3.  Sewer service charge; 
4.  Sewer transportation charge; 
5.  Sewer connection fees; 
6.  Miscellaneous other sewer revenue. 
C.  The fund shall be used solely for the following purposes: 
1.  The San Diego metropolitan sewer annual capacity charges; 
2.  San Diego metropolitan sewer annual maintenance and operation charge; 
3.  Maintenance and operation of the sewer department and improvement of collector lines and system. 
(Ord. 2096 (part), 1995)  
14.04.020 - Sewer service charges—Designated. 
In addition to other fees, assessments or charges provided by the laws of the city or otherwise, the owner or occupant of any parcel of real property which parcel is connected to the sewer system of National City and/or to a water system maintained by the Sweetwater Authority or any other public or private agency, shall pay sewer service charges or fees as follows: 
A.  Property Located Within the City Limits. Sewer service charges shall be as determined from time to time by city council by ordinance requiring a four-fifths vote, after a public meeting. 
B.  Property Outside the City Limits. Property outside the city limits and connected to the National City sewer system shall pay sewer service charges as established for property within the city, or at rates established for the jurisdiction in which the property lies, whichever is greater. 
C.  Minimum Charge. The minimum charge for commercial/industrial accounts shall be equal to the lowest charge for residential use, which is the mobile home rate. 
(Ord. 2096 (part), 1995)  
14.04.030 - Variances. 
A.  The city manager or his/her designee has the authority to grant variances and to establish rules and regulations for the granting of such variances from the established sewer service charges upon his/her own initiative, or when the owner or occupant of any premises applies therefor as hereinafter set forth, and when one or more of the following situations exist: 
1.  Where the owner or occupant can establish, upon presentation of compelling laboratory data, that the rate-of-return-to-sewage, the suspended solids level (SS), or the biological oxygen demand (BOD) of sewage from the property is other than as set forth in the Federal Standard Industrial Code (SIC) system guidelines. 
2.  Where the water account is for fire service only, the sewer service charge shall be zero. 
3.  Where the water account is for landscape only, the sewer service charge shall be zero. 
4.  Where the premises are connected to a septic tank and are not connected to the sewer system of the city, the sewer charge shall be zero, provided that all premises must comply with Sections 14.06.020 and 14.06.130 of this code. 
5.  Where water is not supplied by Sweetwater Authority, or where sewer flow is larger than water delivered. 
6.  Where documentary proof acceptable to the city manager or his/her designee establishes that a single-family living unit has been vacant for a minimum of six months and there is no intent to occupy the unit within the next six months, and where gas, electric and water services have been severed from the unit as demonstrated by provision of a "disconnect notice" from SDG&E, or through submittal of certified bills from a licensed electrical and/or plumbing contractor that the utility services have been severed. 
B.  The owner or occupant of any premises subject to the sewer service may apply in writing to the city manager or his/her designee for a reclassification of such premises under the provisions of this section; provided however, that no rebate upon such reclassification shall be allowed for a period more than ninety days preceding the filing of such application. The applicant shall furnish substantial engineering and factual data to support the applicant's contention that the premises should be reclassified as provided in this section. 
(Ord. 2096 (part), 1995)  
14.04.040 - Sewer service charge—Deposit. 
A guarantee of payment deposit shall be required from all applicants for sewer service. The amount of such deposit and the return thereof, shall be as determined by the city manager or his/her designee based upon regulations developed by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. 2096 (part), 1995)  
14.04.050 - Sewer service charges—Payment. 
A.  All sewer service charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter shall be computed and billed on a semimonthly basis as determined by the city manager or his/her designee, and shall be payable upon the billing of such charges to the owner or the occupants. All sewer service charges shall be billed either to the owner of the property to which sewer service is provided, or the occupant of such property. In either case the owner of the property shall be ultimately responsible for payment of sewer service charges for the property, and for any applicable penalties. 
B.  The sewer service charges and the billing therefor may be combined with other bills and separately designated. The city council may, by resolution, authorize another public agency to bill and collect the sewer service charges provided for herein, and to remit such collections to the city; and the city council may authorize and allow a reasonable fee to such public agency for services rendered in such billing, collecting and remitting. 
C.  Bills for sewer service charges shall become delinquent after the payment due date, which is the final date of payment. If the sewer service charge is not paid before the close of business or postmarked before midnight of the final date of payment, a penalty of ten percent of the amount of said sewer service charge shall be added thereto; provided however, that when the final day for payment falls on Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday, payment may be made without penalty on the next regular business day. 
D.  Any sewer service charge that becomes delinquent shall have added to the basic penalty of ten percent an additional penalty of one and one-half percent per month for nonpayment of the delinquent charge and the basic penalty. All payments for sewer service charges, when received, shall be applied to an account in the following sequence: 
1.  To city lien amounts not yet recorded by the county; 
2.  To accumulated interest charges; 
3.  To city penalty charges; 
4.  To any city prior balance; 
5.  To city current fees; 
6.  Then in order to any prior balances and current fees charged or collected on the city billing. 
(Ord. 2096 (part), 1995)  
14.04.060 - Delinquent charges as debt to city—Court action. 
Any sewer service charge or fees established or set by this chapter or any subsequent ordinances or amendments enacted by the city, which become delinquent pursuant to the terms of the ordinance establishing same, and all penalties or delinquent charges accrued thereon, shall constitute a debt due to the city, for which the city may sue the party responsible therefor, be it the owner and/or the occupant or user of the property or premises being served, in any competent civil court for collection of same. If the city prevails in such civil action it shall be awarded a reasonable attorney's fees, to be fixed by the court, in addition to any other relief granted or other costs awarded. 
(Ord. 2096 (part), 1995)  
14.04.070 - Delinquent charges to constitute lien. 
A.  Any sewer service charge or fees established or set by this chapter or any subsequent ordinance enacted by this city, and all amendments thereto, which become delinquent for a period of at least sixty days pursuant to the terms of the ordinance establishing same, and all penalties or delinquent charges accrued thereon, shall constitute a lien upon the real property served (except publicly owned property), and such lien shall continue until the charge or fee and all penalties thereon are fully paid or until the property is sold therefor. 
B.  When the sewer service charge has not been paid for a period of at least sixty days after the final date of payment as set forth in Section 14.04.050, the owner of the property shall be notified by mail that failure to pay said charge will result in a lien upon the property. Said notice shall inform said owner of the public hearing to be held on said delinquent account. 
C.  When the full amount for said sewer service charge is not paid for a period of at least sixty days after the final date of payment as set forth in Section 14.04.050, the city clerk shall set said delinquent account for hearing by the city council which will be held after such sixty-day period has expired. 
1.  Prior notice of the delinquent charges and of the hearing to consider such charges shall be served upon the owner of the property to which sewer service is provided, as determined by the latest equalized assessment roll. 
2.  The city clerk shall cause notice of the hearing to be published pursuant to Section 6066 of the California Government Code. Additionally, before charges are collected on the tax roll for the first time, the city clerk shall cause a notice in writing of the filing of the report proposing to have such charges for the forthcoming fiscal year collected on the tax roll and of the time and place of hearing thereon, to be mailed to each person to whom any parcel or parcels of real property described in said report is assessed in the last equalized assessment roll available on the date said report is prepared, at the address shown on said assessment roll or as known to said clerk. If the city council adopts the report, then the requirements for notice in writing to the persons to whom parcels of real property are assessed shall not apply to hearings on reports prepared in subsequent fiscal years but notice by publication as herein provided shall be adequate. 
D.  The city council shall consider said delinquent accounts at the time set for hearing, together with any objections or protest by interested parties. Any owner of land or person affected by the sewer service charges may present a written or oral protest or objection to said account. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall either approve the account as submitted, or as modified or corrected by the city council. The decision for the city council on the charges, and on all protest or objections, shall be final and conclusive. The amounts so approved shall be charges to the owner of the property on the next regular tax bill, and shall be a lien upon the property involved. The city council shall confirm such assessment and cause a certificate specifying the amount of the unpaid charges to be recorded on the assessment roll, and thereafter such assessment shall constitute a special assessment against and a lien upon the property. The city council shall adopt a resolution assessing such amounts as liens upon the respective parcels of land as they are shown upon the last available assessment roll. 
E.  For each sewer service account which has a delinquent sewer service charge balance that is transferred into the city's processing system for the establishment of same as a lien to be collected upon the tax rolls, there is levied thereon a lien transfer fee, in such an amount as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the city council, to be added to the delinquent account balance to reimburse the city for the actual cost of the data processing, accounting, public notice and control procedures related to the lien processing system; provided, however, that no lien transfer fee shall be levied on any delinquent account unless and until prior written notice of the intent to levy such fee is given to the delinquent user in question, in accordance with subsection C of this section. 
(Ord. 2246, 2004; Ord. 2096 (part), 1995)  
14.04.075 - Sewer service charges—Collection on tax roll. 
In addition to and as an addition to other procedures for the collection of sewer service charges, such charges, together with any delinquent charges or penalties for nonpayment of such charges, may be collected on the tax roll by following the procedure set forth in Section 5473 et seq. of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 2225, 2003)  
14.04.080 - Disconnection of sewer line. 
Any person, firm or corporation who is the owner, occupant or user of property receiving sewer services from the city, who fails or refuses to pay any sewer service charge or fee as provided by city ordinance within the time limit prescribed for the payment thereof, shall be subject to having his/her sewer line disconnected, and thereafter no such sewer service which has been disconnected for nonpayment of such sewer service charge or fee shall be reconnected until the owner, occupant or user of such property shall have paid all delinquent charges or fees owed the city and all actual expenses incurred by the city in causing such disconnection and reconnection. 
(Ord. 2096 (part), 1995)  
Chapter 14.06 - SEWER CONNECTIONS 
Sections: 
 
14.06.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter: 
A.  "Person" means and includes an individual, partnership, firm, association or corporation. 
B.  "Private property" means all those lands lying within the corporate limits of National City, except those lands owned or controlled by the city and shown as a separate lot of parcel on maps filed in either the county recorder's office or the county clerk's office, or on resubdivisions authorized by the city council as provided in ordinances of the city regulating such resubdivisions or lot splits, as shown on the current tax roll for the city. 
C.  "Public sewers" means and includes any and all publicly owned pipelines, manholes, lamp holes, inspection holes, cleanouts, accessories, equipment or appurtenances to any and all devices used for the disposal of the sewage of the city within the boundary lines of streets, alleys, rights-of-way or public easements. 
D.  "Sewer lateral" or "lateral" means that part of any sewer extending from the sewer main in a public street, alley, easement or right-of-way to private property for the use of such property. 
E.  "Sewer system service," also referred to herein as service," means and is the making available of the city sewer system to any parcel of property by the city. 
(Ord. 1489 §§ 2—6, 1975)  
14.06.020 - Connections—Required when. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation to install, or cause to be installed, a septic tank, a cesspool, or other device or devices, for disposal of sewage in the city where the building to be connected is within two hundred feet of the available sewer system after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The sewer system shall be deemed available where a building connection pipe may be laid with a fall of one-quarter inch per foot. 
(Ord. 1489 § 13, 1975)  
14.06.030 - Permit—Prerequisites to issuance—Fees. 
If private property which is sought to be connected with a public sewer system has actually been assessed to pay for the cost and expenses of the construction of such public sewer system, or if the public sewer system has been constructed for the use of the private property by private contract by an owner of the private property or his assignor at no expense to the city, either partially or wholly, from its funds or from money derived from a bond issue authorized by an election, the city engineer shall issue a permit upon the payment of connection and permit fees as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2052 § 1, 1993: Ord. 1489 § 7, 1975)  
14.06.040 - Permit—Issuance. 
Upon the receipt of an application for a permit under the provisions of this chapter, the city engineer shall, if the same is in accord with provisions hereof, and if the fee has been paid to the treasurer, issue a permit to the owners of the property to be served, in duplicate, one copy to be delivered to the permittee and one copy to be kept in the city engineer's office. 
(Ord. 2052 § 2, 1993: Ord. 1489 § 22, 1975)  
14.06.050 - Work to be performed by city. 
It is unlawful for any person, other than the city, its officers, agents, permittees and/or employees, to connect any pipe, drain or sewer with, or to open or penetrate, any public sewer in the city, or to damage, remove or open any portion of any manhole, flush tank, lamp hole, inspection pipe or any other part or appurtenance to any public sewer. All sewer laterals from mains to the property line shall be constructed by the city. All connections to the sewer main in a public street, alley, easement or right-of-way shall be made by the city. 
(Ord. 1489 § 8, 1975)  
14.06.060 - Fees—Sewer laterals. 
A.  In addition to any fee or other charge which the city may make for connecting with the public sewer, the owner or applicant for such connection shall pay to the city for constructing and laying a sewer lateral as defined in Section 14.06.010D, a fee as established in the fee schedule adopted by the city council. 
B.  Under abnormal conditions, additional appropriate charges shall be established by the city engineer. Abnormal conditions include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following: 
1.  Deep sewer laterals in excess of eight feet; 
2.  Difficult or unusual excavations; 
3.  Unusual obstructions or hazards; 
4.  Sewer connections where the conduit is larger than six inches inside diameter; 
5.  If, in the opinion of the city engineer, the estimated sewage flow from any property is in excess of one thousand gallons per day, the fee shall be determined by multiplying the estimated flow, in gallons per day, by $0.653. The city engineer may further require the installation of a flow meter. If actual flows exceed the estimated flow, an adjustment to the fee may also be required as determined by the city engineer. 
C.  In case a connection is made to a public sewer where the sewer main or service lateral is already installed across private property, the property owner shall install the building sewer to the sewer main and shall uncover the existing sewer main so that a connection can be made, which connection shall be made by the city. 
(Ord. 2018 § 11, 1991; Ord. 1798, 1983: Ord. 1625, 1978: Ord. 1489 § 9, 1975)  
14.06.070 - Fees—For property frontage. 
In addition to a fee for permit or other charge which the city may make for connecting to the public sewer system, the owner or applicant (excluding those exempted by Section 14.06.030) for sewer system service to any property whose dimensions parallel to the street are fifty feet or less shall, upon making application for such service, pay the minimum sum of three hundred dollars to the city. Where the subject property is over fifty feet in width, the minimum charge shall be six dollars per foot of frontage. 
(Ord. 1489 § 10, 1975)  
14.06.080 - Connections—Approval and inspection required. 
The size and number of service laterals serving any property shall be determined by the city engineer and such laterals shall be connected only upon the order of the city engineer after the appropriate fees contained in Sections 14.06.050 and 14.06.060 have been paid. The building sewer shall be inspected and approved prior to connections to the service lateral. 
(Ord. 2052 § 3, 1993: Ord. 1489 § 11, 1975)  
14.06.090 - Connections—Permit required—Issuance restrictions. 
No connection to the public sewers shall be made, or any work done thereon, either in the public streets or alleys, or within property lines, until a permit for such construction and work has been issued therefor by the city. Permits for sewer connection shall be issued only to persons who have plumbing already installed in their premises, or have taken out permits therefor under the provisions of city ordinances. Applications for permits required by the provisions of this chapter shall be made to the director of building and housing. 
(Ord. 1489 § 21, 1975)  
14.06.100 - Permit—Recordkeeping required. 
It shall be the duty of the city engineer to keep on file all records of sewer permits issued. It shall be the duty of the city engineer to plat sewer lines constructed hereunder on the plats in his office. 
(Ord. 2052 § 4, 1993: Ord. 1489 § 24, 1975)  
14.06.110 - Sewers appeal board established—Authority. 
There is created a sewers appeal board consisting of the director of building and safety, the city engineer and a representative of the city council to be appointed by the mayor. Any applicant for service from the sewer system who presents a special or peculiar case may be referred to the sewers appeal board by the city engineer for decision on the amount of charge to be made in addition to the three-hundred-dollar minimum charge; or any applicant who desires to present a plan of sewer service different from the number of services required by the city engineer may make a written request to the sewers appeal board for a decision. Nothing in this section shall deny the right of appeal of the applicant to the city council for the fixing of the charges; provided, however, that such appeal to the city council is made within thirty days from the date of the decision rendered by the sewers appeal board and the decision of the city council on any such appeal shall be final. 
(Ord. 2052 § 5, 1993: Ord. 1489 § 12, 1975)  
14.06.120 - City engineer to perform work authorized by permit. 
Upon the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this chapter, the city engineer shall proceed with the work called for by the permit, and upon completion shall file with the city engineer a copy of that permit with a notation thereon that the work has been completed and the connection made and the date of completion, together with an itemized statement of the cost thereof, and accurate location of same. 
(Ord. 1489 § 23, 1975)  
14.06.130 - Public sewer construction—Inspection, approval and connection required. 
All public sewers constructed and conduits leading thereto installed under the provisions of this chapter shall be left uncovered until the city engineer has given permission to cover the same. Existing buildings within two hundred feet of the available city sewer system shall be connected to the city sewer system at such times as the private sewer system fails or is ineffective in the disposal of liquid and solid wastes. 
(Ord. 1489 § 25, 1975)  
14.06.140 - Materials and installation specifications. 
Every building sewer or drainage piping installed within the public right-of-way and the property lines that is to be connected with the public sewers shall be of approved materials listed in the Uniform Plumbing Code and shall be installed according to the listing of their approval. Piping conveying industrial, chemical or process wastes from their point of origin to sewer connected pretreatment facilities shall be of such material and design as to adequately perform its intended function to the satisfaction of the director of building and safety. Drainage discharge piping from pretreatment facilities or interceptors shall conform to standard drainage installation procedures. The installation and testing of approved materials shall be in accordance with installation and testing procedures contained in the Uniform Plumbing Code. No connection in any manner shall be made between drainage piping or sewers on private property and the public sewers until inspected and approved by the city engineer or director of building and safety, as applicable. 
(Ord. 2052 § 6 1993: Ord. 1489 § 15, 1975)  
14.06.150 - Connections—Multiple permitted when—Restrictions on lines installed by property owners. 
Every building with plumbing fixtures shall be separately and independently connected to the public sewer; except, where one building stands in the rear of another building on an interior lot, the building drain from the front building may be extended to the rear building or where two or more buildings on the same property under one ownership and not subdividable may be served by a single adequately sized connection to the public sewer. Whenever a sewer line is to be installed at the cost of the property owners on or across any street, alley, easement or right-of-way or any ground dedicated to the city for any purpose, or across private property, and when said sewer is to be connected to the public sewer, or may become a part of the public sewer system, the sewer line shall be installed under the supervision of the city engineer and the city shall have the right to make extensions and connections thereto at all times. Before any lateral connections are made to any such sewer, so installed by property owners, a permit thereof must be taken out and the regular fees paid. 
(Ord. 1489 § 14, 1975)  
14.06.160 - Property owner—Responsibility for building connection line—Stoppages. 
A.  The property owner is responsible for the building connection line from the house to the main. The owner or occupant is responsible for calling a licensed private plumbing contractor if a stoppage occurs. City crews cannot respond to requests for service unless the owner or occupant has first obtained the service of a licensed plumber. If the licensed plumber is unsuccessful in cleaning the line and in his opinion determines that the stoppage is located in the right-of-way portion of the building connection, the plumber shall call the department of public works and request city service. 
B.  Whenever it is necessary for the city to relieve stoppage in laterals, if the obstruction is in the street between the sewer main and the property line, and is due to waste matter which should not have been placed in the sewer, the owner of such property shall pay to the city the cost of the removal of such obstruction. 
(Ord. 1852, 1985; Ord. 1489 § 20, 1975)  
14.06.170 - Property owner—Maintenance duties. 
The building sewer or drainage piping installed within property lines and the building connection serving such building sewer or drainage piping shall be maintained by the property owner. 
(Ord. 1489 § 16, 1975)  
14.06.180 - Prohibited discharges designated. 
Except as provided in Section 14.06.190 of this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to deposit, by any means whatsoever, into any plumbing fixture, floor drain, interceptor, sink, receptacle or device which is connected to the drainage system, public sewer, private sewer, septic tank or cesspool, any ashes; cinders; solids; rags; inflammable, poisonous or explosive liquids or gases; oils; grease or any other organic, chemical or industrial waste that may be detrimental to the public sewer system or detrimental to the functioning of the sewage treatment plant. No cesspool, septic tank, seepage pit or drainfield shall be connected to any public sewer or to any building sewer leading to such public sewer. 
Unless approved by the director of building and safety, no rain, surface or subsurface water shall be connected to or discharged into any sewerage system. Roofs, inner courts, vent shafts, light wells or similar areas having rainwater drain, shall discharge to the outside of the building or to the gutter and shall not be connected to the sewerage system. 
(Ord. 2052 § 7, 1993: Ord. 1489 § 18, 1975)  
14.06.190 - Industrial wastes—Discharge restrictions—Permit required when. 
A.  Chemical or industrial liquid wastes shall not be discharged into the public sewer system without obtaining an industrial waste permit and the approval of the San Diego Metropolitan Sewerage System to discharge such wastes into the public sewer. Wastes that are known to be detrimental to the public sewer system or detrimental to the functioning of the sewage treatment plant shall be treated and disposed of as found necessary and directed by the San Diego Metropolitan Sewerage System or other authority having jurisdiction. 
B.  Solid wastes resulting from the preparation of any food or drink prepared on premises where such foods or drinks are served or proposed to be served for consumption may, when properly ground through a food waste disposer, be discharged into the public sewer system. 
C.  Interceptors (including grease, oil and sand, etc.) shall be provided when, in the judgment of the director of building and safety or the public works director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease, flammable wastes, sandy solids, acid or alkaline substances or other ingredients harmful to the building drainage system, the public or private sewer or to public or private sewage disposal facilities. 
(Ord. 2052 § 8, 1993: Ord. 1489 § 19, 1975)  
14.06.200 - Fees—For extra inspections or violations. 
When any person shall have violated or failed to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter or when, through any such violation or failure to comply by any person doing the work, it is necessary to make extra inspections of the work, there shall be charged said person a fee of ten dollars for such extra inspection made necessary on account of such violation or failure to comply. 
(Ord. 1489 § 17, 1975)  
14.06.210 - Fees—Disposition of funds. 
Any money collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be credited as follows: 
A.  Permit inspection and connection fees to the sewer service revenue fund of the city; 
B.  Sewer system charges to the sewer service revenue fund of the city. 
(Ord. 1721, 1980: Ord. 1489 § 22 (part), 1975)  
14.06.220 - Violation—Penalties—Enforcement authorities. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a violator of this chapter and shall be subject to all penalties provided under law. In addition, such violators may be subject to penalty provisions contained within the Business and Professions Code of the state of California and enforced by the registrar of contractors. 
(Ord. 1489 § 26, 1975)  
Chapter 14.12 - UNLAWFUL WATER USES 
Sections: 
 
14.12.060 - Wasting water—Prohibited. 
From and after the date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in Sections 14.12.060 through 14.12.090, it is declared to be unlawful for any person, legal or natural, to waste or to cause or permit to be wasted any water furnished, supplied or delivered by any agency distributing for public benefit any water dedicated to or provided for public use within the city. 
(Ord. 747 § 1, 1948)  
14.12.070 - Wasting water—Evidence. 
It is prima facie evidence of the violation of Sections 14.12.060 through 14.12.090 for any person, legal or natural, to permit any water supplied from such public source to the premises owned, occupied or controlled by such person, to escape, flow or seep therefrom. 
(Ord. 747 § 2, 1948)  
14.12.080 - Wasting water—Responsibility. 
The person, legal or natural, ostensibly in possession, control or ownership of any premises upon which water is wasted or permitted to be wasted in violation of Sections 14.12.060 through 14.12.090 shall be prima facie responsible for such violation. 
(Ord. 747 § 3, 1948)  
14.12.090 - Penalty. 
The violation of Sections 14.12.060 through 14.12.090 is an infraction punishable as prescribed in Section 1.20.010. 
(Ord. 1621, 1978; Ord. 1358 § 2 (part), 1973: Ord. 747 § 4, 1948)  
Chapter 14.16 - POLLUTION 
Sections: 
 
14.16.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter or in the regulations promulgated in relation thereto shall be construed as defined herein. 
A.  "Industrial wastes" means all wastes other than domestic wastes. 
B.  "Plumbing system" means and includes all potable water supply and distribution pipes, all plumbing fixtures and traps, all drainage and vent pipe and all drains, including their respective joints and connections, devices, receptacles and appurtenances within property lines of private property. 
C.  "Sewage" means any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in suspension or solution, including liquids containing chemicals in solution. 
D.  "Sewerage" is a comprehensive terms including all construction and appurtenant equipment utilized in the collection, transportation, pumping, treatment and final disposal of sewage. 
(Ord. 1289 § 9, 1971)  
14.16.020 - Objectionable sewage prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cause to enter or permit to enter the public sewerage system any substance, liquid, gas or solid which would cause a public nuisance or hazard to life, or would be deleterious to the plumbing system, public sewerage system or to the waters receiving the discharge of the public sewerage system. 
(Ord. 1289 § 2, 1971)  
14.16.030 - Disposal—Permit required. 
Any person, firm, corporation or governmental agency desiring to discharge industrial wastes into the sewerage system shall obtain a permit to discharge such wastes into the system from the San Diego Metropolitan Sewerage System. 
(Ord. 2052 § 9, 1993: Ord. 1289 § 3, 1971)  
14.16.040 - Regulations. 
The director of building and housing shall promulgate and enforce regulations necessary to the administration of this chapter. He may amend such regulations from time to time as conditions require. These regulations shall be consistent with the general policy established by the city council and shall be approved by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 1289 § 4, 1971)  
14.16.050 - Appeal. 
In the event that any interested or affected person is dissatisfied with any action or determination of the director of building and housing, such person is entitled to make an appeal in writing to the city manager. If dissatisfied with the determination of the city manager, said person is entitled to make an appeal in writing to the city council. If thirty days or more elapse following the action or determination of any one of the officials in the above designated chain of appeal without an appeal being taken therefrom, then the action or determination of such official or officials shall be final. 
(Ord. 1289 § 5, 1971)  
14.16.060 - Notice of violation. 
Any person, firm or corporation found to be violating any provision of this chapter or any regulation promulgated relative thereto shall be served by the director of building and housing with a written notice which states the nature of the violation and provides a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violation. 
(Ord. 1289 § 6, 1971)  
14.16.070 - Suspension of sewer service. 
When deemed necessary by the director of public works or the director of building and safety for the preservation of the public health or safety or for the protection of public or private property, he may suspend sewer service to any person, firm or corporation using the sewer system in any manner or way to endanger the public health or safety, or public or private property. In suspending service he may sever all pertinent connections to the public sewerage system. If such endangerment shall be imminent, then the director may act immediately to suspend sewer service coincident with notice of warning to such person, firm or corporation. 
(Ord. 2052 § 10, 1993: Ord. 1289 § 7, 1971)  
14.16.080 - Tests—Inspection. 
A.  The director of public works and the director of building and safety or other duly authorized employees and agents of the city shall be permitted to enter onto all properties at any reasonable hour for the purpose of: 
1.  Determination of the size, depth, location and condition of any sewer or drain connection; 
2.  Determination of the location, use and discharge connections of interceptors and plumbing fixtures; and 
3.  Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing of the quality and characteristics of sewage or other liquids or wastes being discharged into the public sewerage system. 
B.  Where warranted, installation of an appropriate manhole or manholes for purposes of sampling the final industrial waste discharge may be required by the director of building and safety. 
C.  Whenever an analysis of the sewage and wastes from any plant, building or premises of an industrial or commercial character confirms the presence of any substance, liquid, gas or solids in sufficient quantity or condition which would cause a public nuisance or hazard to life or would be deleterious to the plumbing system, public sewerage system or to the waters receiving the discharge of the public sewerage system, the owner of the plant, building or premises shall pay to the city treasurer the cost of each such sewage and waste analysis. 
(Ord. 2052 § 11, 1993: Ord. 1289 § 8, 1971)  
Chapter 14.20 - WELLS 
Sections: 
 
14.20.010 - County ordinance adopted. 
There is adopted by the city council, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing provision for the construction, repair and reconstruction of wells to the end that the groundwater of this county will not be polluted or contaminated and that water obtained from such wells will be suitable for the purpose for which used and will not jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the people of this county, and for the destruction of abandoned wells or wells found to be public nuisances to the end that such wells will not cause pollution or contamination of groundwater or otherwise jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the people of this county, that certain ordinance known as Ordinance No. 4286(NS) of the board of supervisors of the county, of which ordinance not less than three copies have been and are now filed in the office of the city clerk and the same are adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which the ordinance codified in this section takes effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. 1431 § 2, 1974)  
14.20.020 - Section 67.402 amended. 
Section 67.402 of county Ordinance No. 4286 (NS) is amended as follows: 
Delete: The definition "Well Standards Advisory Board." 
(Ord. 1488 § 1, 1975)  
14.20.030 - Article 2 deleted. 
Article 2 of county Ordinance No. 4286 (NS) is amended as follows: 
Delete: Entire article titled "Well Standards Advisory Board." 
(Ord. 1488 § 2, 1975)  
14.20.040 - Article 4 deleted and replaced—Nuisances. 
Article 4 of county Ordinance No. 4286 (NS) is amended as follows: 
Delete: Entire article and replace with new article to read as follows: 
"Article 4 - NUISANCES 
 "Section 64.430. INVESTIGATION. The County Health Officer may, upon reasonable cause to believe that an abandoned well or other well is causing a nuisance by polluting or contaminating ground water, or constitutes a safety hazard, investigate the situation to determine whether such a nuisance does in fact exist. He shall have the power, when in the performance of his duty and upon first presenting his credentials and identifying himself as an employee of the County Health Department to the person apparently in control of the premises, if available, to enter upon any such premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., to discover or inspect anything or condition which appears to indicate such a nuisance. He may examine such premises, things, or conditions, take such samples and make such tests as needed and take any other steps reasonably necessary for the proper investigation and determination of whether such a nuisance exists. 
 "Section 64.431. ORDER TO ABATE A NUISANCE. Whenever the Health Officer determines that an abandoned or other well is causing a nuisance by polluting or contaminating ground water, or constitutes a safety hazard, he may issue a written order requiring that the conditions productive of the nuisance be abated within a period of ten days thereafter and shall forthwith serve the order upon the person occupying the premises, if any, and if no person occupies the premises, the order shall be posted upon said premises in a conspicuous place. In addition, a copy shall be mailed to the owners of the premises as their names and addresses appear upon the last equalized assessment roll. The Health Officer may for good cause extend the time specified in the order or otherwise modify or rescind the order. 
 The order of abatement shall advise the possessors and owners of the property of their right to appeal to the city council and to stay the order of abatement pending such appeal. 
 "Section 64.432 APPEAL FROM ORDER OF ABATEMENT. Any person who has been given an order of abatement may, within ten days following the receipt of the order of abatement, file an appeal in writing to the City Council. Said appeal shall be accompanied by a filing fee of twenty-five dollars and shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is taken. The City Clerk shall then proceed to set the matter for hearing, not later than 20 days thereafter, and such appeal shall stay the effect of any order issued pursuant to Section 64.431 until the City Council hears the appeal and issues its order either to affirm, overrule or modify the action of the Health Officer. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the appealing party at least five days prior to the hearing. 
 "Section 64.433. ABATEMENT BY COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER. In the event that a nuisance is not abated in accordance with an order of abatement, the Health Officer may, upon securing the approval of the City Council, proceed to abate the nuisance by force account, contract or any other method deemed most expedient by the City Council. 
 "Section 64.434. PAYMENT OF COSTS. The Health Officer shall prepare and file with the City Clerk a report specifying the work done, the itemized and total cost of the work, a description of the real property upon which the well is or was located, and the names and addresses of the record owner, the holder of any mortgage or deed of trust of record, and any other person known to have a legal interest in the property. 
 A hearing shall be held on said report and any protests or objections thereto, and notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the persons with a legal interest in the property at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. The City Council shall determine at the hearing the correct charge to be made for the work. 
 All costs of abatement carried out under the terms of this section shall constitute a charge and special assessment against the parcel of land involved. If such costs are not paid within 60 days, they shall then be declared a special assessment against that property as provided in Government Code Section 25845. The assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary City taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary City taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of City taxes shall be applicable to such special assessment. In addition to its rights to impose said special assessment, the City shall retain the alternative right to recover its costs by way of civil action against the owner and person in possession or control jointly and severally." 
(Ord. 1488 § 3, 1975)  
Chapter 14.22 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-2403, § 1, adopted June 16, 2015, amended Ch. 14.22 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said chapter to read as herein set out. The former Ch. 14.22, §§ 14.22.010—14.22.230, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. 2088; Ord. 2250 § 3 (part), 2004; Ord. 2308 (part), 2008; and Ord. No. 2010-2329, 2-16-2010. 
 
14.22.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "National City Storm Water Management and Discharge Control Ordinance," and shall be so cited. 
(Ord. No. 2015-2403, § 1, 6-16-2015)  
14.22.020 - Purpose and intent. 
The purposes of this chapter are as follows: 
A.  To establish requirements for discharges into the MS4, receiving waters, and the environment; 
B.  To protect, to the maximum extent practicable (MEP), life, property, receiving waters, aquatic life, and the environment from loss, injury, degradation, or damage by discharges from within the city's jurisdiction; 
C.  To protect the stormwater conveyance system from damage; and 
D.  To meet the requirements of state and federal law and the MS4 Permit. 
(Ord. No. 2015-2403, § 1, 6-16-2015)  
14.22.030 - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter and reference documents (including the Best Management Practices Manual), the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
"Authorized enforcement official" means the city manager of the city of National City or any designee of the city manager who is responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to, the directors, their management staff, and designees. 
"Authorized enforcement staff" means any city employee or contractor hired by the city who is assigned to duties involving permits and other city approvals, inspections, or enforcement related to this chapter. 
"Best management practices" (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, pollution treatment practices or devices, and other management practices to prevent or reduce to the maximum extent practicable (MEP) the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to storm water, the MS4, or to receiving waters. BMPs also include, but are not limited to, treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal or drainage from raw materials storage. 
"BMP Manual" or "Manual" means the city's Best Management Practices (BMP) Manual described in Section 14.22.040.C of this chapter, adopted by resolution as part of the city's Jurisdiction Runoff Management Program, which also includes the city's BMP Design Manual. 
"Channel" means a natural or improved watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or intermittently flowing water. 
"City" means the city of National City. 
"Contamination" as defined in the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act, is "an impairment of the quality of waters of the state by waste to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. 'Contamination' includes any equivalent effect resulting from the disposal of waste whether or not waters of the state are affected. 
"Developer" means a person who seeks or receives permits for or who undertakes land development activity. 
"Development project" means new development or redevelopment with land disturbing activities, construction, or installation of a structure, the creation of impervious surface or land subdivision. 
"Development project proponent" means developer. 
"Directors" means the director of development services. 
"Discharge" when used as a verb, means to allow pollutants to directly or indirectly enter storm water or to allow storm water or non-storm water to directly or indirectly enter the MS4 or receiving waters, from an activity or operations which one owns or operates. When used as a noun, "discharge" means the pollutants, storm water and/or non-storm water that is discharged. 
"Discharger" means any person or entity engaged in activities or operations or owning facilities, which will or may result in pollutants entering storm water, the MS4 or receiving waters; and the owners of real property on which such activities, operations or facilities are located; provided however that a local government or public authority is not a discharger as to activities conducted by others in public rights-of-way. 
"Erosion" refers to any process in which land is diminished or worn away due to wind, water, or glacial ice. Often the eroded debris (silt or sediment) becomes a pollutant via stormwater runoff. Erosion occurs naturally but can be intensified by land clearing activities such as farming, development, road building, and timber harvesting. 
"Groundwater" means subsurface water that occurs beneath the water table in soils and geologic formations that are fully saturated. 
"Illegal connection" means a pipe, facility, or other device connected to the MS4 or receiving waters, which has not been reviewed and authorized by the city; or a permitted/authorized pipe, facility, or other device, which conveys illegal discharges. 
"Illegal discharge" means any discharge to the MS4 or receiving water that is prohibited by this chapter. This includes, but is not limited to, discharges of non-storm water that are not exempt discharges listed in Section 14.22.070, discharges of irrigation runoff to the MS4, and any discharges that contain additional pollutants due to the absence of a required BMP or the failure of a BMP. Discharges that require a NPDES permit that has not been issued or has not been acknowledged by the discharger to be applicable are illegal discharges. Discharges regulated under an applicable NPDES permit are illegal discharges for the purposes of this chapter unless compliance with all applicable permit and SWPPP conditions is maintained. 
"Impervious surface" means constructed or modified surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall. The term includes, but is not limited to, building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, and driveways. 
"Land development activity" means construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment, or reconstruction of any public or private projects. 
"Land disturbance activity" means any activity that moves soils or substantially alters the pre-existing vegetated or man-made cover of any land. This includes, but is not limited to, grading, digging, cutting, scraping, stockpiling, or excavating of soil; placement of fill materials; paving, pavement removal, exterior construction; substantial removal of vegetation where soils are disturbed including, but not limited to, removal by clearing or grubbing; or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves streambed alterations or the diversion or piping of any watercourse. Land disturbance activity does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or the original purpose of the facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities or maintenance activities required to protect public health and safety. 
"Land owner" means the holder of legal title to the land and other persons or entities who exercise control over a land development project pursuant to rights granted in a purchase agreement, joint venture agreement, development agreement, or long-term lease. 
"Maximum extent practicable" (MEP) is an acceptability standard for BMPs. When BMPs are required to meet this standard, the BMPs must be the most effective set of BMPs that is still practicable. A BMP is effective if it prevents, reduces, or removes the pollutants that would otherwise be present in runoff due to human activity. A BMP is practicable if it complies with other regulations as well as storm water regulations; is compatible with the area's land use, character, facilities, and activities; is technically feasible (considering area soil, geography, water resources, and other resources available); is economically feasible; and provides benefits that are reasonable in relation to costs. 
"MS4 permit" means RWQCB Order No. R9-2013-0001, NPDES No. CAS0109266, as may be amended. 
"Municipal separate storm sewer system" (MS4) is a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains): (1) owned or operated by the city having jurisdiction over disposal of storm water; (2) designated or used for collecting or conveying storm water; (3) which is not a combined sewer; (4) which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works as defined at 40 CFR 122.26. 
"National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit" means a national pollutant discharge elimination system permit issued by the RWQCB or the SWRCB. 
"Non-storm water discharge" means any discharge to the MS4 that is not entirely composed of storm water. 
"Nuisance" shall have the same meaning as set forth in National City Municipal Code Section 1.36.010. 
"Pollutant" means any agent that may cause or contribute to the degradation of water quality such that a condition of pollution or contamination is created or aggravated. 
"Pollution" as defined in the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act, is "the alteration of the quality of the waters of the state by waste, to a degree which unreasonably affects either of the following: 1) The waters for beneficial uses; or 2) Facilities that serve these beneficial uses." Pollution may include contamination. 
"Post-construction BMP plan" means a plan, submitted on a city form or in a city-specific format in connection with an application for a city permit or other city approval, identifying the BMPs that will be used for storm water and non-storm water management during the permitted activity. 
"Premises" means any building, lot, parcel, real estate, land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved. 
"Priority development projects" refers to new development and redevelopment project categories as more fully set forth in Section E.3.b of the MS4 Permit and in the BMP Manual. 
"Receiving water" means all waters that are "waters of the United States". 
"Redevelopment" means any construction, alteration, or improvement of an already developed site that will increase the total impervious surface area of that site or that involves activities that could expose pollutants to rainfall. Redevelopment can include, but is not limited to, the expansion of building footprints, the addition or replacement of a structure, exterior construction and remodeling, replacement of existing impervious surfaces that are not part of a routine maintenance activity, and other activities that create additional impervious surfaces. 
"Runoff" means all flows in a stormwater conveyance system including stormwater (wet weather flows) and non-stormwater (dry weather flows). 
"RWQCB" means the Regional Water Quality Control Board for the San Diego region. 
"Sediment" means soils or other surficial materials eroded and then transported or deposited by the action of wind, water, ice, or gravity. Sediment resulting from anthropogenic sources (i.e., human induced land disturbance activities) is considered a pollutant. Sediments can increase turbidity, clog fish gills, reduce spawning habitat, lower young aquatic organisms' survival rates, smother bottom dwelling organisms, and suppress aquatic vegetation growth. 
"State" means the state of California. 
"Stop Order" means a verbal directive, written notice or combination directed to one or more responsible parties to cease and desist immediately from conducting business or performing or allowing work or activity to continue, including without limitation construction, land development or land grading, without having first obtained a required permit or license or from conducting work or activity in a manner that violates the terms and conditions of an issued permit or license or while a required permit or license is suspended or revoked. 
"Storm water" means, per 40 CFR 122.26(b)(13), storm water runoff, snowmelt runoff and surface runoff and drainage. Surface runoff and drainage pertains to runoff and drainage resulting from precipitation events. 
"Storm water management" means the use of structural or nonstructural BMPs that are designed to reduce urban run-off pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and/or peak discharge flow rates or velocities. When applied to the city or another municipality, storm water management also includes planning and programmatic measures. 
"Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP)" means a document which describes the BMPs to be implemented by the owner or operator to eliminate or reduce to the MEP discharges of pollutants to the MS4. This plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following site information: 
1.  An inventory of all of materials/wastes that are handled on a premise and have a reasonable potential to impact storm water quality; 
2.  A description of measures taken which will reduce the possibility or likelihood of accidental spillage resulting from equipment failure or employee error; 
3.  A description of on-site spill control/response equipment and procedures to prevent contaminants from entering the storm water conveyance system; 
4.  A site map indicating all building structures, materials and waste storage areas, paved areas, areas of existing and potential erosion, storm drain inlets, and point(s) of discharge to a municipal storm water conveyance system or receiving waters. The site map shall include an estimate of the size of the facility and the facility's impervious area; 
5.  An employee training program, as defined in subsection D of this section, including training outlines and training records; 
6.  A description of any storm water monitoring program that is conducted on the site. 
A storm water pollution prevention plan prepared and implemented pursuant to any NPDES storm water permit shall meet the definition of a storm water pollution prevention plan for the purposes of this chapter. 
"Structural BMP" means a BMP that relies on either a physical condition (other than an entirely natural and undisturbed condition) or on a constructed or installed device to reduce or prevent pollutants in storm water discharges and authorized non-storm water discharges. 
"Structural post-construction BMP" means a structural BMP (other than a temporary construction-related BMP) put in place in connection with a land development or redevelopment project to prevent or reduce contamination in storm water or receiving waters or to prevent or reduce erosion downstream from the project. All treatment control BMPs are structural post-construction BMPs. 
"SWRCB" means the State Water Resources Control Board. 
"Water main" means a potable or recycled water delivery line greater than or equal to four inches in diameter. 
"Water quality standards" are defined as the beneficial uses (e.g., swimming, fishing, municipal drinking water supply, etc.) of water and the water quality objectives adopted by the state or United States Environmental Protection Agency to protect those uses. 
"Waters of the state" means any water, surface or underground, including saline waters within the boundaries of the state (State Water Code Section 10350(e)). The definition of the "waters of the state" is broader than that for the "waters of the United States" in that all water in the state is considered to be "waters of the state" regardless of circumstances or condition. 
"Waters of the United States" means water subject to the regulatory jurisdiction of the United States under the Federal Clean Water Act and applicable case law. (In general, this includes "navigable" waters, waters tributary to "navigable" waters, and adjacent wetlands). 
"Watercourse" means any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, ditch, channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, arroyo, or wash in which waters flow in a definite direction or course, either continuously or intermittently, and which has a definite channel and a bed or banks. A channel is not limited to land covered by minimal or ordinary flow but also includes land covered during times of high water. Watercourse does not include any surface drainage prior to its collection in a stream, river, creek, ditch, channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, arroyo, or wash. 
(Ord. No. 2015-2403, § 1, 6-16-2015)  
14.22.040 - General provisions. 
Responsibility for Administration. This chapter shall be administered for the city of National City by its authorized enforcement officials. 
A.  Construction and Application. This chapter shall be interpreted to assure consistency with the requirements of the MS4 permit. This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other chapter, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other chapter, rule, or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall take precedence. Storm water and non-storm water discharges regulated under a valid facility-specific NPDES permit or facility-specific RWQCB waste discharge requirements permit are not subject to this chapter, but shall instead be regulated exclusively by the RWQCB. 
B.  BMP Manual. The city may establish and adopt a written description of the runoff management measures and programs, including minimum BMPs, that the city will implement, or require to be implemented, to ensure compliance with this chapter. These documents shall be known collectively as the BMP Manual. Amendments to the BMP Manual shall be approved by the authorized enforcement official. 
C.  Severability and Validity. If any section of this chapter is declared invalid by a court of law, the remaining sections shall remain valid. 
(Ord. No. 2015-2403, § 1, 6-16-2015)  
14.22.050 - Watercourse protection. 
Every person owning or occupying property through which a natural watercourse of a stormwater conveyance system passes shall: 
A.  Keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris and other materials which would pollute, contaminate, retard, or divert the flow of water through the watercourse or the MS4; 
B.  Maintain existing structures within or adjacent to such a watercourse so that those structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse or the MS4; 
C.  Not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that necessary for maintenance, nor remove vegetation in such a manner as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion; 
D.  Not deposit in, plant in or remove any material from a watercourse including its banks, except as required for necessary maintenance; 
E.  Not construct, alter, enlarge, connect to, change or remove any structure in a watercourse; and 
F.  Not carry out developments within thirty feet of the center line of any creek or twenty feet of the top of a bank, whichever is the greater distance from the top of the bank. 
G.  The above requirements do not supersede any requirements set forth by the California Department of Fish and Game, SWRCB, the RWQCB, or the United States Army Corps of Engineers regulating waters of the United States and/or storm water discharges. 
(Ord. No. 2015-2403, § 1, 6-16-2015)  
14.22.060 - Discharge prohibitions. 
A.  Illegal Discharges. The discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly into the MS4 or receiving waters is prohibited, except as exempted in Section 14.22.070 of this chapter and unless the applicable requirements of this chapter have been met. It is unlawful for any person to cause either individually or jointly any discharge into or from the MS4 which results in or contributes to a violation of the MS4 Permit. 
B.  Illegal Connection. It is prohibited to establish, use, maintain or continue illegal connections to the MS4, regardless of whether such connections were made under a permit or other authorization or other authorization or whether permissible under the law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
C.  Prevention of Illegal Discharges. Throwing, depositing, leaving, abandoning, maintaining or keeping materials or wastes on public or private lands in a manner and place where they may result in an illegal discharge is prohibited. 
D.  Violations of the MS4 Permit. It is unlawful for any person to cause, or threaten to cause, either individually or jointly any discharge into or from the stormwater conveyance system that results in or contributes to a violation of the MS4 Permit. 
(Ord. No. 2015-2403, § 1, 6-16-2015)  
14.22.070 - Exemptions to discharge prohibitions. 
A.  Permitted Discharges. Any discharge to the MS4 that is regulated under a NPDES permit issued to the discharger and administered by the state pursuant to Division 7 of the California Water Code is allowed, provided that the discharger is in compliance with all requirements of the NPDES permit and other applicable laws and regulations. 
B.  Groundwater Discharges Typically Requiring Permits. Non-storm water discharges to the MS4 from the following categories are allowed if: (i) the discharger obtains coverage under NPDES Permit No. CAG919001 (RWQCB Order No. R9-2007-0034, or subsequent order) for discharges to San Diego Bay, and the discharger is in compliance with all requirements of the applicable NPDES permit and all other applicable laws and regulations; or (ii) the RWQCB determines in writing that coverage under NPDES Permit No. CAG919001 (or subsequent permit) is not required. Otherwise, non-storm water discharges from the following categories are illegal discharges: 
1.  Discharges from uncontaminated pumped groundwater; 
2.  Discharges from foundation drains when the system is designed to be located at or below the groundwater table to actively or passively extract groundwater during any part of the year; 
3.  Discharges from water from crawl space pumps; 
4.  Discharges from water from footing drains when the system is designed to be located at or below the groundwater table to actively or passively extract groundwater during any part of the year. 
C.  Discharges from Water Lines. Non-storm water discharges to the MS4 from water line flushing and water main breaks are allowed if the discharges have coverage under NPDES Permit No. CAG679001 (RWQCB Order No. R9-2010-0003, or subsequent order), and the discharge is in compliance with all requirements of that NPDES permit and other applicable laws and regulations. This category includes water line flushing and water main break discharges from water purveyors issued a water supply permit by the California Department of Public Health or federal military installations. Discharges from recycled or reclaimed water lines to the MS4 are allowed if the discharges have coverage under an NPDES permit. Otherwise, discharges from water lines are illegal discharges. 
D.  Allowable Discharges. Non-storm water discharges to the MS4 from the following categories are allowed, unless the enforcement official or the RWQCB identifies the discharge as a source of pollutants to receiving waters, in which case non-storm water discharges from the following categories are illegal discharges: 
1.  Discharges from diverted stream flows; 
2.  Discharges from rising groundwater; 
3.  Discharges from uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to the MS4; 
4.  Discharges from springs; 
5.  Discharges from flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
6.  Discharges from potable water sources, except as set forth in Section 14.22.070(C) and except that irrigation runoff discharges are considered illegal discharges and are not allowed; 
7.  Discharges from foundation drains when the system is designed to be located above the groundwater table at all times of the year, and the system is only expected to produce non-storm water discharges under unusual circumstances; 
8.  Discharges from footing drains when the system is designed to be located above the groundwater table at all times of the year, and the system is only expected to produce non-storm water discharge under unusual circumstances. 
E.  Conditionally Allowed Discharges. Non-storm water discharges from the following categories are allowed if they are controlled as follows and in accordance with the city's BMP Manual. Otherwise, non-storm water discharges from the following categories are illegal discharges: 
1.  Air conditioning condensation. Air conditioning condensation shall comply with applicable BMPs identified in the BMP Manual. 
2.  Individual residential vehicle washing. Wash water from individual residential vehicle washing must be directed to landscaped areas or other pervious surfaces, where feasible. Where discharges cannot be feasibly prevented, BMPs must be implemented in accordance with the BMP Manual. Non-commercial car washes, such as fundraisers and other similar activities, are not considered individual residential vehicle washing. Discharges from such activities are therefore considered illegal discharges. 
3.  Water from swimming pools. 
(i)  Chlorinated swimming pool water. Chlorine, algaecide, filter backwash, and other pollutants must be eliminated prior to discharging swimming pool water to the MS4. 
(ii)  Saline swimming pool water. Saline swimming pool water must be directed to the sanitary sewer, landscaped areas, or other pervious surfaces that can accommodate the volume of water, unless the saline swimming pool water can be discharged through a pipe or concrete channel directly to a naturally saline water body (e.g., the Pacific Ocean). 
F.  Firefighting Activities. Non-storm water discharges to the MS4 from firefighting activities are allowed if they are addressed as follows: 
1.  Non-emergency firefighting discharges. Non-emergency firefighting discharges, including building fire suppression system maintenance discharges (e.g., sprinkler line flushing), controlled or practice blazes, training, and maintenance activities shall be addressed by BMPs to prevent the discharge of pollutants to the MS4. 
2.  Emergency firefighting discharges. BMPs are encouraged to prevent Pollutants from entering the MS4. During emergencies, priority of efforts should be directed toward life, property, and the environment (in descending order). BMPs shall not interfere with emergency response operations or impact public health and safety. 
G.  Exemptions Not Absolute. Notwithstanding the categories of non-storm water discharges conditionally allowed by Section 14.22.070.A through F, if the RWQCB or the authorized enforcement official determines that any of these categories of otherwise conditionally allowed discharges are a source of pollutants to receiving waters, are a danger to public health or safety, or are causing a public nuisance, such discharges shall be prohibited from entering the MS4. 
(Ord. No. 2015-2403, § 1, 6-16-2015)  
14.22.080 - Best management practice requirements for all dischargers. 
A.  Best Management Practices. Any person engaged in activities, which will or may result in discharges to the MS4 shall undertake all measures to reduce the risk of non-storm water discharges and such pollutants to the MEP. 
1.  Every person undertaking any activity or use of premises which may cause or contribute to storm water pollution, illegal discharges, or non-storm water discharges to the MS4 shall comply with the BMP requirements, as described in the BMP Manual and as may be established by the authorized enforcement official. BMPs shall be maintained routinely throughout the life of the activity. Such BMPs include the minimum BMPs set forth in the BMP Manual. 
2.  Authorized enforcement staff may require any facility or operation that is engaged in activities which may result in pollutant discharges to the MS4 to develop and implement a storm water BMP plan, which must include employee training program and the applicable minimum BMPs from the BMP Manual. 
3.  Each discharger that is subject to any NPDES permit shall comply with all requirements of all such permits. The discharger must also make reports submitted to the RWQCB or other permitting agency, including monitoring data, available to the city upon request. 
4.  Parties undertaking land disturbance activities shall comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter, the BMP Manual, and National City Municipal Code Chapter 15.70 (Grading). 
5.  Parties undertaking land development and redevelopment activities shall comply with all applicable requirements of the BMP Manual and Section 14.22.110. 
B.  Guidance Documents. Any authorized enforcement official under the supervision of the City Engineer may prepare, disseminate, and maintain guidance documents addressing the use of BMPs for specific activities or facilities, illegal connections, and illegal discharges. These guidance documents may set out additional compliance alternatives that, in specified circumstances, can provide the same environmental protection that is afforded by the BMPs required by this chapter or specified in the BMP Manual. 
C.  Significant Sources of Pollutants. When authorized enforcement staff identifies a discharge that is in violation of Sections 14.22.060.D and 14.22.070.G, the authorized enforcement official may order the discharger to install, implement, and maintain additional BMPs to prevent or reduce contamination in storm water and non-storm water to the MEP. Any such order shall specify a reasonable date by which those BMPs must be put in place. Failures to install, implement, or maintain additional BMPs as required by any such order is a violation of this chapter. 
D.  Collection and Use of Storm Water. An authorized enforcement official may modify any requirement imposed by this chapter to allow the on-site collection and use of storm water, or the collection of storm water for delivery to and use at city-designated sites, provided the modified requirements are enforceable and provide equivalent environmental protection. 
(Ord. No. 2015-2403, § 1, 6-16-2015)  
14.22.090 - Additional requirements for land disturbance activity. 
A.  Permit Issuance. No land owner or development project proponent shall receive any city grading, clearing, building, or other land development permit or equivalent approval required for land disturbance activity without first meeting the requirements of this chapter, the BMP Manual, and National City Municipal Code Chapter 15.70 (Grading) with respect to the portion of the development project and the land disturbance activity to which the permit at issue would apply. 
B.  Owners and Operators Both Responsible and Liable. Persons or entities performing land disturbance activity (including but not limited to construction activities) in the city, and the owners of land on which land disturbance activity is performed, are dischargers for purposes of this chapter, provided however, that a local government or public authority is not a discharger as to activities conducted by others in public rights-of-way. 
C.  BMP Plan Submittals. All applications to the city for a permit or approval associated with a land disturbance activity must demonstrate how the proposed activity will comply with all applicable BMP requirements in a format specified by the city. The submitted materials shall specify the manner in which the discharger/applicant will implement the BMPs required by this chapter, the BMP Manual, and National City Municipal Code Chapter 15.70 (Grading) for the activity at issue. 
(Ord. No. 2015-2403, § 1, 6-16-2015)  
14.22.100 - Additional requirements for all land development and redevelopment projects. 
A.  Application to Development and Redevelopment Projects. No land owner or development project proponent in the city shall receive any city grading, clearing, building, or other land development permit required for land development activity or redevelopment activity unless the project meets or will meet the requirements of this chapter and applicable requirements defined in the city's BMP Manual. For priority development projects, the project's post-construction BMP plan must be approved prior to the issuance of such permits. 
B.  Owners and Developers Responsible and Liable. Developers, development project proponents, and land owners for land on which land development activity is performed are dischargers for purposes of this chapter, provided, however that a local government or public authority is not a discharger as to activities conducted by others in public rights-of-way. 
C.  Post-construction BMPs Required. Land development and redevelopment projects with the potential to add pollutants to storm water or to affect the flow rate or velocity of storm water runoff after construction is completed, shall be designed to include and shall implement post-construction BMPs to ensure that pollutants and runoff from the development will be reduced to the MEP, and will not significantly degrade receiving water quality, and will not cause or contribute to an exceedance of water quality standards in accordance with the requirements defined in the BMP Manual. 
D.  Post-construction BMP Plan. All applications to the city for a permit or approval associated with a land development or redevelopment activity must be accompanied by a post-construction BMP plan on a form or in a format specified by the city. The plan shall specify the manner in which the discharger/applicant will implement the post-construction BMPs required by this chapter. The plan must address those aspects of the project that, at the time a complete application is submitted, are subject to further environmental review pursuant to Section 15162 of the California Environmental Quality Act. Post-construction BMPs for other aspects of the project need not be addressed in this plan. 
E.  Post-construction BMP Plan Review Fee and Deposit. Fees for post-construction BMP plan review and deposit thereof shall be adopted by resolution. 
F.  Control to the Maximum Extent Practicable. All dischargers engaged in land development and significant redevelopment activities shall install, implement, and maintain post-construction BMPs as needed to prevent or reduce pollutant discharges in stormwater from land disturbance to the MEP. 
(Ord. No. 2015-2403, § 1, 6-16-2015)  
14.22.110 - Maintenance of BMPs. 
A.  Existing Development. Dischargers shall maintain the BMPs they rely upon to achieve and maintain compliance with this chapter. 
B.  Structural post-construction BMPs. The owners and occupants of lands on which structural post-construction BMPs have been installed to meet the requirements of this chapter shall ensure the maintenance of those BMPs, and shall maintain those BMPs by contract or covenant or pursuant to this chapter. The owners of lands on which BMPs have been installed to meet the requirements of this chapter and applicable post-construction BMP requirements are responsible for maintenance of those BMPs, shall enter into a BMP maintenance agreement contract or equivalent agreement with the city, and shall provide annual written verification that appropriate maintenance is conducted for all treatment control BMPs. 
C.  Maintenance Obligations. Primary responsibility to maintain a structural post-construction BMP may be transferred through a contract or other agreement. If that contract provides that it will be submitted to the city pursuant to this chapter as part of a development permit application, and if that contract is so submitted, the person or entity accepting a maintenance obligation in such a contract or agreement will also be legally obliged to maintain that BMP pursuant to this chapter. 
D.  Obligation to Maintain BMPs Not Avoided by Contracts or Other Agreements. For purposes of city enforcement, no contract or other agreement imposing an obligation to maintain a structural post-construction BMP can relieve a person or entity of any obligation to maintain a BMP imposed by this chapter. 
E.  Disclosure of Maintenance Obligations. Any developer who transfers ownership of land on which a structural post-construction BMP is located or will be located or who otherwise transfers ownership of a structural post-construction BMP or responsibility for the maintenance of a BMP to another person or entity, shall provide clear written notice of the maintenance obligations associated with that BMP to the new or additional responsible party prior to that transfer, and shall record that obligation so that the structural post-construction BMP will run with the land. 
F.  Maintenance Plans for Development Projects. The proponents of any land development project or redevelopment project that requires installation of structural post-construction BMPs shall provide to the city for review and approval prior to issuance of such permit, a plan for maintenance of all structural post-construction BMPs associated with the project. The plan shall specify the persons or entities responsible for maintenance activity, the persons, or entities responsible for funding, schedules and procedures for inspection and maintenance of the BMPs, worker training requirements, and any other activities necessary to ensure BMP maintenance. The plan shall provide for servicing of all structural post-construction BMPs at least annually and for the retention of inspection and maintenance records for at least three years. 
G.  Access for Maintenance. Structural post-construction BMPs shall be provided adequate access for long-term inspection and maintenance purposes. 
H.  Assurance of Maintenance for Land Development Projects. The proponents of any land development activity or redevelopment activity that requires a city permit shall provide to the city, prior to issuance of permits for the project, proof of a mechanism acceptable to the city which will ensure ongoing long-term maintenance of all structural post-construction BMPs associated with the proposed project. The proponents shall be responsible for maintenance of BMPs unless, and until, an alternative mechanism for ensuring maintenance is accepted by the city and becomes effective. 
I.  Security for Maintenance for Land Development Projects. If it is determined by the authorized enforcement official that the public interest requires the posting of bond or other security to assure the maintenance of a BMP, such bond or security may be required by the authorized enforcement official. 
(Ord. No. 2015-2403, § 1, 6-16-2015)  
14.22.120 - Inspection and sampling. 
A.  Regulatory Inspections and Certification Programs. Authorized enforcement staff may establish inspection or certification programs to evaluate and enforce compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Authorized enforcement officials may inspect facilities, activities, and properties subject to this chapter at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner to carry out the purposes of this chapter. If entry for a regulatory inspection is refused by the land owner or operator or by the occupant of a residence, an inspection warrant shall be obtained prior to inspection. 
B.  Inspections of New Construction. When any new storm drain system or structural BMP is installed on private property as part of a project that requires a city permit, in order to comply with this chapter, the land owner shall grant the city permission to access the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner to ensure that the BMP is working properly. This includes the right to enter the property without prior notice for routine inspections, to enter as needed for additional inspections when the city has a reasonable basis to believe that the BMP is not working properly, to enter for any needed follow-up inspections and to enter when necessary for abatement of a nuisance or correction of a violation of this chapter. 
C.  Scope of Inspections. Inspections may include all actions necessary to determine whether any illegal discharges or illegal connections exist, whether the BMPs installed and implemented are adequate to comply with this chapter, whether those BMPs are being properly maintained and whether the facility or activity complies with the other requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-2403, § 1, 6-16-2015)  
14.22.130 - Enforcement. 
The City Engineer shall be the primary enforcement official for this chapter. When appropriate or necessary, this chapter may also be enforced by any other official or officer who is charged by the municipal code with code enforcement authority. The enforcement of this chapter shall be accomplished in the same manner as provided in Chapter 7.32 of this code except that reference to the term "code conformance officer" in Chapter 7.32 shall include the authorized enforcement official as defined in this chapter and that all references to "Title 7" shall mean this storm water management and control ordinance for the purposes of enforcement of this chapter only. 
The authorized enforcement official may exercise any of the following supplemental enforcement powers as may be necessary to effectively implement and enforce this chapter: 
A.  Carry out any sampling activities, including taking samples from the property of any person or from any vehicle which any authorized representative of the enforcement agency reasonably believes is currently, or has in the past, caused or contributed to causing an illegal discharge to the MS4; 
B.  Stop and inspect any vehicle reasonably suspected of causing or contributing to an illegal discharge to the MS4 when accompanied by a uniformed police officer in a clearly marked vehicle; 
C.  Conduct tests, analyses and evaluations to determine whether a discharge is an illegal discharge or whether the requirements of this chapter are not met; 
D.  Photograph any effluent stream, material or waste, material or waste container, container label, vehicle, waste treatment process, waste disposal site or condition contributing to storm water pollution and constituting a violation of this chapter; 
E.  Review and obtain a copy of the BMP plan prepared by an owner and/or occupant or facility operator, if such a plan is required; 
F.  Require the owner and/or occupant or facility operator to retain evidence, as instructed by the inspector, for a period not to exceed thirty days; 
G.  Review and obtain copies of all storm water monitoring data compiled by the owner and/or occupant or facility operator, if such monitoring is required; 
H.  The authorized enforcement official may issue warning notices to any person owning or occupying a premise to clean up and abate any release of pollutants on the premise, which may result in a violation of this chapter. The authorized enforcement official may also order the abatement of pollutant storage practices, which may reasonably result in such a violation; 
I.  The authorized enforcement official may require reasonable monitoring of discharges from any premises to the MS4 and shall have the authority to order the mitigation of circumstances which may result in illegal discharges to the MEP; 
J.  Enter upon and conduct inspections or samplings as may be required of any premises, facilities or equipment, including monitoring and control equipment, to ensure compliance with the BMP Manual and jurisdictional runoff management program (JRMP). The authority to conduct reasonable inspections and the obligation of an owner or occupant to allow such inspection upon presentation of official credential is conferred and shall be exercised pursuant to Chapters 1.12 and 1.20 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2015-2403, § 1, 6-16-2015)  
14.22.140 - Enforcement authority. 
Authorized enforcement officials may enforce this chapter and abate public nuisances as follows: 
A.  Administrative Authorities. 
1.  Administrative Penalties. Administrative penalties may be imposed in accordance with the provisions for administrative penalties as set forth in Chapters 1.44 and 1.48. Administrative penalties may include the recovery of fines assessed against the city of National City by the RWQCB. Any later-enacted administrative penalty provision in this code shall also be applicable to this chapter, unless otherwise provided therein. 
2.  Cease and Desist Orders. Written and/or verbal orders pursuant to Section 1.12.030 may be issued to stop illegal discharges and/or remove illegal connections. If it is determined by an authorized enforcement official that the public interest requires the posting of bond or other security to assure the violation is corrected, such bond or security may be required by the authorized enforcement official. 
3.  Notice and Order to Clean, Test or Abate. Written and/or verbal orders may be issued to perform any activities to comply with the BMP Manual, this chapter, or as directed by an authorized enforcement official where conditions warrant. 
4.  Public Nuisance Abatement. Violations of this chapter are deemed a threat to public health, safety, and welfare; and constitute a public nuisance. If actions ordered under subsections (A)(2) and (A)(3) are not performed, the authorized enforcement official may abate any public nuisance pursuant to this code. City costs for pollution detection and abatement, if not paid in full by the discharger in addition to any other penalties, may be made a lien against the property in accordance with the abatement procedure. 
5.  Stop Orders. Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter or other laws implemented through enforcement of this chapter, an authorized enforcement official may order the work stopped by notice in writing in accordance with Section 1.12.030 served on any person engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such person shall immediately stop such work until authorized by the authorized enforcement official to proceed with the work. 
6.  Permit Suspension or Revocation. Violations of this chapter may be grounds for permit and/or other city license suspension or revocation in accordance with this code. 
B.  Judicial Authorities. 
1.  Civil Penalties and Remedies. The city attorney is authorized to file criminal and civil actions to enforce this chapter and to seek civil penalties and/or other remedies as provided in this section and in Section 14.22.160 of this chapter. There is no requirement that administrative enforcement procedures be pursued before such actions are filed. 
2.  Injunctive Relief. The city may enforce compliance with this chapter by judicial action for injunctive relief. 
3.  Arrest or Issue Citations. The assistance of a peace officer may be enlisted to arrest violators as provided in California Penal Code and/or a citation and notice to appear as prescribed in the Penal Code, including Section 853.6, may be issued. There is no requirement that administrative enforcement remedies be used before such actions are taken. The immunities prescribed in Section 836.5 of the Penal Code are applicable to authorized enforcement officials acting in the course and scope of their employment pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-2403, § 1, 6-16-2015)  
14.22.150 - Other acts and omissions that are violations. 
In addition to failing to comply with any of the other requirements of this chapter, the following acts and omissions are violations of this chapter, whether committed by a discharger or by another person or entity: 
A.  Causing, Permitting, Aiding, or Abetting Noncompliance. Causing, permitting, aiding, or abetting noncompliance with any part of this chapter constitutes a violation of this chapter. 
B.  Concealment, Misrepresentation, and False Statements. Any falsification or misrepresentation made to the city concerning compliance with this chapter, including any misrepresentation in a voluntary disclosure; any submission of a report that omits required material facts without disclosing such omission and any withholding of information required to be submitted by or pursuant to this chapter in order to delay city enforcement action, is a violation of this chapter. Concealing a violation of this chapter is a violation of this chapter. 
C.  Failure to Promptly Correct Noncompliance. Violations of this chapter must be corrected within the time period specified by an authorized enforcement official. Each day (or part thereof) in excess of that period during which action necessary to correct a violation is not initiated and diligently pursued is a separate violation of this chapter. 
D.  City Permits and BMP Plans. Any failure to conform to an applicable BMP plan prepared pursuant to this chapter; any failure to comply with storm water-related provisions of a city-issued grading permit or grading plan prepared to secure such a permit; and any failure to comply with storm water-related provisions in any other city permit or approval, is also a violation of this chapter. For purposes of this chapter a permit provision or condition of approval is "storm water-related" if compliance with the provision or condition would have the effect of preventing or reducing contamination of storm water or of moderating run-off flows rates or velocities, whether or not the provision or condition was initially imposed to promote those outcomes. 
(Ord. No. 2015-2403, § 1, 6-16-2015)  
14.22.160 - Penalties. 
A.  Administrative Penalties. Administrative penalties may be imposed pursuant to this code. Any later-enacted administrative penalty provision in the code shall also be applicable to violations of this chapter, unless otherwise provided therein. 
B.  Misdemeanor Penalties. Noncompliance with any part of this chapter may be charged as a misdemeanor and may be enforced and punished as prescribed in the Penal Code and Government Code of the state of California and this code. 
C.  Penalties for Infractions. Any violation of this chapter may be charged as an infraction at the discretion of the prosecutor. Infractions may be abated as a nuisance or enforced and punished as prescribed in the Penal Code and Government Code of the state of California and this code. 
D.  For Civil Actions. In addition to other penalties and remedies permitted in this chapter, a violation of this chapter may result in the filing of a civil action by the city. Except where a maximum monetary amount is specified, the following may also be awarded without monetary limitations in any civil action: 
1.  Injunctive relief; 
2.  Costs to investigate, inspect, monitor, survey, or litigate; 
3.  Costs to place or remove soils or erosion control materials, costs to correct any violation and costs to restore environmental damage or to end any other adverse effects of a violation; 
4.  Compensatory damages for losses to the city or any other plaintiff caused by violations; and/or restitution to third parties for losses caused by violations; 
5.  Civil penalties; 
6.  Reasonable attorney fees; and 
7.  Fines assessed against the city by the RWQCB. 
As part of a civil action filed by the city to enforce provisions of this chapter, a court may assess a maximum civil penalty of two thousand five hundred dollars per violation of this chapter for each day during which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued, permitted, or maintained by such person(s). 
In determining the amount of any civil liability to be imposed pursuant to this chapter, the court shall take into consideration the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation or violations, whether any discharge caused the violation is susceptible to cleanup or abatement and, with respect to the violator, the ability to pay, the effect on ability to continue in business, any voluntary cleanup efforts undertaken, any prior history of violations, the degree of culpability, economic savings, if any resulting from the violation, and such other matters as justice may require. 
E.  Penalties and Remedies Not Exclusive. Penalties and remedies under this section may be cumulative and in addition to other administrative, civil or criminal remedies. 
(Ord. No. 2015-2403, § 1, 6-16-2015)  
14.22.170 - Restrictions and conditions on issuance of ministerial and discretionary development permits. 
All development permits issued by city departments shall be subject to review and compliance with the BMP Manual. The City Engineer may require conditions for BMP Manual compliance for development permit issuance, and no permit shall be issued by any department or city agency without those conditions being incorporated into the permit. Conditions which may be required for new construction, alterations to existing structures, land grading, or excavation may include, but shall not be limited to the following: 
A.  Installation of rain gutters, brow ditches, curbing and berms; 
B.  Drainage flow, flow redirection and directional flow control; 
C.  Installation of French drains; 
D.  Installation of clarifiers, filters or liquid traps; 
E.  Installation of reservoirs, holding and settling tanks or filtration systems; 
F.  Maintenance and monitoring programs and adequate funding for required systems and programs; 
G.  Payment of program compliance monitoring fees; 
H.  Any other requirements as may reasonably and rationally relate to meeting BMP Manual objectives and requirements. 
This authority shall also include the right to require monitoring and compliance programs on each project to be guaranteed by adequate security and servitudes or conditions running with the land on which the project is located to be recorded with the County of San Diego recorder. If an off-site system is used, appropriate easements shall be required to be obtained and recorded against that site to ensure the maintenance and inspection of any required system and its installed facilities on the project site. 
(Ord. No. 2015-2403, § 1, 6-16-2015)  
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapters:  
Chapter 15.04 - CITY COUNCIL AUTHORITY UNDER CHAPTER 15 OF THE MUNICIPAL CODE[1] 
Section: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-2323, § 1, adopted October 6, 2009, amended Ch. 15.04, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 15.04, pertained to the Advisory and Appeals Board. See also the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
 
15.04.010 - City council's authority under Title 15. 
A.  In matters pertaining to Title 15 of the Municipal Code, the city council shall have final authority in the following matters: 
1.  Alternate Materials and Method of Construction. The city council may approve alternate materials and/or method of construction provided they find that the proposed materials and/or method of construction, for the purpose intended, at least equivalent of that prescribed in the code in suitability, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, safety and sanitation. 
2.  Refusal to Issue Permits. The refusal of the building official to issue any permit required by the city may be appealed by the applicant to the city council. 
3.  Notice to Abate Public Nuisances. The action of the building official in issuing a correction notice or a notice to abate a public nuisance may be appealed to the city council. 
4.  Interpretation of City Codes. The decision of the building official in interpreting provisions of the building code, housing code, electrical code, plumbing code, mechanical code, energy code, green buildings standards code, uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings, uniform swimming pool, spa and hot tub code, and residential code of the city may be appealed to the city council. 
5.  Disabled Access Regulations. All appeals regarding the interpretation or application of the disabled access regulations contained in Chapter 7 (commencing with Section 4450) of Division 5 of Title 1 of the Government Code pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 19957.5 and the disabled access regulations contained in Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations shall be heard by the city council. 
6.  Decision of the City Council to be Final. In deciding the matters enumerated in subsections 1 through 5 of this section, the decision of the city council shall be final. 
B.  Definitions. The following definitions apply to Chapter 15: 
For the purposes of Chapters 15.08, 15.10, 15.14, 15.16, 15.20, 15.22, 15.24, 15.34, 15.75, 15.78, and 15.79, "authority having jurisdiction" means the building official of the City of National City. 
(Ord. No. 2009-2323, § 1, 10-6-2009; Ord. No. 2013-2394, § 1, 12-3-2013)  
Chapter 15.08 - CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-2419, §§ 1—3, adopted Jan. 17, 2017, amended Ch. 15.08 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said chapter to read as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.08, §§ 15.08.010—15.08.100, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2013-2392, § 3, adopted Dec. 3, 2013. 
Prior ordinance history— Ords. 1421, 1451, 1587, 1621, 1629, 1702, 1787, 1835, 1908, 1975, Sections 13 and 14 of 2018, 2046, 2111, 2157, 2209, 2285, 2300, and 2010-2349. 
 
15.08.010 - California Building Code—Adopted. 
The city council adopts, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, use, height, area, fire resistance and maintenance of all buildings and/or structures, Volumes I and II of the 2016 California Building Code, including both Administration Divisions I and II, published in the California Building Standards Commission 2016 Edition, based on the International Building Code 2015 Edition, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2, Part 2.5 of Division 13 of the California Health and Safety Code beginning with Section 18901, and Appendices C, G, H, and I, save and except such portions as are deleted, added, or modified. Copies of all the codes are filed in the office of the building official and are adopted and incorporated as fully set out in this chapter, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2419, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.08.020 - Chapter 2, Definitions—Amended. 
Section 202 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended by amending the following definition: 
Building, Existing . An "existing building" is a building erected prior to the adoption of the 2016 California Building Code, or one for which a legal building permit has been issued. If more than fifty-percent of a structural roof or more than fifty-percent of all exterior walls are removed as part of a project, the building is not an existing building. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2419, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.08.025 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 104 "Duties and Powers of Building Official", Subsection 104.6 "Right of entry"—Amended. 
Section 104.6 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
104.6 Right of Entry . When necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this code, or when the Authority Having Jurisdiction has reasonable cause to believe that there exists a condition that makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Authority Having Jurisdiction, or designee, may request entry as specified in Chapter 1.12 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2419, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.08.030 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 105 "Permits," Subsection 105.2 "Work exempt from permit—Building"—Amended. 
Section 105.2 Building: Item 4 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
(Items 1—3 unchanged) 
4.  Permits for retaining walls shall be as specified in the National City Municipal Code, Chapter 15.70. 
(Items 5—13 unchanged) 
Section 105.2 Building of the 2016 California Building Code is amended by adding the following Subsections 14 through 17: 
14.  Playground, gymnastic and similar equipment and structures used for recreation and athletic activities accessory to Group R Division 3 structures. 
15.  Repairs to lawfully existing Group R Division 3 structures and Group U occupancy structures accessory to Group R Division 3 structures constructed pursuant to a building permit which involves only the replacement of component parts or existing work completed with similar materials only for the purpose of maintenance and do not affect any structural components or plumbing, mechanical or electrical installations. Repairs exempt from permit requirements shall not include any addition, change, or modification in construction, exit facilities or permanent fixtures or equipment. Specifically exempt from permit requirements are: 
1)  Painting and decorating including refinishing of exterior stucco finishes. 
2)  Installation of floor covering. 
3)  Cabinet work. 
4)  Outside paving on private property not within the public right-of-way. 
16.  Ground mounted satellite antennas not exceeding ten feet in diameter and roof mounted satellite antennas not exceeding eight feet in diameter. 
17.  Painted wall signs and Styrofoam or other foam mounted wall signs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2419, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.08.040 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 105 "Permits", Subsection 105.5 "Expiration"—Amended. 
Section 105.5 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section 105.5 Expiration . Every permit issued by the Authority Having Jurisdiction under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within six calendar months from the date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is stopped at any time after the work is commenced for a period of six calendar months, or if the building or work authorized by such permit exceeds three calendar years from the issuance date of the permit. Work shall be presumed to have commenced if the permittee has obtained a required inspection approval of work authorized by the permit by the Authority Having Jurisdiction within six calendar months of the date of permit issuance. 
Work shall be presumed to be stopped if the permittee has not obtained a required inspection approval of work by the Authority Having Jurisdiction within each six-month period upon the initial commencement of work authorized by such permit. 
Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit, or a renewal permit as specified below, shall be first obtained. 
1.  Permits where work has not commenced. For permits for which work has not commenced in the first six calendar months from the date of issuance, a renewal permit may be obtained provided that: 
A.  No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; 
B.  The expiration has not exceeded three years from the original issuance date; 
C.  The same edition of the California codes is in effect as used in the initial plan check; 
D.  A fee equal to one-half the amount required for a new permit is paid; and 
E.  The renewal permit shall expire three calendar years from the date of initial permit issuance. 
Where later editions of the California codes have been adopted than used in the initial plan check, such applications for renewal shall be considered as a new plan check submittal. Accordingly, plans shall reflect the requirements of the current codes in effect, a full new plan check is required, and a full new plan check fee shall be paid. Upon completion of a new plan check, the permit may be renewed upon payment of a permit fee equal to one-half the amount required for a new permit. 
2.  Permits where work has commenced. For permits where work has commenced and was subsequently stopped as defined herein, a renewal permit may be obtained provided that: 
A.  No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; 
B.  The expiration has not exceeded three years from the original issuance date; 
C.  A fee equal to one-half the amount required for a new permit is paid, except that where construction has progressed and has been approved to the point of requiring only a final inspection, a fee equal to one-quarter the amount required for a new permit shall be paid; and 
D.  A renewal permit shall expire three calendar years from the date of initial permit issuance. 
3.  Permits that have exceeded three years. For permits that have exceeded three years beyond the issuance date, a renewed permit may be obtained provided that: 
A.  Construction in reliance upon the building permit has commenced and has been approved; 
B.  No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and 
C.  A fee equal to the full amount required for a new permit is paid except that where the Authority Having Jurisdiction determines that construction has progressed to the point that a lesser fee is warranted, such lesser fee shall be paid. 
The maximum life of a permit renewal in accordance with subsection 15.08.040.3 shall be one calendar year from the date of renewal. The permit may be renewed for each calendar year thereafter provided that all requirements of Subsections A, B and C as stated in subsection 15.08.040.3 are met. 
4.  Extension of an unexpired permit. For an extension of an unexpired permit, the permittee may apply for an extension of the time within which work under that permit may be continued when, for good and satisfactory reasons as determined by the Authority Having Jurisdiction in his or her sole discretion, the permittee is unable to continue work within the time required by section 15.08.040. The Authority Having Jurisdiction may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding six calendar months beyond the expiration date in effect at the time of the extension application, upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. 
5.  Permits issued where the permittee has been deployed to a foreign country, may be held in abeyance until six months after the return of the permittee from his/her deployment if necessary, upon application for such relief by the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2419, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.08.045 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 105 "Permits", Subsection 105.7 "Placement of permit"—Amended. 
Section 105.7 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section 105.7 Placement of permit . The building permit or a copy, the inspection record, and the approved plans shall all be kept on site until the completion of the project. The inspection record is to be kept on the job unless removed by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2419, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.08.050 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 105 "Permits", Subsection 105.8 "Permit denial"—Added. 
Section 105.8 is added to the 2016 California Building Code to read as follows: 
Section 105.8 Permit denial . The Authority Having Jurisdiction may deny the issuance of a building permit on any property where there exists an unsafe or a substandard building as provided in Chapter 15.10 and 15.16 of the National City Municipal Code, or where there exists unlawful construction, or where there exists a violation of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2419, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.08.055 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 109 "Fees", Subsection 109.2 "Schedule of permit fees"—Amended. 
Section 109.2 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section 109.2 Schedule of permit fees . Permit fees, including plan review fees, shall be assessed in accordance with the current City of National City Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2419, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.08.056 - Plan review fees—Added. 
When plans are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review, an additional plan review fee shall be charged in accordance with the current City of National City Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2419, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.08.060 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 109 "Fees", Subsection 109.4 "Work commencing before permit issuance"—Amended. 
Section 109.4 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section 109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance . Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to an administrative penalty equal to the inspection fee portion [of] the permit fee that would be required by this code if a permit were to be issued. The administrative penalty is in addition to a permit fee. 
When a plan review is required for issuance of such permit, the plan review fee portion will not be subject to said penalty. The payment of such administrative penalty shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code or from any penalty prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2419, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.08.065 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 110 "Inspections", Subsection 110.3.8.1 "Re-inspections"—Added. 
Section 110.3.8.1 is added to the 2016 California Building Code to read as follows: 
Section 110.3.8.1 Re-inspections . A re-inspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or re-inspection when any of the following occurs: 
1.  The portion of work for which the inspection was called is not complete or the corrections previously required and called for are not made; 
2.  Calling for an inspection before the job is ready for such inspection or re-inspection; 
3.  The inspection record card or the approved plans are not posted or otherwise available to the inspector; 
4.  Failure to provide access on the date for which the inspection is requested; or 
5.  Deviating from the approved plans when such deviation or change required approval of the building official. 
To obtain a re-inspection, the permittee shall file an application in writing on a form provided for that purpose and pay the re-inspection fee in accordance with the current City of National City Fee Schedule. In instances where a re-inspection fee has been assessed, no further inspections shall be performed until the fees have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2419, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.08.070 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 111 "Certificate of Occupancy", Subsection 111.3 "Temporary occupancy"—Amended. 
Section 111.3 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section 111.3 Temporary Certificate of Occupancy . Where a project or a major portion thereof is substantially complete and can be safely occupied, but practical difficulties delay completion of work, the building official may issue a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy for the use of a portion or portions of the building or structure prior to the completion of the entire project. 
Prior to issuance of a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy, the premises shall be inspected by all affected city departments who shall prepare a list of work required to be completed and shall forward the list along with a recommendation for approval or disapproval of the issuance of a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy to the building official. 
Upon receipt of a recommendation for approval from all affected City departments, the building official may prepare a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy granting temporary occupancy that shall include the following: 
1.  Work yet to be completed; 
2.  Maximum time allotted for completion of said work; 
3.  Property owner's signature and the signature of the contractor agreeing to complete the work within the prescribed time or vacate the premises upon order of the building official until such work is completed; 
4.  Evidence that a faithful performance bond has been posted if required by any affected city department; and 
5.  A copy of the Temporary Certificate of Occupancy granting temporary occupancy shall be provided to all affected city departments. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2419, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.08.075 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 113 "Board of Appeals", Subsection 113.1 "General"—Amended. 
Section 113.1 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section 113.1 Board of Appeals . In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations of the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, the City Council shall appoint an ad hoc Board of Appeals comprised of three (3) members who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction and who are not employees of the City. Board members shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. The board shall comply with Rosenberg's Rules of Order in conducting their business, and shall render written decisions and findings to the appellant with a copy to the Building Official. Decisions of the Board may be appealed to the City Council by the appellant or by the Building Official within thirty (30) days of the decision of the Board, by the filing of a written notice of appeal with the Director of Emergency Services stating the reasons for the appeal. The person filing the appeal and the opposing party shall be given at least ten (10) days' written notice of the time and place of the hearing on the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2419, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.08.080 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 114 "Violations", Subsection 114.1 "Unlawful acts"—Amended. 
Section 114.1 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section 114.1 Unlawful acts . It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this code. 
Violation of any provision of this code shall be punishable as a misdemeanor and shall carry the penalties as prescribed in Chapter 1.20 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2419, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.08.085 - Section 501 "General", Subsection 501.2 "Address identification"—Amended. 
Section 501.2 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section 501.2 Address numbers . Every principal building or structure within the incorporated limits of the City of National City shall be identified by a designated street number as issued by the National City Fire Department. 
Approved numbers or addresses shall be placed on all new and existing buildings, adjacent to the principal entrance to the premises or at a point that is highly visible and legible from the street. If necessary, directional signs shall be posted showing proper access to the given address from a point where the Fire Department access roadway leaves the dedicated street, to the entrance of each addressed building. All such numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabetical letters and shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inches (12.7mm), and shall be placed on a contrasting background. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2419, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.08.090 - Table 1505.1 "Minimum roof covering classification for types of construction"—Amended. 
Table 1505.1 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
Due to climatic and geographical conditions within the City of National City, Table 1505.1 is amended as follows: 
Table 1505.1
Minimum Roof Covering Classification
For Types of Construction 
IA 	IB 	IIA 	IIB 	IIIA 	IIIB 	IV 	VA 	VB 
B 	B 	B 	B 	B 	B 	B 	B 	B 
 
(Ord. No. 2017-2419, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.08.092 - Chapter 18, Division II, Section 1803 "Geotechnical Investigations", Subsection 1803.1.1.1—Added. 
Chapter 18, Division II, Section 1803 Geotechnical Investigations, Subsection 1803.1.1.1 is added to the 2016 California Building Code to read as follows: 
Subsection 1803.1.1.1. A geotechnical investigation shall be submitted with each application for a building permit for a new building or addition [of] 500 square feet and larger. The investigation and report shall comply with the requirements of Section 1803. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2419, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.08.093 - Chapter 31, Division II, Section 3109 Swimming Pool Enclosures and Safety Devices, Subsection 3109.4.4.8 "Construction requirements for building a pool or spa"—Amended. 
Section 3109.4.4.8 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section 3109.4.4.8 Construction requirements for building a pool or spa . Whenever any building permit is issued and there is an existing swimming pool, toddler pool or spa, the permit shall require that the suction outlet of the existing swimming pool, toddler pool or spa be updated so as to be equipped with an anti-entrapment cover meeting current standards of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) or the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME). 
(Ord. No. 2017-2419, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.08.095 - Appendix Chapters C, G, H, and I—Adopted. 
Appendix Chapters C, G, H, and I of the 2016 California Building Code are adopted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2419, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
Chapter 15.10 - UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS* 
Sections: 
 
15.10.005 - Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings (1997 Edition) adopted. 
There is adopted by the city council, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing hazards to life and property from substandard housing conditions, that certain code known as the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, as copyrighted by the International Conference of Building Officials, being particularly the 1997 Edition, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, of which code one copy is now on file in the office of the director of building and safety; and the same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this chapter and from the date on which the ordinance codified in this chapter takes effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. 2158 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2112 § 2 (part), 1996)  
15.10.010 - Section 201.3 "Right of entry"—Amended. 
Section 201.3 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read: 
 201.3. Right of Entry. When necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this code, or when the Building Official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises a condition or code violation which make such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Building Official and/or their authorized representatives may request entry as specified in Chapter 1.12 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2285 § 3, 2006: Ord. 2158 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2112 § 2 (part), 1996)  
15.10.015 - Section 202 amended—Abatement of dangerous buildings. 
Section 202 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read: 
 202. Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. All non-residential buildings or portions thereof which are determined after inspection by the building official to be dangerous as defined in this code are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedures specified in Section 401 of this code. 
 All residential building or portions thereof which are determined after inspection by the building official to be dangerous as defined in this code are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the procedures specified in Health and Safety Code Section 17980 and the California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1, Subchapter 1-State Housing Law Regulations. 
(Ord. 2158 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2112 § 2 (part), 1996)  
15.10.020 - Section 203 amended—Violations. 
Section 203 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read: 
 203. Violations. Violation of any provisions of this code shall be punishable as a misdemeanor and shall carry the penalties as prescribed in Chapter 1.20 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2158 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2112 § 2 (part), 1996)  
15.10.025 - Section 205 amended—Board of appeals. 
Section 205 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read: 
 205. Board of Appeals. The Advisory and Appeals Board is established by City Ordinance No. 1834 adopted October 9, 1984. The Board shall have jurisdiction to review the items as enumerated in Chapter 15.04 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2158 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2112 § 2 (part), 1996)  
15.10.030 - Section 403 amended—Repair, vacation and demolition. 
Section 403, Section 1, Subsection 1.3 is amended to read: 
 403.1.3. Securing Vacant Buildings. All exterior openings into buildings ordered to be secured shall be completely covered with not less than one-half inch plywood or similar material approved by the Director of Building and Safety and shall be attached with not less than ¼ inch by two inch lag screws in each corner and at 24 inches on center around the perimeter of the opening. When conventional lag screws have failed to restrict entry by unauthorized individuals, the Director of Building and Safety may require that tamper-proof lag screws be utilized. 
(Ord. 2158 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2112 § 2 (part), 1996)  
15.10.035 - Section 501 amended—General. 
Section 501 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read: 
 501. General. Any person entitled to service under Section 401.3 may appeal from any notice and order or any action of the building official under this code by filing an appeal as specified in Chapter 15.04 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2158 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2112 § 2 (part), 1996)  
15.10.040 - Section 502 amended—Effects of failure to appeal. 
Section 502 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read: 
 502. Effects of Failure to Appeal. Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of Section 15.04.060 of the National City Municipal Code shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and adjudication of the Notice and Order or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. 2158 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2112 § 2 (part), 1996)  
15.10.045 - Chapter 6 amended—Appeal procedure. 
Chapter 6 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read: 
 Appeal Procedure. Appeal procedures shall be as set forth in Section 15.04.060 and Section 15.04.070 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2158 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2112 § 2 (part), 1996)  
Chapter 15.12 - BUILDING MOVING* 
Sections: 
 
15.12.010 - Findings and declaration—Prohibition. 
The city council specifically and expressly finds and declares that the nature and uniqueness of the city, its housing stock, environment, and rate of population growth necessitate and demand the moving of existing structures into or within the city be permitted and controlled. However, the moving into or within the city of a commercial structure, or of a residential structure which does not have historical significance as determined by the city council, or of a manufactured home if more than ten years has elapsed between the date of manufacture of the manufactured home and the date of application for the issuance of a permit pursuant to Section 15.12.030, is absolutely prohibited. This prohibition shall not apply to any former landfill site which is subject to the regulatory order or directive of a regulatory agency, due to the existence on the site of hazardous materials as defined by Section 25260 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 2199, 2002: Ord. 2177 § 1 (part), 2000)  
15.12.020 - Code adopted. 
The city council adopts this chapter for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing the moving of structures into or within the city, and regulation of the moving of structures through the city. 
(Ord. 2177 § 1 (part), 2000)  
15.12.030 - Building moving permit—Required. 
Prior to moving any structure into or within the city limits, a permit for such moving shall be obtained from the building and safety department. No permit shall be issued for any commercial structure, or for any residential structure which does not have historical significance as determined by the city council, or for any manufactured home for which more than ten years has elapsed since the date of its manufacture. 
(Ord. 2177 § 1 (part), 2000)  
15.12.040 - Building moving—Application. 
Prior to moving any structure into or within the city limits, an application for a permit for such moving shall be obtained from the building and safety department. 
(Ord. 2177 § 1 (part), 2000)  
15.12.050 - Fees. 
A fee as established in the National City fee schedule shall accompany each application to move a structure from one location on a lot to a new location on the same lot, or from within or outside the city to a new location within the city. 
(Ord. 2177 § 1 (part), 2000)  
15.12.060 - Inspection required. 
Upon receipt of an application under this chapter, the building and safety department shall inspect the structure to be moved and make a report of the results of the inspection to the city council. The building and safety department may require an applicant to provide a written certification by a qualified contractor that the structure to be moved is free from fungus, termites or similar infestations. The building and safety director will forward the application for a permit under this section together with a written report to the city council. A permit allowing the moving of a building, house or structure will be issued only on order of the city council. The city council can order the issuance of a permit under this chapter as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. 2177 § 1 (part), 2000)  
15.12.070 - Building moving permit—Compliance required. 
A.  A permit to move a structure into the city limits or within the city limits shall be granted only if the city council finds that the relocation of the structure will not have an adverse effect upon property values in the district to which the structure will be relocated. The council shall further find the relocation of the structure in question will not have an adverse effect on the health, safety, welfare or morals of the community and neighborhood in which the structure will be relocated. The council shall find that the relocation of the structure in question will not have an adverse effect on the zoning regulations and plans of the city. 
B.  Prior to granting a permit to relocate a structure under this chapter, the city council shall determine that the proposed move will comply with applicable zoning laws, and that the structure to be relocated will comply with all the building codes, laws and regulations in force. The council shall further find that the proposed relocation of the structure will not contribute to blight or deterioration in the neighborhood to which the structure will be relocated. 
C.  The city council, in granting a permit under this chapter, may impose such additional conditions, rules and regulations as are reasonable necessary to protect the health, safety, welfare and morals of the city and in particular the neighborhood to which a structure will be relocated. 
D.  To ensure compliance with conditions, rules, regulations and laws relating to the relocation of a structure under this chapter, the city council may require the applicant to post a performance bond, adequate in amount, to guarantee his faithful performance of all laws, rules, regulations and conditions. 
E.  As a condition to the granting of a permit under this chapter, the city council may require the applicant to execute a covenant running with the land which will bind the land and its successive owners to the performance of conditions imposed by the city council in granting a permit under this chapter. 
F.  As a condition to granting a permit under this chapter, the city council may require the applicant to install private improvements on the building site to be occupied by the relocated structure which in the judgment of the council are reasonably required to preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the community and the neighborhood to which the structure will be relocated. 
For the purpose of determining required public improvements pursuant to Section 13.22.060, the building and safety director shall determine the improvement valuation of each building to be relocated. Such improvement valuation shall be based upon the current adopted policy of the city council for new buildings. 
G.  As a further condition to the granting of a permit under this chapter, the city council may require the applicant to make such aesthetic improvements and rehabilitations on the relocated structure as are necessary to preserve land values and property values in the neighborhood to which the structure is relocated. 
(Ord. 2177 § 1 (part), 2000)  
15.12.080 - Additional permit required. 
In addition to the permit required by this chapter, prior to moving a building and/or structure over or upon any public street, alley or way, a transportation permit shall be obtained from the city engineer as set forth in Section 11.40.110 of this code. 
(Ord. 2177 § 1 (part), 2000)  
15.12.090 - Violations. 
Violations of any provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor and shall carry the penalties as prescribed in Chapter 1.20 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2177 § 1 (part), 2000)  
Chapter 15.14 - CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-2424, §§ 1—3, adopted Jan. 17, 2017, amended Ch. 15.14 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said chapter to read as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.14, §§ 15.14.005—15.14.080, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2013-2390, § 3, adopted Dec. 3, 2013. 
Prior ordinance history— Ords. 1422, 1589, 1838, 1911, 1977, Sections 16 and 18 of 2018, 2048, 2113, 2160, 2206, 2285, 2304 and 2010-2351. 
 
15.14.005 - 2016 California Mechanical Code—Adopted. 
The city council adopts and incorporates herein as the National City Mechanical Code, for the purpose of prescribing in the city of National City, regulations governing the erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of any heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration system, incineration or other miscellaneous heat producing appliance, in or on any building or structure or outdoors on any premises or property, the 2016 California Mechanical Code, including Appendix Chapters A, B, C, and D, California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 4, except such portions as are deleted, added, or amended by this chapter. Copies of all codes are filed in the office of the building official and are adopted and incorporated as if fully set out in this chapter, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2424, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.14.015 - Chapter 1, Division II, Administration—Adopted and amended. 
Chapter 1, Division II, Administration is adopted subject to the additions, amendments and deletions provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2424, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.14.020 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 103 Powers and Duties of the Authority Having Jurisdiction, Subsection 103.4 Right of entry—Amended. 
Section 103.4 of the 2016 California Mechanical Code is amended to read as follows: 
103.4 Right of entry . When necessary to make inspections to enforce any provision of this code, or when the Building Official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises a condition or code violation which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Building Official, or designee, may request entry as specified in Chapter 1.12 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2424, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.14.025 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 107 Board of Appeals, Subsection 107.1 General—Amended. 
Section 107.1 of the 2016 California Mechanical Code is amended to read as follows: 
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, the City Council shall appoint an ad hoc Board of Appeals consisting of three (3) members who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to mechanical system design, construction, and maintenance and the public health aspects of mechanical systems and who are not employees of the City. Board members shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. The Board shall comply with Rosenberg's Rules of Order in conducting their business, and shall render written decisions and findings to the appellant with a copy to the Building Official. The Building Official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the Board, unless such decision is appealed to the City Council. Decisions of the Board may be appealed to the City Council by the appellant or by the Building Official within thirty (30) days of the decision of the Board, by the filing of a written notice of appeal with the Director of Emergency Services stating the reasons for the appeal. The appellant and the opposing party shall be given at least ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of the hearing on the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2424, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.14.030 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 106 Violations and Penalties, Subsection 106.1 General—Amended. 
Section 106.1 of the 2016 California Mechanical Code is amended to read as follows: 
106.1 Violations . Violations of any provision of this code shall be punishable as a misdemeanor and shall carry the penalties as prescribed in Chapter 1.20 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2424, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.14.035 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 104 Permits, Subsection 104.4.3 Expiration—Amended. 
Section 104.4.3 of the 2016 California Mechanical Code is amended to read as follows: 
104.4.3 Expiration . Every permit issued by the Building Official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within six calendar months from the date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is stopped at any time after work has commenced for a period of six calendar months, or if the building or work authorized by such permit exceeds three calendar years from the issuance date of the permit. Work shall be presumed to have commenced if the permittee has obtained a required inspection approval of work authorized by the permit by the Building Official within six calendar months of the date of permit issuance. 
Work shall be presumed to be stopped if the permittee has not obtained a required inspection approval of work by the Building Official within each six-month period upon commencement of work authorized by such permit. 
Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit or renewal permit is obtained, as specified below, shall first be obtained. 
1.  Permits where work was not commenced. For permits for which work has not commenced in the first six calendar months from the date of issuance, a renewal permit may be obtained provided that: 
A.  No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; 
B.  The expiration has not exceeded three years from the original issuance date; 
C.  The same edition of the adopted codes is in effect as used in the initial plan check; 
D.  A fee equal to one-half the amount required for a new permit is paid, and 
E.  The renewal permit shall expire three calendar years from the date of the initial permit issuance. 
Where later editions of the California codes have been adopted than used in the initial plan check, such applications for renewal shall be considered as a new plan check submittal. Accordingly, plans shall reflect the requirements of the current codes in effect, a full new plan check is required, and a full new plan check fee shall be paid. Upon completion of the new plan check, the permit may be renewed upon payment of a permit fee equal to one-half the amount required for a new permit. 
2.  Permit where work was commenced. For permits where work was commenced and was subsequently stopped as defined herein, a renewal permit may be obtained provided that: 
A.  No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; 
B.  The expiration has not exceeded three years from the original issuance date; 
C.  A fee equal to one-half the amount required for a new permit is paid, except that where construction has progressed to the point of requiring only a final inspection, a fee equal to one-quarter of the amount required for new permit shall be paid; and 
D.  A renewal permit shall expire three calendar years from the date of the initial permit issuance. 
3.  Permits that have exceeded three years. For permits that have exceeded three years beyond the issuance date, a renewed permit may be obtained, provided that: 
A.  Construction in reliance upon the building permit has been commenced and has been approved; 
B.  No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and 
C.  A fee equal to the full amount required for a new permit is paid, except that where the Building Official determines that construction has progressed to the point that a lesser fee is warranted, such lesser fee shall be paid. 
The maximum life of a permit renewal in accordance with sub-section 15.14.035.3 shall be one calendar year from the date of renewal. The permit may be renewed each calendar year thereafter provided that all requirements of Subsection A, B and C as stated in sub-section 15.14.035.3 are met. 
4.  Extension of an unexpired permit. For an extension of an unexpired permit, the permittee may apply for an extension of time within which work under that permit may be continued when for good and satisfactory reasons, as determined by the Building Official in his or her sole discretion, the permittee is unable to continue work within the time required by section 15.14.035. The Building Official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding six calendar months beyond the expiration date in effect at the time of the extension application, upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action being taken. 
5.  Permits issued where the permittee has been deployed to a foreign country may be held in abeyance until six months after the return of the permittee from his/her deployment if necessary, upon application for such relief by the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2424, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.14.040 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 104 Permits, Subsection 104.4.7 Permit denial—Added. 
Section 104.4.7 of the 2016 California Mechanical Code is added to read as follows: 
104.4.7 Permit denial . The Building Official may deny the issuance of a building permit on any property where there exists an unsafe or a substandard building as provided in Chapter 15.10 and 15.16 of the National City Municipal Code, or where there exists unlawful construction, or where there exists a violation of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2424, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.14.045 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 104.5 Fees—Amended. 
Section 104.5 of the 2016 California Mechanical Code is amended as follows: 
104.5 General . Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the current City of National City Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2424, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.14.050 - Chapter 1, Division II, Table 104.5 Mechanical permit fees—Deleted. 
Table 104.5 of the 2016 California Mechanical Code, entitled Mechanical Permit Fees, is deleted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2424, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.14.060 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 104.0 Permits, Subsection 104.3.2 Plan review fees—Amended. 
Section 104.3.2, of the 2016 California Mechanical Code is amended as follows: 
Section 104.3.2 Plan review fees . When plans are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review, an additional plan review fee shall be charged in accordance with the current City of National City Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2424, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.14.065 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 104.5 Fees, Subsection 104.5.2 Investigation Fees—Amended. 
Section 104.5.2 of the 2016 California Mechanical Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section 104.5.2 Investigation Fees . Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to an administrative penalty equal to the inspection fee portion [of] the permit fee that would be required by this code if a permit were to be issued. The administrative penalty is in addition to a permit fee. 
When a plan review is required for issuance of such permit, the plan review fee portion will not be subject to said penalty. The payment of such administrative penalty shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code or from any penalty prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2424, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.14.070 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 105 Inspections and Testing, Subsection 105.2.6 Reinspections—Amended. 
Subsection 105.2.6 of the 2016 California Mechanical Code is amended to read as follows: 
105.2.6 Re-inspections . To obtain a re-inspection, the permittee shall pay the re-inspection fee in accordance with the current City of National City Fee Schedule. In instances where a re-inspection fee has been assessed, no further inspections shall be performed until the fees have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2424, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.14.075 - Appendix Chapters A, B, C and D—Adopted. 
Appendix Chapters A, B, C, and D of the 2016 California Mechanical Code are adopted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2424, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
Chapter 15.16 - UNIFORM HOUSING CODE[4] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
 Prior ordinance history: Ords. 1423, 1588, 1629, 1747, 1839, 1912, 1978 and 2049. 
 
15.16.005 - Uniform Housing Code (1997 Edition) adopted. 
There is adopted by the city council, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing hazards to life and property from substandard housing conditions, Chapters 1-6 and Sections 701.2 and 701.3 of that certain code known as the Uniform Housing Code, as copyrighted by the International Conference of Building Officials, being particularly the 1997 Edition, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, added, modified or amended, of which code one copy has been and is now filed in the office of the director of building and safety; and the same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which the ordinance codified in this chapter takes effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. 2159 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2114 § 2 (part), 1996)  
15.16.010 - Section 201.1 amended—Authority. 
Section 201.1 of the Uniform Housing Code is amended to read: 
 201.1. Authority. The Director of Building and Safety is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this code and State Housing Law as contained in Part 1.5 of Division 13 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 2285 § 5 (part), 2006: Ord. 2159 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2114 § 2 (part), 1996)  
15.16.015 - Section 201.2 amended—Right of entry. 
Section 201.2 of the Uniform Housing Code is amended to read: 
 201.2. Right of Entry. When necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this code or when the Building Official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which make such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Building Official and/or their authorized representatives may request entry as specified in Chapter 1.12 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2285 § 5 (part), 2006: Ord. 2159 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2114 § 2 (part), 1996)  
15.16.020 - Section 202 amended—Administration and enforcement. 
Section 202 is amended to read: 
 202. Administration and Enforcement. The administration and enforcement procedures specified in State Housing Law contained in Part 1.5 of Division 13 of the California Health and Safety Code, and as further specified in State Housing Law Regulations contained in Subchapter 1 of Chapter 1 of Division 1 of Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations, shall govern the administration and enforcement of this code and State Housing Law. 
(Ord. 2159 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2114 § 2 (part), 1996)  
15.16.025 - Section 203 amended—Housing advisory and appeals board—Amended. 
Section 203 of the Uniform Housing Code is amended to read: 
 203. Housing Advisory and Appeals Board. The Advisory and Appeals Board is established by City Ordinance No. 1834 adopted October 9, 1984. The Board shall have the jurisdiction to review the items enumerated in Chapter 15.04 of the National City Municipal Code. Appeal procedures shall be as set forth in Sections 15.04.060 and 15.04.070 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2159 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2114 § 2 (part), 1996)  
15.16.030 - Section 204 amended—Violations. 
Section 204 of the Uniform Housing Code is amended to read: 
 204. Violations. Violation of any provisions of this code shall be punishable as specified in Health and Safety Code Section 17995. 
(Ord. 2159 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2114 § 2 (part), 1996)  
15.16.035 - Section 304 added—Annual housing permit. 
Section 304 of the Uniform Housing Code is amended to read: 
 304. Annual Housing Permit. (a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, or corporation to own or operate an apartment house, hotel, or lodging house as defined in Chapter 4 of this code or any single family, duplex, triplex or four-plex rental unit without first obtaining an Annual Housing Permit therefor. 
 (b) The Annual Housing Permit required by this section shall be prorated on a quarterly basis and shall expire by limitation on the last day of the quarter one year later in which it was issued. The Annual Housing Permit shall not be transferable from one establishment to another; however, the permittee for an Annual Housing Permit may be changed without charge upon notification to the City of National City Building and Safety Department. 
(Ord. 2285 § 5 (part), 2006: Ord. 2159 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2114 § 2 (part), 1996)  
15.16.040 - Section 305 added—Fee schedule. 
Section 305 of the Uniform Housing Code is amended to read: 
 305. Fee Schedule. All fees for housing permits and housing permit inspections shall be as set forth in a fee schedule as adopted from time to time by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 2285 § 5 (part), 2006: Ord. 2159 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2114 § 2 (part), 1996)  
15.16.045 - Section 306 added—Permit suspension or revocation. 
Section 306 is added to the Uniform Housing Code to read: 
 306. Permit Suspension or Revocation. Whenever it is found that any rental unit is not being conducted in conformity with the provisions of this code, the Annual Housing Permit to operate same shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the City of National City. 
(Ord. 2285 § 5 (part), 2006: Ord. 2159 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2114 § 2 (part), 1996)  
15.16.050 - Section 401 amended—Definitions—Health officer. 
Section 401 of the Uniform Housing Code is amended by adding the following definition for health officer to read: 
 401. Definitions—Health Officer. Health Officer as defined herein shall be the County Health Officer and his or her designates. 
(Ord. 2159 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2114 § 2 (part), 1996)  
15.16.055 - Section 401 amended—Definitions—Apartment, hotel and lodging house. 
Section 401 of the Uniform Housing Code is amended by adding the following definition for apartment, hotel, and lodging house to read: 
 401. Definitions—Apartment, Hotel and Lodging House. Apartment, Hotel, and Lodging House shall be defined as enumerated in the latest edition of the Uniform Building Code. 
(Ord. 2159 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2114 § 2 (part), 1996)  
15.16.060 - Annual housing permit fee—Exemptions. 
A.  No annual housing permit fee shall be imposed on a residential rental unit in any of the following situations: 
1.  The unit is occupied by a family member, is rented at less than current owner's expense, and is declared as family-occupied on the owner's county property tax declaration or federal income tax return. "Current owner's expense" is defined to include mortgage payments, property taxes, association fees, assessments, property insurance and utilities; 
2.  The unit is unoccupied, under construction and will not be occupied for any portion of the tax year. 
B.  Proof of exemption eligibility will be required for certain exemptions, and may be different for each exemption claimed. Exemption eligibility is only good for one year, and must be renewed each taxable year by the tax due date or be subject to an administration fee. 
(Ord. 2291 § 1 (part), 2007)  
15.16.065 - Collection enforcement and penalties. 
Failure to pay the fee when due shall result in a penalty of twenty percent of the fee due on the first day of March and each first day of each month thereafter, provided that the amount of penalty added shall not exceed one hundred percent of the fee due for each year or portion thereof that the fee was unpaid. Should the owner fail to pay the fee and penalty, the city may use any remedies provided by law, including abatement or municipal lien procedures established by ordinance or state laws. 
(Ord. 2291 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 15.20 - CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-2425, §§ 1—3, adopted Jan. 17, 2017, amended Ch. 15.20 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said chapter to read as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.20, §§ 15.20.005—15.20.070, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2013-2391, § 3, adopted Dec. 3, 2013. 
Prior ordinance history— Ords. 1424, 1590, 1840, 1876, 1913, 1976, Sections 20 and 21 of 2018, 2047, 2115, 2163, 2208, 2285, 2305 and 2010-2352. 
 
15.20.005 - 2016 California Plumbing Code—Adopted. 
The city council adopts, and incorporates herein as the city plumbing code, except as amended, deleted, or added by this chapter, for the purpose of prescribing in the city of National City, regulations governing the erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of any plumbing, gas, or drainage piping and systems or water heating or treating equipment in or on any building or structure or outdoors on any premises or property, the 2016 California Plumbing Code, including Administration Divisions I and II, California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 5, and Table 2902.1 of the 2016 California Building Code. Copy of all codes are filed in the office of the building official and are adopted and incorporated as if fully set forth in this chapter, and the provisions shall be controlling within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2425, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.20.015 - Chapter 1, Divisions I and II—Adopted and amended. 
Chapter 1, Division I, "Administration" is adopted. Chapter 1, Division II, "Administration" is adopted, subject to the additions, amendments, and deletions contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2425, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.20.020 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 103 "Duties and Powers of the Authority Having Jurisdiction" Subsection 103.4 "Right of Entry"—Amended. 
Section [103.4] of the 2016 California Plumbing Code is amended to read as follows: 
103.4 Right of Entry . When necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this code, or when the Building Official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises a condition or code violation which make such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Building Official, or designee, may request entry as specified in Chapter 1.12 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2425, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.20.024 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 107 "Board of Appeals", Subsection 107.1 "General"—Amended. 
Section 107.1 of the 2016 California Plumbing Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section 107.1 General . In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations of the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, the City Council shall appoint an ad hoc Board of Appeals comprised of three (3) members who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to plumbing design, construction, and maintenance, and the public health aspects of plumbing systems and who are not employees of the City. Board members shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. The Board shall comply with Rosenberg's Rules of Order in conducting their business, and shall render written decisions and findings to the appellant with a copy to the Building Official. Decisions of the Board may be appealable to the City Council by the appellant or by the Building Official within thirty (30) days of the decision of the Board, by the filing of a written notice of appeal with the Director of Emergency Services stating the reasons for the appeal. The person filing the appeal and the opposing party shall be given at least ten (10) days' written [(?)] notice of the time and place of the hearing on the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2425, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.20.025 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 106 "Violations and Penalties" Subsection 106.3 "Penalties"—Amended. 
Section 106.3 of the 2016 California Plumbing Code is amended to read as follows: 
106.3 Penalties . Violation of any provision of this code shall be punishable as a misdemeanor and shall carry the penalties as prescribed in Chapter 1.20 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2425, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.20.027 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 104.5 "Fees", Subsection 104.5.3 "Investigation Fees"—Amended. 
Section 104.5.3 of the 2016 California Plumbing Code is amended to read as follows: 
104.5.3 Work without a permit . Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to an administrative penalty equal to the inspection fee portion [of] the permit fee that would be required by this code if a permit were to be issued. The administrative penalty is in addition to a permit fee. When a plan review is required for issuance of such permit, the plan review fee portion will not be subject to said penalty. The payment of such administrative penalty shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code or from any penalty prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2425, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.20.030 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 104 "Permits", Subsection 104.4.3 "Expiration"—Amended. 
Section 104.4.3 of the 2016 California Plumbing Code is amended to read as follows: 
104.4.3 Expiration . Every permit issued by the Building Official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within six calendar months from the date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is stopped at any time after the work is commenced for a period of six calendar months, or if the building or work authorized by such permit exceeds three calendar years from the issuance date of the permit. Work shall be presumed to have commenced if the permittee has obtained a required inspection approval of work authorized by the permit by the Building Official within six calendar months of the date of permit issuance. 
Work shall be presumed to be stopped if the permittee has not obtained a required inspection approval of work by the Building Official within each six-month period upon the initial commencement of work authorized by such permit. 
Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit, or a renewal permit as specified below, shall be first obtained. 
1.  Permits where work has not commenced. For permits for which work has not commenced in the first six calendar months from the date of issuance, a renewal permit may be obtained provided that: 
A.  No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; 
B.  The expiration has not exceeded three years from the original issuance date; 
C.  The same edition of the California codes is in effect as used in the initial plan check; 
D.  A fee equal to one-half the amount required for a new permit is paid; and 
E.  The renewal permit shall expire three calendar years from the date of initial permit issuance. 
Where later editions of the California codes have been adopted than used in the initial plan check, such applications for renewal shall be considered as a new plan check submittal. Accordingly, plans shall reflect the requirements of the current codes in effect, a full new plan check is required, and a full new plan check fee shall be paid. Upon completion of a new plan check, the permit may be renewed upon payment of a permit fee equal to one-half the amount required for a new permit. 
2.  Permits where work has commenced. For permits where work has commenced and was subsequently stopped as defined herein, a renewal permit may be obtained provided that: 
A.  No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; 
B.  The expiration has not exceeded three years from the original issuance date; 
C.  A fee equal to one-half the amount required for a new permit is paid, except that where construction has progressed and has been approved to the point of requiring only a final inspection, a fee equal to one-quarter the amount required for a new permit shall be paid; and 
D.  A renewal permit shall expire three calendar years from the date of initial permit issuance. 
3.  Permits that have exceeded three years. For permits that have exceeded three years beyond the issuance date, a renewed permit may be obtained provided that: 
A.  Construction in reliance upon the building permit has commenced and has been approved; 
B.  No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; 
C.  A fee equal to the full amount required for a new permit is paid except that where the Building Official determines that construction has progressed to the point that a lesser fee is warranted, such lesser fee shall be paid. 
The maximum life of a permit renewal in accordance with subsection 15.20.030.3 shall be one calendar year from the date of renewal. The permit may be renewed for each calendar year thereafter provided that all requirements of Subsections A, B, and C as stated in subsection 15.20.030.3 are met. 
4.  Extension of an unexpired permit. For an extension of an unexpired permit, the permittee may apply for an extension of the time within which work under that permit may be continued when for good and satisfactory reasons, as determined by the Building Official in his or her sole discretion, the permittee is unable to continue work within the time required by section 15.20.030. The Building Official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding six calendar months beyond the expiration date in effect at the time of the extension application, upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. 
5.  Permits issued where the permittee has been deployed to a foreign country, may be held in abeyance until six months after the return of the permittee from his/her deployment if necessary, upon application for such relief by the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2425, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.20.035 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 104 "Permits", Subsection 104.3.4 "Permit denial"—Added. 
Section 104.3.4 is added to the 2016 California Plumbing Code to read as follows: 
104.3.4 Permit denial . The Building Official may deny the issuance of a plumbing permit on any property where there exists an unsafe or a substandard building as provided in the Chapters 15.10 and 15.16 of the National City Municipal Code, or where there exists unlawful construction, or where there exists a violation of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2425, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.20.040 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 104 "Permits", Subsection 104.5 "Fees"—Amended. 
Section 104.5 of the 2016 California Plumbing Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section 104.5 Fees . Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the current City of National City Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2425, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.20.042 - Placement of permit—Added. 
The building permit or a copy, the inspection record, and the approved plans shall all be kept on site until the completion of the project. The inspection record is to be kept on the job unless removed by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2425, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.20.045 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 104 "Permits", Subsection 104.3.2 "Plan review fees"—Amended. 
Section 104.3.2 of the 2016 California Plumbing Code is amended to read as follows: 
104.3.2 Plan review fees . When a plan or other data are required to be submitted by 104.3.1, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting plans and specifications for review. The plan review fees for plumbing work shall be assessed in accordance with the current City of National City Fee Schedule. When plans are incomplete or changed so as to require an additional plan review fee, the fee shall be assessed in accordance with the current City of National City Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2425, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.20.050 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 105 "Inspections and Testing", Subsection 105.2.6 "Reinspections"—Amended. 
Section 105.2.6 of the 2016 California Plumbing Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section 105.2.6 Re-inspections . A re-inspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or re-inspection when any of the following occurs: 
1.  The portion of work for which the inspection was called is not complete or the corrections previously required and called for are not made; 
2.  Calling for an inspection before the job is ready for such inspection or re-inspection; 
3.  The inspection record card or the approved plans are not posted or otherwise available to the inspector; 
4.  Failure to provide access on the date for which the inspection is requested; or, 
5.  Deviating from the approved plans when such deviation or change required approval of the building official. 
To obtain a re-inspection, the permittee shall file an application in writing on a form provided for that purpose and pay the re-inspection fee in accordance with the current City of National City Fee Schedule. In instances where a re-inspection fee has been assessed, no further inspections shall be performed until the fees have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2425, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.20.060 - Chapter 1, Division II, Table 104.5 "Plumbing permits fees"—Deleted. 
Table 104.5 of Chapter 1, Division II of the 2016 California Plumbing Code, entitled "Plumbing Permit Fees", is deleted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2425, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.20.065 - Table 422.1 "Minimum plumbing facilities"—Deleted. 
Table 422.1 of Chapter 4, of the 2013 California Plumbing Code, entitled "Minimum Plumbing Facilities", is deleted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2425, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.20.070 - Table 2902.1 "Minimum number of required plumbing fixtures of the 2016 California Building Code"—Adopted. 
Table 2902.1 of the 2016 California Building Code is adopted. Plumbing fixtures shall be provided for the type of occupancy and in the minimum number shown in Table 2902.1. Types of occupancies not shown in Table 2902.1 shall be considered individually by the Building Official. The number of occupants shall be determined by this code. Occupancy classification shall be determined in accordance with Chapter 3 of the 2016 California Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2425, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
Chapter 15.22 - UNIFORM SWIMMING POOL, SPA AND HOT TUB CODE 
Sections: 
 
15.22.005 - Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code (2009 Edition)—Adopted. 
There is adopted by the city council for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing the erection, installation, construction, enlargement, alteration, addition, repair, replacement, maintenance, and use or occupancy of any swimming pool, spa or hot tub that certain code known as the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code as copyrighted by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, being particularly the 2009 Edition, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, based on local climatic, geological, or topographical conditions that justify deviating from such code, of which one copy is now on file in the office of the building official; and the same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this chapter and from January 1, 2011, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. 2210 § 2 (part), 2002: Ord. 2162 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2116 § 1 (part), 1996) 
(Ord. No. 2010-2356, § 1, 11-23-2010)  
15.22.010 - Chapter 1, Section 104 "Administrative authority"—Deleted. 
Section 104 of the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code is hereby deleted. 
(Ord. 2210 § 2 (part), 2002: Ord. 2162 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2116 § 1 (part), 1996) 
(Ord. No. 2010-2356, § 1, 11-23-2010)  
15.22.015 - Chapter 1, Section 102.2 "Duties and powers of the administrative authority"—Amended. 
Section 102.2 of the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code is amended by adding the following: 
102.2 Duties and Powers of the Administrative Authority . The San Diego County Health Department and/or its authorized representatives are authorized to enforce this code in accordance with the terms of the agreement between the City of National City and the San Diego County Health Department. 
(Ord. 2210 § 2 (part), 2002: Ord. 2162 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2116 § 1 (part), 1996) 
(Ord. No. 2010-2356, § 1, 11-23-2010)  
15.22.020 - Chapter 1, Section 102.3 "Violations—Amended. 
Section 102.3 of the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code is amended to read as follows: 
102.3. Violations . Violations of any provisions of this code shall be punishable as a misdemeanor and shall carry the penalties as prescribed in Chapter 1.20 of the National City Municipal Code. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this code. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use that is authorized is lawful. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans shall not prevent the Administrative Authority from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans and specifications or from preventing construction operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of this code or of any other ordinance or from revoking any approval when issued in error. 
(Ord. 2210 § 2 (part), 2002: Ord. 2162 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2116 § 1 (part), 1996) 
(Ord. No. 2010-2356, § 1, 11-23-2010)  
15.22.022 - Chapter 1, Section 102.3.2 "Penalties"—Amended. 
Section 102.3.2 of the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code is amended to read as follows: 
102.3.2 Penalties . Violation of any provision of this code shall be punishable as a misdemeanor and shall carry the penalties as prescribed in Chapter 1.20 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2356, § 1, 11-23-2010)  
15.22.025 - Chapter 1, Section 103.3.4 "Permits"—Deleted. 
Section 103.3.4 of the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code is deleted. 
(Ord. 2210 § 2 (part), 2002: Ord. 2162 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2116 § 1 (part), 1996) 
(Ord. No. 2010-2356, § 1, 11-23-2010)  
15.22.030 - Chapter 1, Section 103.4.1 "Fees"—Amended. 
Chapter 1, Section 103.4.1 of the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code is amended to read as follows: 
103.4.1 Fees . Every applicant for a permit to install, remove, alter, repair or replace or cause to be installed, removed, altered, repaired, or replaced any swimming pool, spa or hot tub; any swimming pool, spa or hot tub plumbing, gas or draining piping; or any swimming pool, spa, or hot tub heater, fixture, or water treating equipment in a building or premises shall first state in writing on the application for a permit provided for that purpose, the character of work proposed to be done. Permit fees shall be as established by the most recently adopted fee schedule. 
(Ord. 2210 § 2 (part), 2002: Ord. 2162 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2116 § 1 (part), 1996) 
(Ord. No. 2010-2356, § 1, 11-23-2010)  
15.22.033 - Chapter 1 Section 103.4.3.2 "Work commencing without a permit" —Amended. 
Section 103.4.3.2 of the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section 103.4.3.2 Work commencing without a permit . Any person who shall commence any swimming pool, spa, or hot tub work for which a permit is required by this code without having obtained a permit therefor, shall be subject to an administrative penalty equal to the inspection fee portion of the permit fee that would be required by this code if a permit were to be issued. The administrative penalty is in addition to a permit fee however, this provision shall not apply to emergency work when it shall be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Administrative Authority that such work was urgently necessary and that it was not practical to obtain a permit therefor, before the commencement of the work. In all such cases, a permit must be obtained by the next business day, and if such permit is not obtained for the completion of such emergency work, the administrative penalty as herein provided shall be charged. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2356, § 1, 11-23-2010)  
15.22.035 - Chapter 1, Section 117 "Board of Appeals"—Amended. 
Section 117 of the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section 117 Board of Appeals . The City Council, pursuant to National City Municipal Code Chapter 15.04, shall have jurisdiction to review the items as enumerated in Chapter 15.22 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2210 § 2 (part), 2002: Ord. 2162 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2116 § 1 (part), 1996) 
(Ord. No. 2010-2356, § 1, 11-23-2010)  
15.22.040 - Chapter 2, Section 202 "Definitions"—Amended. 
Section 202 of the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code is amended by adding the following definitions: 
Section 202 Definitions . 
Above Ground/On Ground Pool - See definition of swimming pool. 
Approved safety pool cover - means a manually or power-operated safety pool cover that meets all of the performance standards of the American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM) in compliance with Standard F1346-91. 
Enclosure - is a fence, wall, or other barrier that isolates a swimming pool from access to the home. 
Exit alarms - devices that make audible, continuous alarm sounds when any door or window, that permits access from the residence to the pool area that is without any intervening enclosure, is opened or is left ajar. Exit alarms may be battery operated or may be connected to the electrical wiring of the building. 
Grade (surface) - is the underlying surface such as earth or a walking surface. 
Hot Tub - See definition of swimming pool. 
Spa - See definition of swimming pool. 
Swimming Pool - is any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water over 18 inches deep. This includes in-ground, aboveground and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs, spas, portable spas and nonportable wading pools. 
Swimming Pool, Indoor - is any swimming pool which is totally contained within a structure and surrounded on all four sides by walls of said structure. 
Swimming Pool, Outdoor - is any swimming pool which is not an indoor pool as defined herein. 
(Ord. 2210 § 2 (part), 2002: Ord. 2162 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2116 § 1 (part), 1996) 
(Ord. No. 2010-2356, § 1, 11-23-2010)  
15.22.045 - Chapter 31, Section 3109.4.1 "Barrier height and clearances"—Amended. 
Section 3109.4.21 of the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section 3109.4.1 Barrier Protection Required . Outdoor swimming pools, including in-ground, aboveground, and on-ground pools, hot tubs and spas shall be provided with a barrier that shall comply with the following: 
1.  The top of the barrier shall be at least 60 inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool and shall be constructed to withstand the forces specified in the Uniform Building Code. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall be 2 inches measured to a hard surface such as concrete. This measurement shall be taken on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade, such as an aboveground pool, the barrier may be at ground level, such as the pool structure, or mounted on top of the pool structure. Where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, the maximum vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and the bottom of the barrier shall be 4 inches. 
2.  Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a 4-inch diameter sphere. 
3.  Solid barriers that do not have openings, such as masonry or stone walls, shall not contain indentations or protrusions except for tooled masonry joints. 
4.  Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than 45 inches and there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 2 inches in width, and spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 4 inches. 
5.  Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be a 1¾-inch square. The wire shall be not less than 11½ gauge. 
6.  Access gates shall comply with the requirements of items (1) through (7) and shall be equipped to accommodate a locking device no less that 54 inches above grade. Pedestrian access gates shall open outward away from the pool and shall be self-closing with a self-latching device. Gates other than pedestrian access gates shall comply with the requirements of items (1) through (7) and shall be equipped with a locking device. 
7.  Where a wall of a dwelling serves as part of the barrier, doors with direct access to the pool through that wall shall be equipped with an alarm that produces an audible warning when the door and its screen, if present, are opened. The alarm shall sound continuously for a minimum of 30 seconds, within 7 seconds after the door and its screen, if present, are opened, and be capable of providing a sound pressure level of not less than 85 DBA when measured indoors at 10 feet. The alarm shall automatically reset under all conditions. The alarm system shall be equipped with a manual means, such as a touch pad or switch, to temporarily deactivate the alarm for a single opening. Such deactivation shall last for no more than 15 seconds. The deactivation switch shall be located at least 54 inches above the threshold of the door. Other means of protection, such as self-closing doors with self-latching devices approved by the building official, shall be acceptable so long as the degree of protection afforded is not less than the protection afforded by the alarm system described above. 
8.  Where an above-ground pool structure is used as a barrier or where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, and the means of access is a ladder or steps, then (a) the ladder or steps shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access or, (b) the ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier which meets the requirements of items (1) through (9). When the ladder or steps are secured, locked or removed, any opening created shall not allow the passage of a 4-inch diameter sphere. 
9.  Hot tubs and spas located outdoors and not exceeding 64 square feet may have rigid pool covers meeting American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) Standard F1346-91 equipped with a permanent locking and latching device in lieu of a required barrier. 
10.  Where unusual circumstances exist that make strict enforcement of (1) through (10) impractical, the administrative authority may grant modifications for individual cases pursuant to Section 106 of the Uniform Building Code. 
(Ord. 2210 § 2 (part), 2002: Ord. 2162 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2116 § 1 (part), 1996) 
(Ord. No. 2010-2356, § 1, 11-23-2010)  
15.22.050 - Chapter 1, Division II Section 102.2.2 "Right of entry"—Amended. 
Division II, Section 102.2.2 of the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section 102.2.2 Right of Entry . When necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provision of this code, or when the Authority Having Jurisdiction has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises a condition or code violation which make such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Authority Having Jurisdiction and/or their authorized representatives may request entry as specified in Chapter 1.12 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2356, § 1, 11-23-2010)  
15.22.055 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 103.3.4 "Expiration"—Amended. 
Section 103.3.4 of the 2010 California Plumbing Code is amended to read as follows: 
103.3.4 Expiration . Every permit issued by the Authority Having Jurisdiction under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within six calendar months from the date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after work has commenced for a period of six calendar months, or if the building or work authorized by such permit exceeds three calendar years from the issuance date of the permit. Work shall be presumed to be suspended or abandoned if the permittee has not obtained a required inspection approval of work by the Authority Having Jurisdiction within each six-month period upon commencement of work authorized by such permit. 
In the event a permit has expired, a permittee may recommence work only if either a new permit or renewal permit is obtained, as specified below: 
1.  Permits where work was not commenced. For permits for which work was not been commenced in the first six calendar months from the date of issuance, a renewal permit may be issued only if: 
(A)  No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; 
(B)  The expiration has not exceeded three years from the original issuance date; 
(C)  The same edition of the adopted codes is in effect as used in the initial plan check; and, 
(D)  A fee equal to one-half the amount required for a new permit is paid. 
The renewal permit shall expire three calendar years from the date of the initial permit issuance. When later editions of the codes have been adopted than used in the initial plan check, such applications for renewal shall be considered as a new plan check submittal. Accordingly, plans shall reflect the requirements of the current codes in effect. a full new plan check is required and a full new plan check fee shall be paid. Upon completion of the new plan check, the permit may be renewed upon payment of a permit fee equal to one-half the amount required for a new permit. 
2.  Permit where work was commenced. For permits where work was commenced and was subsequently stopped as defined herein, a renewal permit may be obtained only if: 
(A)  No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; 
(B)  The expiration has not exceeded three years from the original permit issuance date; 
(C)  A fee equal to one-half the amount required for a new permit is paid, except that where construction has progressed to the point of requiring only a final inspection. a fee equal to one-quarter of the amount required for new permit shall be paid; 
(D)  A renewal permit shall expire three calendar years from the date of the initial permit issuance. 
The maximum life of a permit renewal in accordance with this sub-section shall be one calendar year from the date of renewal. The permit may be renewed each calendar year thereafter provided that all requirements of (A) (8) [(B)] and (C) as stated in this sub-section are met. 
3.  Extension of an unexpired permit. For an extension of a permit which has not yet expired, the permittee may apply for an extension of time within which work under that permit may be continued when for good and satisfactory reasons the permittee is unable to continue work within the time required by this chapter. The Authority Having Jurisdiction may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding six calendar months beyond the expiration date in effect at the time of the extension application, upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action being taken. 
Permits issued where the permittee has been deployed to a foreign country, may be held in' abeyance until six months after the return of the permittee from his/her deployment if necessary, upon application for such relief by the permittee. 
4.  Permits that have exceeded three years. For permits that have exceeded three years beyond the issuance date. a permit renewal may be obtained, provided that: 
(A)  Construction in reliance upon the building permit has been commenced and has been approved; 
(B)  No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and. 
(C)  A fee equal to the full amount required for a new permit is paid, except that where the Authority Having Jurisdiction determines that construction has progressed to the point that a lesser fee is warranted, such lesser fee shall be paid. 
5.  Permits issued where the permittee has been deployed to a foreign country, may be held in abeyance until six months after the return of the permittee from his/her deployment if necessary, upon application for such relief by the permittee. 
A permit renewed pursuant to this subsection shall not exceed one calendar year from the date of renewal. A permit may be renewed annually provided that all requirements of (A), (B), and (C) above are met. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2356, § 1, 11-23-2010)  
15.22.060 - Permit denial. 
The Authority Having Jurisdiction may deny the issuance of a building permit on any property where there exists an unsafe or a substandard building as provided in the Chapters 15.10 and 15.16 of the National City Municipal Code, or where there exists unlawful construction, or where there exists a violation of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2356, § 1, 11-23-2010)  
15.22.065 - Permit fees. 
Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the most recent Fee Schedule adopted by the National City City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2356, § 1, 11-23-2010)  
15.22.070 - Plan review fees. 
When a plan or other data are required to be submitted by 103.2.2, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting plans and specifications for review. The plan review fees for plumbing work shall be as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by the City Council. When plans are incomplete or changed so as to require an additional plan review fee, the fee shall be as per the fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2356, § 1, 11-23-2010)  
15.22.075 - Reinspection. 
A re-inspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or re-inspection when any of the following occurs: 
1.  The portion of work for which the inspection was called is not complete; the corrections previously required and called for are not made; 
2.  Calling for an inspection before the job is ready for such inspection or re-inspection; 
3.  The inspection record card or the approved plans are not posted or otherwise available to the inspector; 
4.  Failure to provide access on the date for which the inspection is requested; or, 
5.  Deviating from the approved plans when such deviation or change required approval of the building official. 
To obtain a re-inspection, the permittee shall pay the re-inspection fee as specified in the most current Fee Schedule adopted by the National City City Council. In instances where a re-inspection fee has been assessed, no further inspections shall be performed until the fees have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2356, § 1, 11-23-2010)  
15.22.080 - Advisory and appeals board. 
The City Council, pursuant to National City Municipal Code Chapter 15.04, shall have jurisdiction to review the items as enumerated in Chapter 15.20 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2356, § 1, 11-23-2010)  
15.22.085 - Placement of permit placement of permit. 
The building permit or a copy, the inspection record, and the approved plans shall all be kept on site until the completion of the project. The inspection record is to be kept on the job unless removed by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2356, § 1, 11-23-2010)  
15.22.090 - Expiration of plans. 
An application for a permit shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or the permit has been issued; except that the Authority having Jurisdiction is authorized to grant a maximum of three extensions for additional time of three months each, provided there have been no changes to the plans and no new codes have been adopted since the initial plan check was conducted. A fee equal to 25% of the initial plan check fee will be assessed for each plan check extension. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2356, § 1, 11-23-2010)  
15.22.095 - Work commencing without a permit. 
Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to an administrative penalty equal to the inspection fee portion [of] the permit fee that would be required by this code if a permit were to be issued. The administrative penalty is in addition to a permit fee. When a plan review is required for issuance of such permit, the plan review fee portion will not be subject to said penalty. The payment of such administrative penalty shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code or from any penalty prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2356, § 1, 11-23-2010)  
Chapter 15.24 - CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-2420, §§ 1—3, adopted Jan. 17, 2017, amended Ch. 15.24 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said chapter to read as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.24, §§ 15.24.005—15.24.080, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2013-2386, § 3, adopted Dec. 3, 2013. 
Prior ordinance history— Ords. 1327, 1350, 1358, 1512, 1841, 1914, 1972, Sections 22 and 23 of 2018, 2051, 2117, 2161, 2207, 2265, 2285, 2301 and 2010-2353. 
 
15.24.005 - 2016 California Electrical Code, Annex H of the 2016 California Electrical Code and the 2014 National Electrical Code—Adopted and amended. 
The city council adopts 2016 California Electrical Code, Annex H of the 2016 California Electric Code, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 3, including all Annexes, and the 2014 National Electrical Code, for the purpose of prescribing in the city of National City, regulations governing the inspection of installations, investigation of fires caused by electrical installations, the review of construction plans, drawings, and specifications for electrical systems, the design, alteration, modification, construction, maintenance, and testing of electrical systems and equipment, the regulation and control of electrical installations at special events including but not limited to exhibits, trade shows, amusement parks, and other similar special occupancies, in or on any building or structure, or outdoors on any premises or property. The city council amends, deletes, or adds certain sections of the 2016 Electrical Code, Annex H of the 2016 Electrical Code, and the 2014 National Electrical Code, based on local climatic, topographic or geological conditions that justify deviating from said codes. Copies of these codes are filed in the office of the building official, and are adopted and incorporated as if fully set out in this chapter, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2420, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.24.010 - Annex H, Administration and enforcement—Adopted and amended. 
ANNEX H to the 2016 California Electrical Code entitled "Administration and Enforcement", is adopted subject to the following additions, amendments and deletions contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2420, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.24.015 - Annex H, Section 80.13 "Authority", Subsection 80.13(7) "Right of entry"—Amended. 
Section 80.13(7) of Annex H of the 2016 California Electrical Code is amended to read as follows: 
80.13(7) Right of entry . When necessary to make inspections to enforce any provision of this code, or when the Building Official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises a condition or code violation which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Building Official, or designee, may request entry as specified in Chapter 1.12 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2420, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.24.020 - Annex H, Section 80.13 "Authority", Subsection 80.13(17) "Electric Fences Prohibited"—Added. 
Section 80.13(17) is added to Annex H of the 2016 California Electrical Code as follows: 
80.13(17). Electric Fences Prohibited . No electric fence shall be constructed, maintained or operated within the City of National City. Electric fences as used herein, include all fences which in any way use electrical energy as an additional deterrent or have wires charged with electricity which are not covered with adequate insulation to protect persons and animals coming in contact therewith. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2420, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.24.025 - Annex H, Section 80.19 "Permits and Approvals", Subsection 80.19(D) "Annual permits"—Deleted. 
Section 80.19(D) of Annex H of the 2016 California Electrical Code is deleted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2420, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.24.030 - Annex H, Section 80.19 "Permits and Approvals", Subsection 80.19(E) "Fees"—Amended. 
Section 80.19(E) of Annex H of the 2016 California Electrical Code is amended to read as follows: 
Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the current City of National City Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2420, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.24.035 - Annex H, "Work commencing before permit issuance"—Added. 
Work commencing before permit issuance . Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to an administrative penalty equal to the inspection fee portion [of] the permit fee that would be required by this code if a permit were to be issued. The administrative penalty is in addition to a permit fee. 
When a plan review is required for issuance of such permit, the plan review fee portion will not be subject to said penalty. The payment of such administrative penalty shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code or from any penalty prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2420, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.24.040 - Annex H, Section 80.19 "Permits and Approvals", Subsection 80.19(F) "Inspection and approvals"—Amended. 
Section 80.19(F) of Annex H of the 2016 California Electrical Code is amended to read as follows: 
(1)  All electrical systems and equipment for which a permit is required by this code shall be subject to inspection by the Building Official, and the electrical system shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved by the Building Official. 
It shall be the duty of the permittee to cause the electrical system to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the Building Official, nor the City of National City shall be liable for the expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to permit inspection. When the installation of an electrical system and equipment is complete, an additional and final inspection shall be made. Electrical systems and equipment regulated by this code shall not be connected to the energy source until authorized by the Building Official. 
Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the City of National City. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel provisions of this code or other ordinances of the City of National City shall not be valid. 
(2)  Inspection requests. It shall be of the duty of the permittee to notify the Building Official that such work is ready for inspection. The Building Official may require that every request for inspection be filed at least one working day before such inspection is desired. Such request may be in writing or by telephone at the option of the Building Official. 
It shall be the duty of the permittee to provide access to and means for inspection of such work. 
(3)  Operation of Electrical Equipment. The requirements of section 15.24.040 shall not be construed to prohibit the operation of any electrical system or equipment installed to replace existing equipment. The request for inspection of such equipment must have been with the Building Official not more than forty-eight hours after such replacement work is completed and before any portion of such electrical system is concealed by any permanent portion of the building. 
(4)  Re-inspections. A re-inspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or re-inspection when any of the following occurs: 
A.  The portion of the work for which the inspection was called is not complete or the corrections previously required are not made; 
B.  Calling for an inspection before the job is ready for such inspection or re-inspection; 
C.  The inspection record card or the approved plans are not posted or otherwise available to the inspector; 
D.  Failure to provide access on the date for which the inspection is requested; or 
E.  Deviating from the approved plans when such deviation or change required approval of the Building Official. 
To obtain a re-inspection, the permittee shall file an application in writing on a form provided for that purpose and pay the re-inspection fee in accordance with the current City of National City Fee Schedule. In instances where re-inspection fees have been assessed, no further inspections shall be performed until the fees have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2420, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.24.045 - Annex H, Section 80.19 "Permits and Approvals", Subsection 80.19(H) "Applications and extensions"—Amended. 
Section 80.19(H) of Annex H of the 2016 California Electrical Code is amended to read as follows: 
80.19(H) Application and Extensions . Every permit issued by the Building Official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within six calendar months from the date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is stopped at any time after the work is commenced for a period of six calendar months, or if the building or work authorized by such permit exceeds three calendar years from the issuance date of the permit. Work shall be presumed to have commenced if the permittee has obtained a required inspection approval of work authorized by the permit by the Building Official within six calendar months of the date of permit issuance. 
Work shall be presumed to be stopped if the permittee has not obtained a required inspection approval of work by the Building Official within each six-month period upon the initial commencement of work authorized by such permit. 
Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit, or a renewal permit as specified below, shall be first obtained. 
1.  Permits where work has not commenced. For permits for which work has not commenced in the first six calendar months from the date of issuance, a renewal permit may be obtained provided that: 
A.  No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; 
B.  The expiration has not exceeded three years from the original issuance date; 
C.  The same edition of the California codes is in effect as used in the initial plan check; 
D.  A fee equal to one-half the amount required for a new permit is paid; and 
E.  The renewal permit shall expire three calendar years from the date of initial permit issuance. 
Where later editions of the California codes have been adopted than used in the initial plan check, such applications for renewal shall be considered as a new plan check submittal. Accordingly, plans shall reflect the requirements of the current codes in effect, a full new plan check is required, and a full new plan check fee shall be paid. Upon completion of a new plan check, the permit may be renewed upon payment of a permit fee equal to one-half the amount required for a new permit. 
2.  Permits where work has commenced. For permits where work has commenced and was subsequently stopped as defined herein, a renewal permit may be obtained provided that: 
A.  No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; 
B.  The expiration has not exceeded three years from the original issuance date; 
C.  A fee equal to one-half the amount required for a new permit is paid, except that where construction has progressed and has been approved to the point of requiring only a final inspection, a fee equal to one-quarter the amount required for a new permit shall be paid; and 
D.  A renewal permit shall expire three calendar years from the date of initial permit issuance. 
3.  Permits that have exceeded three years. For permits that have exceeded three years beyond the issuance date, a renewed permit may be obtained provided that: 
A.  Construction in reliance upon the building permit has commenced and has been approved; 
B.  No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; 
C.  A fee equal to the full amount required for a new permit is paid except that where the Building Official determines that construction has progressed to the point that a lesser fee is warranted, such lesser fee shall be paid. 
The maximum life of a permit renewal in accordance with subsection 15.24.045.3 shall be one calendar year from the date of renewal. The permit may be renewed for each calendar year thereafter provided that all requirements of Subsections A, B and C as stated in subsection 15.24.045.3 are met. 
4.  Extension of an unexpired permit. For an extension of an unexpired permit, the permittee may apply for an extension of the time within which work under that permit may be continued when for good and satisfactory reasons as determined by the Building Official in his or her sole discretion, the permittee is unable to continue work within the time required by section 15.24.045. The Building Official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding six calendar months beyond the expiration date in effect at the time of the extension application, upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. 
5.  Permits issued where the permittee has been deployed to a foreign country, may be held in abeyance until six months after the return of the permittee from his/her deployment if necessary, upon application for such relief by the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2420, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.24.050 - Annex H, Section 80.19 "Permits and Approvals", Subsection 80.19(I) "Permit denial"—Added. 
Section 80.19(I) is added to Annex H of the 2016 California Electrical Code to read as follows: 
80.19(I) Permit Denial . The Building Official may deny the issuance of a building permit on any property where there exists an unsafe or substandard building as provided in Chapter 15.10 and 15.16 of the National City Municipal Code, or where there exists unlawful construction or a violation of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2420, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.24.055 - Annex H, Section 80.23 "Notice of violations, penalties"—Amended. 
Section 80.23 of Annex H of the 2016 California Electrical Code is amended to read as follows: 
80.23 Violations, Penalties . It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this code. 
Violations of any provisions of this code may be punishable as a misdemeanor and shall carry the penalties as prescribed in Chapter 1.20 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2420, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.24.060 - Annex H, Section 80.25 "Connection to electrical supply", Subsection 80.25(C) "Notification"—Deleted. 
Section 80.25(C) of Annex H of the 2016 California Electrical Code is deleted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2420, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.24.065 - Annex H, Section 80.27 "Inspector's qualifications"—Deleted. 
Section 80.27 of Annex H of the 2016 California Electrical Code is deleted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2420, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.24.070 - Annex H, Section 80.29 "Liability for damages"—Deleted. 
Section 80.29 of Annex H of the 2016 California Electrical Code is deleted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2420, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.24.075 - Annex G, Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA)—Deleted. 
Annex G of the 2016 California Electrical Code is deleted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2420, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.24.080 - Article 89 "General Code Provisions", Subsection 89.107.1 "Appeals Board"—Amended. 
Section 107.1 to the 2016 California Electrical Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section 107.1. Board of Appeals . In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations of the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, the City Council shall appoint an ad hoc Board of Appeals comprised of three (3) members who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building codes, regulations, and ordinances, and who are not employees of the City. Board members shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. The Board shall comply with Rosenberg's Rules of Order in conducting their business, and shall render written decisions and findings to the appellant with a copy to the Building Official. Decisions of the Board may be appealed to the City Council by the appellant or by the Building Official within thirty (30) days of the Decision of the Board by filing of a written notice of appeal with the Director of Emergency Services stating the reasons for the appeal. The person filing the appeals and the opposing party shall be given at least ten days' written notice of the time and place of the hearing on the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2420, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
Chapter 15.28 - CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-2418, §§ 1, 3, 4, adopted Jan. 17, 2017, amended Ch. 15.28 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said chapter to read as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.28, §§ 15.28.002—15.28.160, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2013-2387, § 4, adopted Dec. 3, 2013. 
 
15.28.002 - Findings and declarations. 
The city council of the city of National City, does specifically and expressly find and declare that the nature and uniqueness of the local climate, geographical and topographical conditions in the city of National City does reasonably necessitate and demand specific changes in and variations from the 2016 California Fire Code, which are noted in and made part of this chapter as authorized by Health and Safety Code Sections 17958.7 and 18941.5. These conditions result from the age and concentration of structures and the increased risk of conflagration spread as a result. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2418, §§ 1, 3, 4, 1-17-2017)  
15.28.010 - 2016 California Fire Code—Adopted and amended. 
There is adopted by the city council of the city of National City for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire, hazardous materials or explosion and establishing a fire prevention bureau, the 2016 California Fire Code, and the appendices thereto, including both Administration Divisions I and II, published by the International Code Council and the California Building Standards Commission, and the National Fire Protection Association Standards (current edition) published by the National Fire Protection Association, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, added, or amended. Within this chapter, those codes may be collectively referred to as the California Fire Code. One copy of this adopted code is on file in the office of the fire marshal of the city of National City. The code is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this chapter shall take effect, shall be controlling within the limits of the city of National City. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2418, §§ 1, 3, 4, 1-17-2017)  
15.28.020 - Establishment and duties of fire prevention bureau. 
A.  The California Fire Code shall be enforced by the fire prevention bureau in the fire department in the city of National City, which is established and shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire department. 
B.  The battalion chief/fire marshal in charge of the fire prevention bureau shall be appointed by the chief of the fire department of the city of National City. 
C.  The director of emergency services may detail members of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The chief of the fire department shall recommend to the city manager of National City the employment of technical inspectors, who, when such authorization is made, shall be selected through an examination to determine their fitness for the same position. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2418, §§ 1, 3, 4, 1-17-2017)  
15.28.030 - Definitions. 
A.  The word "jurisdiction" used in the 2016 California Fire Code means the city of National City. 
B.  Whenever the words "chief of the bureau of fire prevention" are used in the California Fire Code, they shall be held to mean the fire marshal of the city of National City. 
C.  Where reference to the Uniform Building Code, or building code, or any nationally recognized standard is made, it means the currently adopted edition. 
D.  Where the word "administrator" is used in the California Fire Code, it shall be held to mean the city council of the city of National City. Whenever the term "city" is used, it means the city of National City. 
E.  Where the term "corporation counsel" is used in the California Fire Code, it shall be held to mean the city attorney for the city of National City. 
F.  "Fire authority having jurisdiction (FAHJ)" means the designated entity providing enforcement of fire regulations as they relate to planning, construction, and development. This entity may also provide fire suppression and other emergency services. 
G.  Whenever the term "this code" is used, it means the 2016 California Fire Code as modified by the city of National City with the deletions, amendments, and additions contained in this chapter. 
H.  Whenever the terms "chief", "fire chief", "chief of the fire department" are used, they mean the "director of the department of emergency services". 
(Ord. No. 2017-2418, §§ 1, 3, 4, 1-17-2017)  
15.28.035 - Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited—Amended. 
Section 5504.3 of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
The Establishment of Limits for Storage of Flammable Cryogenic Fluids. The storage of flammable cryogenic fluids is prohibited in all areas within the City limits of National City, except within the following zones as established by the National City Land Use Code: MM and IM; Medium Manufacturing; MH and IH; Heavy Manufacturing; MT-Tidelands Manufacturing. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2418, §§ 1, 3, 4, 1-17-2017)  
15.28.040 - Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of Class I and II liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited—Amended. 
Sections 5704.2.9.6 and 5706.2.4.4 of the 2016 California Fire Code are amended to read as follows: 
All areas within the city limits of the City of National City except for those areas zoned commercial or manufacturing, as established, defined, and set under the zoning regulations in Title 18 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2418, §§ 1, 3, 4, 1-17-2017)  
15.28.050 - Establishment of limits in which storage of liquefied petroleum gases is prohibited—Amended. 
Section 6104.2 of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
All areas within the city limits of the City of National City, except for those areas zoned commercial or manufacturing, as established, defined, and set under zoning regulations in Title 18 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2418, §§ 1, 3, 4, 1-17-2017)  
15.28.060 - Establishment of limits for storage of explosives and fireworks is to be prohibited—Amended. 
Chapter 56 of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
The permanent storage of explosives and/or fireworks shall be strictly prohibited within the city limits of the City of National City. Temporary storage may be allowed, by permit, during setup for excavation, demonstration, or other use, when in the opinion of the fire marshal, there are significant measures in place to ensure public safety. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2418, §§ 1, 3, 4, 1-17-2017)  
15.28.070 - Amendments made to the 2016 California Fire Code. 
The geographical density of the City of National City, the dry southern California climate, which is subject to annual drought conditions, make the following amendments set out in Sections 15.28.080 through 15.28.130 necessary and meet the conditions described in Section 15.28.002, findings and declarations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2418, §§ 1, 3, 4, 1-17-2017)  
15.28.080 - Section 102.7 "Referenced Codes"—Amended. 
Section 102.7 of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
102.7 The codes, standards, and publications adopted and set forth in this code, including other codes, standards and publications referred to therein are, by title and their most current edition, hereby adopted as standard reference documents of this code. When this code does not specifically cover any subject related to building design and construction, recognized fire engineering practices shall be employed. The National Fire Codes and the Fire Protection Handbook of the National Fire Protection Association are permitted to be used as authoritative guides in determining recognized fire-prevention engineering practices. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2418, §§ 1, 3, 4, 1-17-2017)  
15.28.085 - Section 307.4.1 "Bonfires"—Amended. 
Section 307.4.1 of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
307.4.1 Bonfires . Bonfires are strictly prohibited within the City Limits. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2418, §§ 1, 3, 4, 1-17-2017)  
15.28.090 - Section 307.4.2 "Recreational Fires"—Amended. 
Section 307.4.2 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
307.4.2 Recreational Fires . Recreational Fires are strictly prohibited within the City limits. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2418, §§ 1, 3, 4, 1-17-2017)  
15.28.100 - Section 1013.6.1 "Graphics"—Amended. 
Section 1013.6.1 of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
1013.6.1 Graphics . Every exit sign and directional exit sign shall have plainly legible letters not less than 6 inches (152 mm) high with the principal strokes of the letters not less than 0.75 inch (19.1 mm) wide. The word "EXIT" shall have letters having a width not less than 2 inches (51 mm) wide, except the letter "I," and the minimum spacing between letters shall not be less than 0.375 inch (9.5 mm). Signs larger than the minimum established in this section shall have letter widths, strokes, and spacing in proportion to the height. 
The word "EXIT" shall be green in color and in high contrast with the background and shall be clearly discernible when the means of exit sign illumination is or is not energized. If a chevron directional indicator is provided as part of the exit sign, it shall be green in color, the construction shall be such that the direction of the chevron directional indicator cannot be readily changed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2418, §§ 1, 3, 4, 1-17-2017)  
15.28.110 - Section 5704.3.3.9 "Storage of Empty Wooden or Plastic Pallets"—Supplemented. 
The following is added to Section 5704.3.3.9 as follows: 
Storage of Empty Wooden or Plastic Pallets . The storage of empty wooden or plastic pallets is prohibited, except as follows: 
1.  Outdoor Storage. Pallets may be stored outside of a building or in a detached building. Pallets shall not be stacked closer than 5 feet from any building. 
2.  Indoor Storage. Pallets shall not be stored indoors unless the premises are protected with an automatic fire sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA Standard 13, section titled Protection of Idle Pallets, except when both of the following conditions are met: 
a.  Pallets are stored no higher than 6 feet. 
b.  Each pallet pile of no more than 4 stacks shall be separated from other pallet piles by at least 8 feet of clear space and 25 feet from any commodity. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2418, §§ 1, 3, 4, 1-17-2017)  
15.28.120 - Section 503.2.7 and Appendix Section D103.2 "Grade"—Amended. 
Sections 503.2.7 and Appendix Section D103.2 of the 2016 California Fire Code are amended to read as follows: 
503.2.7 and Appendix Section D103.2 Grade . The maximum permitted gradient for a fire apparatus access road shall not exceed 15%. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2418, §§ 1, 3, 4, 1-17-2017)  
15.28.130 - Section 503.6 "Security Gates"—Amended. 
Section 503.6 of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended as follows: 
All gates or other structures or devices which could obstruct fire access roadways or otherwise hinder emergency operations are prohibited unless they meet standards approved by the Chief, and receive Specific Plan Approval. 
All automatic gates across fire access roadways and driveways shall be equipped with an approved key-operated switches overriding all command functions and opening the gate(s). Gates accessing more than four residences or residential lots, or gates accessing hazardous institutional, educational or assembly occupancy group structures, shall also be equipped with an approved emergency traffic control-activating strobe light sensor(s), or other devices approved by the Chief, which will activate the gate on the approach of emergency apparatus with a battery back-up or manual mechanical disconnect in case of power failure. 
All automatic gates must meet fire department policies deemed necessary by the Chief for rapid, reliable access. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2418, §§ 1, 3, 4, 1-17-2017)  
15.28.140 - Section 108, "Board of Appeals", Section 108.1, "Board of appeals established"—Amended. 
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the Fire Marshal relative to the application and interpretation of this code, the City Council shall appoint an ad hoc Board of Appeals consisting of three (3) members who are qualified by experience and training to pass judgment on matters pertaining to hazards of fire, explosions, hazardous conditions and/or fire protection systems, and are not employees of the City. Board members shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. The board shall comply with Rosenberg's Rules of Order in conducting their business, and shall render written decisions and findings to the appellant with a copy to the Fire Marshal. The Fire Marshal shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the Board, unless such decision is appealed to the City Council. Decisions of the board may be appealed to the City Council by the appellant or by the Fire Marshal within thirty (30) days of the decision of the Board, by the filing of a written notice of appeal with the Director of Emergency Services stating the reasons for the appeal. The person filing the appeal and the opposing party shall be given at least ten (10) days' written notice of the time and place of the hearing on the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2418, §§ 1, 3, 4, 1-17-2017)  
15.28.150 - New materials, processes or occupancies, which may require permits. 
The building and safety director, the chief of the fire department and the fire marshal shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving effected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which shall require permits in addition to those now enumerated in said code. The fire marshal shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his/her office and distribute copies thereof to interested parties. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2418, §§ 1, 3, 4, 1-17-2017)  
15.28.160 - Penalties. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the 2016 California Fire Code adopted or any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2418, §§ 1, 3, 4, 1-17-2017)  
Chapter 15.29 - FIRE SAFETY 
Sections: 
 
15.29.010 - Definition. 
"B-2" and "R-1" occupancies, as used in this chapter, mean those businesses as defined in Section 9.117 of the Uniform Fire Code. 
(Ord. 1811 § 2, 1984)  
15.29.020 - Establishment of self-inspection program. 
For the purpose of providing and maintaining functions necessary for the prevention of fire and for the protection of life and property from fire and panic, the city council establishes a business fire safety self-inspection program assuring that certain "B-2" and "R-1" occupancies within the city are inspected on an annual basis for fire safety. 
(Ord. 1811 § 1, 1984)  
15.29.030 - Function of self-inspection program. 
A.  The National City fire department's suppression/rescue personnel and fire prevention bureau personnel shall deliver by hand or by mail its "Self-Inspection Worksheet" and "Business and Emergency Record" forms to each "B-2" and "R-1" occupancy included in the business fire safety self-inspection program within the city on an annual basis. 
B.  The owner or manager of the occupancy or person in highest authority in the occupancy shall within thirty days inspect each occupancy, complete the forms mentioned in subsection A of this section, correct all deficiencies, and return the same to the National City fire department. All deficiencies observed shall be reported on the forms and corrected prior to returning the forms to the National City fire department. 
(Ord. 1811 § 3, 1984)  
15.29.040 - Failure to comply—Issuance of citation. 
Any person who fails to comply with the requirements to inspect the premises, complete the forms, and correct all deficiencies noted within the thirty-day period specified in Section 15.29.030, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and the fire department may cause to be issued a citation for violation of the terms of this chapter pursuant to the authority given to the city. 
(Ord. 1811 § 4, 1984)  
Chapter 15.30 - REIMBURSABLE EXPENSE 
Sections: 
 
15.30.010 - Circumstances under which reimbursement may be sought. 
The city may impose upon the responsible person or entity the reasonable cost of fire prevention, suppression, investigation or the protection of the public from fire and other hazardous conditions that result from any of the following conditions or activities: 
A.  Negligent manufacture, transportation, storage, handling, burning, or release of hazardous or toxic chemicals or substances, flammable liquids, materials or substances, or any material or substance which creates a health hazard (as defined in the currently adopted Uniform Fire Code, Health & Safety Code, Labor Code, or other related codes or ordinances); 
B.  Negligent use of welding equipment, cutting torch or tar pot; 
C.  Negligently creating, permitting, or maintaining a fire or other hazardous condition; 
D.  Failure to correct a hazardous condition for which a "Notice of Correction" has been previously given by the National City Fire Department; 
E.  Setting of a fire negligently or in violation of any ordinance, law, regulation, or statute of the City of National City, County of San Diego or State of California. 
(Ord. 1861 § 1 (part), 1985: Ord. 1705 (part), 1980)  
15.30.011 - Definitions. 
The meaning of all terms used in this chapter not otherwise defined, shall be as set forth in the currently adopted Uniform Fire Code and Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 1861 § l (part), 1985: Ord. 1705 (part), 1980)  
15.30.020 - Determination to charge costs. 
Whenever the fire chief of the city determines that the city or its agent has incurred costs for fire prevention, suppression, investigation or protection of the public safety when a fire or other hazardous condition has resulted from the activities specified in Section 15.30.010, he shall: 
A.  Calculate the costs incurred; 
B.  Identify the person or persons responsible; 
C.  Send by certified mail an invoice of all appropriate charges. 
(Ord. 1861 § 1 (part), 1985: Ord. 1705 (part), 1980)  
15.30.030 - Calculation of costs incurred. 
The "costs incurred" shall include all necessary expenditures to correct the hazardous condition or extinguish the fire, including, but not limited to: 
A.  The cost of manpower; 
B.  The cost of extinguishing agents; and 
C.  The reasonable value of the use of equipment by the agency incurring costs in the use of that equipment. 
(Ord. 1861 § 1 (part), 1985: Ord. 1705 (part), 1980)  
Chapter 15.34 - HISTORICAL BUILDINGS* 
Sections: 
 
15.34.002 - Code adopted. 
There is adopted by the city council, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing the enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, converging, occupancy, use and maintenance of all historical buildings and/or structures, that certain code known as the State Historical Building Code, Title 24, Building Standards Part 8 of the California Administrative Code, of which code not less than three copies have been and are now on file in the office of the city clerk; and the same are adopted and incorporated as if fully set out at length in this chapter, and from the date on which the ordinance codified in this chapter takes effect the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. 1915 § 2 (part), 1987)  
15.34.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide alternative building regulations for the rehabilitation, preservation, restoration (including related reconstruction) or relocation of buildings or structures designated as historic buildings. Such alternative building regulations are intended to facilitate the restoration or change of occupancy so as to preserve their original or restored architectural elements and features, to encourage energy conservation and cost-effective approach to preservation, and to provide for the safety of the building occupants. 
(Ord. 1915 § 2 (part), 1987)  
15.34.015 - Scope. 
The provisions of this code may be applied for the rehabilitation and relocation of qualified historical buildings as defined in Chapter 8-3 of the State Historical Building Code. Said code may apply when repairs, alterations, reconstruction and additions necessary for the preservation, restoration, rehabilitation, relocation or continued use of a building or structure are made. 
(Ord. 1915 § 2 (part), 1987)  
15.34.020 - Intent. 
A.  It is the intent of these regulations to provide means for the preservation of the historical value of designated buildings and, concurrently, to provide reasonable safety from fire, seismic and wind forces, or other hazards, for occupants of such buildings. It is not the intent to protect the property and by so doing adversely affect the historical integrity of the structure. 
B.  It is not the intent of these regulations to allow nonhistorical expansion or addition to a historical building beyond the original construction of such structure unless such expansion or addition conforms to all prevailing applicable regulations. 
(Ord. 1915 § 2 (part), 1987)  
15.34.025 - Application. 
All qualified historical buildings or structures, which includes any structure, collection of structures and their associated sites deemed of importance to the history, architecture or culture of an area by an appropriate local or state governmental jurisdiction. This shall include structures on existing or future national, state or local historical registers or official inventories, such as the National Register of Historic Places, State Historical Landmarks, State Points of Historical Interest, and city or county registers or inventories of historical or architecturally significant sites, places, historic districts or landmarks. 
(Ord. 1915 § 2 (part), 1987)  
15.34.030 - Enforcing agency. 
Local authorities enforcing where they have jurisdiction, and state enforcing authorities, where they have jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 1915 § 2 (part), 1987)  
15.34.035 - Change of occupancy and/or percentage of work done. 
Where permitted, repairs, alterations and reconstruction may be made without adhering to other regulations that deal with full compliance requirements where a change of use (occupancy) takes place, or where the scope of the work exceeds any percentage of the present building value. 
(Ord. 1915 § 2 (part), 1987)  
15.34.040 - Repairs. 
Repairs to any portion of a historical building or structure may be made with original materials and the use of original methods of construction, subject to conditions of this code. 
(Ord. 1915 § 2 (part), 1987)  
15.34.045 - Alternative materials and methods of construction. 
A.  The provisions of the State Historical Building Code are not intended to prevent the use of any proposed alternative design, material or method of construction not specifically prescribed or allowed by State Historical Building Code, provided any such alternative will facilitate the preservation of historical buildings or structures and has been approved. The enforcing agency may approve any such alternative provided the proposed design material or method of construction is satisfactory and that the proposed design, material or method of construction or work offered is, for the purpose intended, reasonably equivalent to that prescribed or allowed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, and safety. 
B.  The enforcing agency may request that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claims that may be made regarding such alternatives. 
(Ord. 1915 § 2 (part), 1987)  
15.34.050 - Substandard buildings. 
Any qualified building that does not comply with the minimum conditions of this code may be considered substandard and must be corrected as a condition of the use of this code. 
(Ord. 1915 § 2 (part), 1987)  
Chapter 15.36 - PEEP SHOW ESTABLISHMENTS* 
Sections: 
 
15.36.005 - Definitions. 
A.  "Peep show establishment" means any place in which a peep show device is installed, maintained or operated. It includes an adult motion picture arcade defined in Section 18.69.020(F). 
B.  "Peep show device" means an aperture or device by or through which electronic, video, photographic, cinematic, digital or computer-generated images are or can be reflected or projected onto an external screen or be internally projected, generated or reflected onto a screen that is an integral part of the device itself. 
(Ord. 2167 § 1 (part), 1999)  
15.36.010 - Wall—Partition construction. 
No person shall operate a peep show establishment unless any wall or partition which is situated so as to create a room, enclosure or booth in which any peep show device is located is constructed of not less than one hour fire resistive material. Any wall of a room, enclosure or booth which adjoins another room, enclosure or booth containing a peep show device shall be solid and uninterrupted by any hole or aperture, other than a lawfully conforming exit or other lawful means of ingress and egress. 
(Ord. 2167 § 1 (part), 1999: Ord. 1201 § 1 (part), 1968)  
15.36.020 - Aisle—Minimum width. 
No person shall operate a peep show establishment in which the width of the aisles in any room, enclosure or booth where a peep show device is located is less than forty-two inches. 
(Ord. 2167 § 1 (part), 1999: Ord. 1201 § 1 (part), 1968)  
15.36.030 - Doorways—Requirements. 
No person shall operate a peep show establishment unless there are no fewer than two doorways of a width no less than thirty-six inches which provide ingress or egress from any room, enclosure or booth in which a peep show device is located; provided, however, that one doorway shall be sufficient should the fire chief so determine, based on fire safety considerations. Doorway or doorways shall be opened and unlocked during business hours. 
(Ord. 2167 § 1 (part), 1999: Ord. 1201 § 1 (part), 1968)  
15.36.040 - Lighted exit signs. 
No person shall operate a peep show establishment unless there is placed over every doorway that provides egress from any room, enclosure or booth in which a peep show device is located an internally illuminated exit sign with letters at least five inches in height. 
(Ord. 2167 § 1 (part), 1999: Ord. 1201 § 1 (part), 1968)  
15.36.050 - Patron—View of doorway. 
No person shall operate a peep show establishment unless each peep show device located in such establishment is situated so as to permit a patron to have a constantly unobstructed view of the interior of the room containing the peep show device. The interior of the room, enclosure or booth containing a peep show device shall be visible at all times. No curtain, door or opaque cover shall block the view of an operator into the interior of the room, enclosure or booth containing the peep show device. 
(Ord. 2167 § 1 (part), 1999: Ord. 1201 § 1 (part), 1968)  
15.36.060 - Minimum lighting. 
No person shall operate a peep show establishment unless a light level of no less than ten foot-candles at floor level is maintained in every portion of said establishment to which the public is admitted. 
(Ord. 1201 § 1 (part), 1968)  
15.36.070 - Maximum occupancy load. 
No person shall operate a peep show establishment in which the number of persons in any room or partitioned portion of a room, enclosure or booth where a peep show device is located exceeds one person per thirty square feet. The maximum occupancy load permitted in any room or partitioned portion of a room in which a peep show device is located shall be conspicuously posted by the operator, and shall remain posted, at the entrance to such room. 
(Ord. 2167 § 1 (part), 1999: Ord. 1201 § 1 (part), 1968)  
15.36.080 - Maximum number of devices. 
No person shall operate a peep show establishment in which the number of peep show devices exceeds the maximum occupancy load permitted in any room or partitioned portion of a room in which a peep show device is located. The maximum number of peep show devices permitted in any room or partitioned portion of a room in a peep show establishment shall be conspicuously posted by the operator, and shall remain posted, at the entrance to said room. 
(Ord. 1201 § 1 (part), 1968)  
15.36.090 - City manager—Delegate—Inspections. 
No person shall deny the city manager or his delegate free access to a peep show establishment for purposes of a reasonable inspection to enforce compliance with building, fire, electrical, or plumbing regulations. 
(Ord. 1201 § 1 (part), 1968)  
15.36.100 - Injunctive relief—Nuisance. 
In addition to the legal remedies provided for in this chapter the operation of any peep show establishment in violation of the terms of this chapter is a public nuisance and may be, by the city, enjoined. 
(Ord. 1201 § 1 (part), 1968)  
15.36.110 - Violation. 
Violation of the provisions of this chapter is an infraction punishable as provided in Section 1.20.010. 
(Ord. 1621, 1978; Ord. 1358 § 2 (part), 1973: Ord. 1201 § 1 (part), 1978)  
15.36.120 - Variance. 
The city manager, or his delegate, is empowered, in the administration of the chapter, to permit such variance or deviation from the regulations of this chapter as will effectuate the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1201 § 1 (part), 1968)  
Chapter 15.40 - SWIMMING POOLS 
Sections: 
 
15.40.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Private swimming pool" is a swimming pool maintained by an individual for the exclusive use of his family and friends; and pools for swimming instruction of short duration which are conducted by or sponsored by the American Red Cross. 
B.  "Public swimming pool" includes, but is not limited to, all commercial pools, real estate and community pools, and pools at hotels, motels, resorts, auto and trailer parks, mobile home parks, auto courts, apartment houses, clubs, public or private schools and gymnasiums, and health establishments. 
(Ord. 1509 § 3, 1976)  
15.40.020 - Permit—Required. 
No person shall maintain or operate any swimming pool, except a private swimming pool, unless an annual operating permit is issued therefor by the director of building and housing. An annual operating permit issued by the director of building and housing is required for the operation of any public swimming pool. 
(Ord. 1509 § 2, 1976)  
15.40.030 - Inspection fee. 
A.  Every person applying for a permit as required by Section 15.40.020 shall, at the time of making application for such permit, pay an annual inspection fee of forty dollars for the first pool under one ownership and on the same property, and a fee of twenty dollars for each additional pool on the same property and under the same ownership. 
B.  This section shall not be applicable to any public swimming pool maintained and operated by the city. 
(Ord. 1509 § 4, 1976)  
15.40.040 - Permit—Penalty for failure to obtain. 
A.  In any case where the operator of a public swimming pool has failed, for a period of thirty days, to file the required application and obtain an annual permit required by Section 15.40.020, there shall be added to and collected with the inspection fee a penalty equal to ten percent of the fee; and for each additional month or fraction of a month after the expiration of said thirty-day period that the operator fails to file such application and obtain such permit, there shall be added to and collected with the inspection fee an additional penalty equal to ten percent of the inspection fee; provided, however, in no event shall the total penalty added to the inspection fee be more than sixty percent of the inspection fee. 
B.  The imposition or payment of the penalty imposed by this section shall not prevent the imposition of any other penalty prescribed by state law or city ordinance, nor shall it prevent a criminal prosecution for violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1509 § 5, 1976)  
15.40.050 - Permit—Renewal. 
A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be renewed annually. Application for the renewal shall be made to the director of building and housing. At the time application is made, there shall be paid to the director of building and housing the annual fee prescribed by Section 15.40.030. The annual fee, if unpaid longer than thirty days after the expiration of the previous permit, is delinquent, and thereafter a penalty shall be imposed in the manner prescribed in Section 15.40.040. 
(Ord. 1509 § 6, 1976)  
Chapter 15.50 - NUISANCE ABATEMENT 
Sections: 
 
15.50.010 - Maintenance of property—Nuisances declared. 
It is declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any building in this city to maintain such building as a "substandard building," as defined in Section 1001 of the Uniform Housing Code, or to maintain such building as a "dangerous building," as defined in Section 302 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. 
(Ord. 1922 (part), 1987)  
15.50.020 - Abatement by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal. 
All or any part of any building found, as provided in this chapter, to constitute a public nuisance shall be subject to abatement by rehabilitation, demolition or repair pursuant to the procedures set forth herein. The procedures set forth herein shall not be exclusive and shall not in any manner limit or restrict the city from enforcing other city ordinances or abating public nuisances in any other manner provided by law. 
(Ord. 1922 (part), 1987)  
15.50.030 - Declaration of nuisances. 
Whenever the director of building and safety, or such other city official as may be designated by the city manager, determines that any building within the city may be maintained contrary to one or more of the provisions of Section 15.50.010, he is authorized to cause notice to be given in the manner provided in this chapter for the holding of a public hearing to ascertain whether the same does in fact constitute such public nuisance, the abatement of which is appropriate under the police power of the city. 
(Ord. 1922 (part), 1987)  
15.50.040 - Form of notice of hearing. 
Notice of the time and place of hearing, which shall be before the Advisory and Appeals Board, shall be titled, "NOTICE OF HEARING", in letters not less than one inch in height and shall be substantially in the following form: 
 NOTICE OF HEARING TO DETERMINE EXISTENCE OF PUBLIC NUISANCE AND TO ABATE IN WHOLE OR PART. Notice is hereby given that on the _______ day of ___________, 19_______, at the hour of _______ of said day, the Advisory and Appeals Board of the City of National City will hold a public hearing in the Council Chambers of the National City City Hall, located at 1243 National City Boulevard, National City, California, to ascertain whether certain buildings situated in the City of National City, State of California, known and designated as ___________, in said City, and more particularly described as ___________, constitute a public nuisance subject to abatement by the rehabilitation of such buildings or by the repair or demolition of said buildings. If said buildings, in whole or part, are found to constitute a public nuisance as defined in Section 15.50.010 of the National City Municipal Code, and if the same are not promptly abated by the owner, such nuisances may be abated by municipal authorities and the rehabilitation, repair or demolition will be assessed upon such premises and such cost will constitute a lien upon such land until paid. Said alleged violations consist of the following: ___________. Said methods of abatement available are: ___________. All persons having any objection to, or interest in said matters are hereby notified to attend a meeting of the Advisory and Appeals Board of the City of National City to be held on the _______ day of ___________, 19_______, at the hour of _______, when their testimony and evidence will be heard and given due consideration. 
DATED: 	_____		_____
			Director of Building & Safety (or title of such other City Official designated by the City Manager). 
 
(Ord. 1922 (part), 1987)  
15.50.050 - Serving notice. 
The director of building and safety, or such other city official as may be designated by the city manager, shall cause to be served upon the owner of each of the affected buildings a copy of said notice in accordance with the provisions of Section 15.50.040. 
The notice shall be served, as aforesaid, at least fifteen days before the time fixed for such hearing. Proof of service of such notices shall be made by declaration under penalty of perjury filed with the city council. 
(Ord. 1922 (part), 1987)  
15.50.060 - Form of proper service of notice. 
Service of the notice shall be by personal service upon the owner of the affected premises or by depositing a copy of said notice in the U.S. mail enclosed in a sealed envelope and with postage thereon fully prepaid. The mail shall be registered or certified and addressed to the owner, and if there is no known address, then in care of the property address. The service is complete at the time of such deposit. "Owner," as used herein, means any person in possession and also any person having or claiming to have any legal or equitable interest in the premises, as disclosed by a current title search from any accredited title company. The failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of the proceedings hereunder. 
(Ord. 1922 (part), 1987)  
15.50.070 - Hearing by advisory and appeals board. 
At the time stated in the notices, the advisory and appeals board shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections or protests, and shall receive testimony from owners, witnesses, city personnel and interested persons relative to such alleged public nuisance and to proposed rehabilitation, repair or demolition of such buildings. The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
(Ord. 1922 (part), 1987)  
15.50.080 - Decision of advisory and appeals board. 
Upon or after the conclusion of the hearing, the advisory and appeals board shall, based upon such hearing, determine whether the buildings, or any part thereof, as maintained constitute a public nuisance as defined herein. If the advisory and appeals board finds that such public nuisance does exist and that there is sufficient cause to rehabilitate, demolish or repair the same, the advisory and appeals board shall adopt a resolution setting forth its findings and ordering the owner or other person having charge or control of such buildings to abate such nuisance by having such buildings rehabilitated, repaired or demolished in the manner and by the means specifically set forth in its resolution. Such resolutions shall set forth times within which such work shall be commenced and completed by the owner. The decision and order of the advisory and appeals board shall be final, unless within ten days of the date of the resolution setting forth the decision and order, the owner or other person having charge or control of such buildings files a written appeal with the city clerk requesting a hearing before the city council. 
(Ord. 1922 (part), 1987)  
15.50.090 - Hearing by city council. 
The director of building and safety, upon notice from the city clerk that an appeal has been timely filed, shall transmit to the city council a report of the advisory and appeals board's record of the case. The city council shall hold a hearing on the matter so appealed, in the same manner as set forth in Section 15.50.070. Notice of the time and date of said hearing shall be provided to the appellant in the same manner as set forth in Sections 15.50.040, 15.50.050 and 15.50.060. Upon the conclusion of the hearing of the appeal by the city council, the council shall adopt a resolution affirming, modifying, or reversing the decision of the advisory and appeals board. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. 1922 (part), 1987)  
15.50.100 - Limitation of filing judicial action. 
Any owner or other interested person having any objections or feeling aggrieved at any proceeding taken by the city council in ordering the abatement of any public nuisance under the provisions of this chapter must bring an action to contest such decision within ninety days after the date of such decision of the city council. Otherwise all objections to such decision shall be deemed waived. 
(Ord. 1922 (part), 1987)  
15.50.110 - Service of resolution to abate. 
A copy of the resolution of the advisory and appeals board, and of the city council in the event of an appeal, ordering the abatement of the nuisance shall be served upon the owners of the property in accordance with the provisions of Section 15.50- .060 and shall contain a detailed list of needed corrections and abatement methods. Any property owner shall have the right to have any such premises rehabilitated or to have such building or structures demolished or repaired in accordance with the resolution and at his own expense provided the same is done prior to the expiration of abatement period set forth in the resolution. Upon such abatement in full by the owner, then proceedings hereunder shall terminate. 
If such nuisance is not completely abated by the owner as directed within the designated abatement period, then the director of building and safety, or such other city official as may be designated by the city manager, is authorized and directed to cause the same to be abated by the city forces or private contract, and the director of building and safety (or such agents as are designated by the city manager) is expressly authorized to enter upon the premises for such purpose. Upon request of the designated official, other city departments shall cooperate fully and shall render all reasonable assistance in abating any such nuisance. 
(Ord. 1922 (part), 1987)  
15.50.120 - Record of cost for abatement. 
A.  The director of building and safety, or such other city official as may be designated by the city manager, shall keep an account of the cost (including incidental expenses) of abating such nuisance on each separate lot or parcel of land where the work is done, and shall render an itemized report in writing to the advisory and appeals board showing the cost of abatement and of rehabilitating, demolishing or repairing of the premises, buildings or structures, including any salvage value relating thereto. 
B.  The advisory and appeals board shall set the matter for hearing to determine the correctness or reasonableness, or both, of such costs. 
C.  A copy of the report and notice shall be served upon the owners of said buildings in accordance with the provisions of Section 15.50.060, at least ten days prior to the date of the advisory and appeals board hearing. 
D.  Proof of such service shall be made by declaration under penalty of perjury filed with the city clerk. 
E.  The term "incidental expenses" includes, but is not limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the city in preparation of notices, specifications and contracts, and in inspecting the work, and the costs of printing and mailing required hereunder. 
(Ord. 1922 (part), 1987)  
15.50.130 - Report—Hearing and proceedings. 
At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering the report, the advisory and appeals board shall hear and pass upon the report of such costs of abatement, together with any objections or protests. Thereupon, the advisory and appeals board may make such revision, correction or modification in the report as it may deem just, after which by resolution the report, as submitted or as revised, corrected or modified, shall be confirmed. The decision of the advisory and appeals board on all protests and objections which may be made shall be final and conclusive, unless within ten days of the date of the resolution confirming the costs of abatement, the owner or other person having charge or control of the subject building files a written appeal with the city clerk requesting a hearing before the city council. The appeal shall be conducted in the same manner as set forth in Section 15.50.090. 
(Ord. 1922 (part), 1987)  
15.50.140 - Assessment of costs against property—Lien. 
The total cost for abating such nuisance, as so confirmed by the advisory and appeals board, or by the city council in the event of an appeal, shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates, and upon recordation in the offices of the county recorder of a notice of lien, as so made and confirmed, shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of such assessment. 
A.  After such confirmation and recordation, a certified copy of such decision shall be sent to the tax division of the county auditor-controller's office, whereupon it shall be the duty of the auditor-controller to add the amounts of the respective assessments to the next regular tax bills levied against the respective lots and parcels of land for municipal purposes, and thereafter such amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes; or 
B.  After such recordation such lien may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner and means provided by law; 
C.  Such notice of lien for recordation shall be in form substantially as follows: 
 NOTICE OF LIEN-CLAIM OF CITY OF NATIONAL CITY. Pursuant to the authority vested by the provisions of Section 15.50.010, et sequitur, of the National City Municipal Code, the Director of Building and Safety of the City of National City (or the designated agent of the City Manager of the City of National City) did on or about the _______ day of ___________, 19_______, cause the premises hereinafter described to be rehabilitated, or the building or structure on the property hereinafter described to be repaired or demolished, in order to abate a public nuisance on said real property; and the Advisory and Appeals Board (or City Council) of the City of National City did on the _______ day of ___________, 19_______, assess the cost of such rehabilitation, repair or demolition upon said real property hereinafter described; and the same has not been paid nor any part thereof; and that said City of National City does hereby claim a lien on such rehabilitation, repair or demolition in the amount of said assessment, to wit: the sum of $_______, and the same shall be a lien upon said real property until the same has been paid in full and discharged of record. The real property hereinbefore mentioned, and upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain parcel of land lying and being in the City of National City, County of San Diego, State of California, and more particularly described as follows: 
(DESCRIPTION) 
DATED: 	_____		_____
			Director of Building & Safety of National City 
 
(Ord. 1922 (part), 1987)  
15.50.150 - Alternative remedies. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city council from ordering the city attorney to commence a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance under applicable Civil or Penal Code provisions as an alternative to the proceedings set forth herein. 
(Ord. 1922 (part), 1987)  
15.50.160 - Violations. 
A.  The owner or other persons having charge or control of any such buildings or premises maintaining any public nuisance as defined in this chapter, or who violates any order of abatement made pursuant to Sections 15.50.080 or 15.50.090, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
B.  Any occupant or lessee in possession of any such building or structure who fails to vacate said building or structure in accordance with an order given as provided in this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
C.  No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any representative of the city council or with any representative of a city department or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in a building which has been ordered to be vacated, repaired, rehabilitated or demolished and removed, or with any person to whom any such building has been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this chapter whenever any such representative of the city council, representative of the city, purchaser or person having any interest or estate in such building is engaged in vacating, repairing, rehabilitating or demolishing and removing any such building pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work as authorized or directed pursuant hereto. Any person who violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 1922 (part), 1987)  
Chapter 15.60 - TEMPORARY USE PERMITS 
Sections: 
 
15.60.005 - Description, purpose and definitions. 
A.  Certain temporary uses, structures or activities that benefit the public at large are often found to be necessary for limited periods of time, but the installation or performance of which, if permitted on a long-term basis, may not be in keeping with the intent and purpose of the zoning, building, fire and other applicable codes. Therefore, the city council adopts this chapter as a vehicle for regulating those certain temporary activities that benefit the public at large without the strict application of municipal code regulations regarding noise, streets and traffic, and land use. Accordingly, temporary use permits shall be authorized pursuant to the procedures in this chapter as an administrative process to provide for the orderly and effective management and regulation of those special events, specialized structures or special activities. 
B.  The issuance of a temporary use permit (sometimes hereafter "permit") in conformity with the procedures outlined in this chapter constitutes authorization for the permittee and its agents, officers and employees to depart from the strict requirements of this code, so long as the conditions of the permit are observed. Except as allowed by permit issued pursuant to this chapter, no person may otherwise violate or contravene the provisions and requirements of this code. 
C.  Definitions. As used in this chapter: 
"Congested traffic area" includes the following streets: National City Boulevard from the northern city limits to the southern city limits; Highland Avenue from Division Street to 30th Street; Eighth Street from Harbor Drive to Paradise Valley Road; and Plaza Boulevard from National City Boulevard to Palm Avenue. 
"Demonstration" means any gathering or procession of persons which does not include animals, motorized equipment or vehicles, upon public streets, sidewalks or public property for the purpose of first amendment expressive activity. The terms "parade" and "demonstration" within this chapter are mutually exclusive. 
"Expressive activity" means and includes all conduct whose sole or principal object is the expression, dissemination or communication by verbal, visual, literary or auditory means of opinions, views or ideas. It is conduct characterized as speech which is protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution, and includes public oratory and the distribution of literature. 
"Parade" means any march, procession or assembly, the conduct of which does not or would not comply with normal and usual traffic regulation or controls, and which does or will consist of any number of persons, animals or vehicles, or any combination thereof, upon any public street, sidewalk or alley. 
"Special event" means any organized activity conducted for a common or collective purpose, use or benefit which involves the utilization of, or has an impact upon, public property or facilities and the need for providing municipal and public safety services in response to the event. The term "special event," when used within this chapter, also includes a "special use," unless the context requires otherwise. 
"Special use" means the erection of a structure, or a particularized utilization of or activity on public or private property, which, as proposed, does not or would not comply with the provisions of building, plumbing, mechanical or electrical codes adopted in Title 15, or the land use restrictions in Title 18. 
D.  Examples of special events include, but are not limited to, public concerts, parades, demonstrations, circuses, fairs, festivals, community events, mass participation sports (marathons, bicycle races and tours), block parties, motion picture filming and the like. Additional lists of special events may be further delineated by city council policy adopted by resolution. 
(Ord. 2154 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 1987 § 3 (part), 1989)  
15.60.010 - Administration—Enforcement. 
A.  The city manager, through the building official, shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter and shall report violations to the city attorney. 
B.  The building official shall coordinate the permit application with other departments or agencies having requirements and conditions related to the use for which the temporary use permit is sought. 
C.  The building official shall process all applications, maintain records of temporary use permits issued, and prescribe any additional procedures necessary to implement and conform to the regulations in this chapter. 
D.  No special use shall be permitted to operate or be occupied until all departmental or other agency inspections and requirements are fully completed and approved. 
(Ord. 2154 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 1987 § 3 (part), 1989)  
15.60.015 - Temporary use classes. 
Uses authorized by this chapter are divided into three separate classes, each having a separate administrative process and requirements. The classification of an activity into a particular use class shall be set forth in council policy adopted by resolution. 
A.  Class A use: requires city council approval; 
B.  Class B use: issued and approved by building official; 
C.  Class C use: subject only to business license regulations. 
(Ord. 2154 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 1987 § 3 (part), 1989)  
15.60.020 - Application and processing. 
A.  Applications for Class A and B temporary use permits shall be filed with the building and safety department the following specified minimum number of calendar or working days prior to the activity: 
1.  Class A use (except for parades and photography/motion picture permits): fifteen working days; 
2.  Parades requiring a Class A use permit: ten calendar days; 
3.  Class B use permit: fifteen working days (except photography/motion picture permits); 
4.  Photography/motion picture applications requiring Class A permits: ten working days; Class B permits: two working days. 
B.  The building official shall initiate action for the review of a fully completed application for a temporary use permit within eight calendar days of its receipt. Except for delays necessitated for reviews by other departments or agencies, which reviews shall be expeditiously taken, the building official shall issue or deny a Class B permit no later than ten calendar days following, based upon substantial compliance with the conditions and standards established by Section 15.60.030(D) and (E). Unless mutually agreed otherwise, the failure of the building official to issue the permit within the timelines specified shall constitute denial of a Class B permit. The building officer shall expeditiously process and shall forward any fully completed application for a Class A permit, together with all staff recommendations, to the city council for its action at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting following submittal in sufficient time prior to the event. 
C.  Any specific period of time shall be extended by any delay of the applicant in providing required information necessary for processing the permit application. 
D.  Permit—Issuance—Hearing Request. The city council shall review an application for a Class A temporary use permit at its next regularly scheduled session (normally once a week) following the completion of reviews by all affected city departments, and, unless deferred to a later date at the applicant's request, may approve, approve with modifications or disapprove issuance of the permit, based upon substantial compliance with the conditions and standards established by Section 15.60.030(D) and (E). The decision of the city council shall be final as to all issues involved. 
(Ord. 2154 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 1987 § 3 (part), 1989)  
15.60.025 - Fees. 
A.  The applicant shall submit the following processing and use fees with the completed application: 
1.  Class A and Class B uses: as established in the city fee schedule; 
2.  Class C use: subject only to the business tax license fee administered at the finance department. 
B.  All fees paid to the city for processing permits are nonrefundable. 
C.  Waiver of fees for a Class A or B use may be requested at the time the application is submitted. The city council retains the sole authority to waive fees when it finds that a waiver qualifies under the city council policy for waiver of fees. 
(Ord. 2154 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 2018 § 24, 1991; Ord. 1987 § 3 (part), 1989)  
15.60.030 - Conditions. 
A.  Submittals of site development standards, site plan reviews, environmental impact reviews and public works improvements, any of which are otherwise required for building permits, are not required to be submitted under this chapter as a condition to the issuance of a temporary use permit. The procedures established in this chapter constitute an exemption from those requirements. 
B.  The building official may require evidence that all other related or applicable permits and approvals, such as fire prevention, health and sanitation, building, police, animal regulation, and business licensing, have been obtained as a condition for issuance of any temporary use permit. 
C.  The building official may require submittal of an engineering design for any temporary buildings, and professional certifications regarding the structure and the mechanical, electrical and other equipment and devices associated with the use which demonstrate substantial conformance with applicable codes, as a condition of the application process. 
D.  The applicant is responsible for obtaining approval to sell or serve alcoholic beverages from the California Alcohol Beverage Control (ABC) Department, 1350 Front Street, Room 5056, San Diego, California, (619) 237-7241. The city reserves the right to disapprove the sale or service of alcoholic beverages, notwithstanding approval by the ABC, as a condition to the issuance of the temporary use permit. 
E.  The city council or the building official, as applicable, may attach appropriate conditions and limitations to the issuance of a temporary use permit that are necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare. Such conditions may include but not be limited to: 
1.  Hours of use; 
2.  Noise mitigation and placement of, or restrictions upon, amplified sound; 
3.  Security; 
4.  Trash collection and disposal; 
5.  Occupancy loading of structures; 
6.  Lighting; 
7.  Sanitary facilities and sanitation; 
8.  Traffic control; 
9.  Dust control; 
10.  Insurance; 
11.  Notification to surrounding residents; 
12.  Other related concerns; 
13.  If a parade, the following: 
a.  Starting time, 
b.  The minimum speed, 
c.  The maximum speed, 
d.  The maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade, 
e.  The portions of the street to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade, 
f.  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof. 
F.  The failure to address or comply with any requirements and conditions as specified in subsection (E) of this section, or the reasonable and probable potential for or occurrence of the conditions listed below, shall be grounds for denial of the application or the revocation of an issued permit and related enforcement under this chapter: 
1.  Demonstrated inability or unwillingness by the applicant to comply with the conditions of an issued permit or any previously issued permit for a similar event, either in this jurisdiction or elsewhere; 
2.  Inadequate security personnel or measures; 
3.  Inadequate first-aid, safety, health or sanitation measures; 
4.  Inadequate off-site parking or alternate transportation to minimize adverse effects on traffic circulation and parking in the vicinity of the event; 
5.  Clear and present likelihood or imminent possibility of an occurrence of violent disorderly conduct likely to endanger public health or safety or result in significant property damage; 
6.  Unreasonable interference with another previously permitted event; 
7.  Excessive diversion of police personnel which will or does interfere with the provision of normal services to the remainder of the city; 
8.  If for a parade to be conducted within the congested traffic area that any of the following will occur: 
a.  The parade will interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic along and across its route; 
b.  The conduct of the parade will require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent or interfere with the provision of normal police services to the remainder of the city; 
c.  The conduct of the parade will require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto; 
d.  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; 
e.  The conduct of the parade will unduly interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire; 
f.  The conduct of the parade is reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property; or 
g.  The parade will not disband from its point of termination expeditiously. 
G.  No permit shall be issued nor application be approved which implies that the city is a sponsor or cosponsor of the event unless expressly authorized by the city council or city manager, as applicable. 
(Ord. 2154 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 1987 § 3 (part), 1989)  
15.60.035 - Issuance. 
A.  No temporary use permit is valid until endorsed by the building official. Permits requiring city council review and approval shall not be endorsed by the building official until the city council approval is completed. 
B.  If an appeal on a permit denial or a condition of issuance is taken to the city council, no endorsement shall be made on the permit by the building official until the day following approval action by the city council. 
C.  Permit Granted—Officials Notified. Immediately upon the granting of a permit by the city council, the building official shall send a copy thereof to the following as applicable: 
1.  Chief of police; 
2.  Fire chief; 
3.  City engineer; 
4.  Director of public works; 
5.  General manager or responsible head of each public transportation utility whose regular vehicle routes are affected by the route of any proposed parade or other special event. 
(Ord. 2154 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 1987 § 3 (part), 1989)  
15.60.040 - Duration. 
A.  Temporary use permits shall be valid only for the maximum durations specified as follows: 
Class A Uses: ten days or as limited by the city council; 
Class B Uses: times specified on schedule; 
Class C Uses: times specified on business license. 
B.  The city council has the authority to limit or extend the duration of any Class A, B or C use or activity at the request of the applicant. 
C.  Temporary use permits which are not exercised within the duration specified or are withdrawn by the applicant shall automatically become void. 
(Ord. 2154 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 1987 § 3 (part), 1989)  
15.60.045 - Appeals. 
A.  An applicant may appeal the action of denial or the imposition of conditions by the building official or any city department by filing a written letter of appeal to the city council with the city clerk within ten calendar days of the date of the building official's action stating the reasons therefor. The city clerk shall docket the appeal upon the agenda of the next regularly scheduled council meeting (normally once a week) 
B.  Upon the filing of an appeal, action on the permit shall be withheld until the city council hearing and decision is rendered. The city council shall have the final authority to approve, conditionally approve or deny the temporary use application. 
C.  The city council, on its own motion, may move to modify or rescind a previously granted approval of any temporary use application, and, except for emergency situations, the applicant shall first have the opportunity to show cause to the city council before the approval may be rescinded or modified. In an emergency situation, the city council may suspend or rescind a previously approved permit without prior notification. 
(Ord. 2154 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 1987 § 3 (part), 1989)  
15.60.050 - Revocation and suspension of permit use or activity. 
A.  The building official, upon finding that the conditions specified in Section 15.60.030 exist, that the conditions of any issued permit are being violated, or that extra events or activities beyond those authorized in the permit are being planned or are occurring, may revoke the permit and order the immediate suspension of the activity. Upon the issuance of the order of revocation, all activity shall cease. Any continuation of the activity thereafter is unlawful. 
B.  Upon finding imminent and hazardous threats to public safety, health or welfare caused by any activity covered by the permit, the building official, with police assistance, shall take reasonable steps to physically prevent public access to the site of any use or activity and eliminate the hazards. 
(Ord. 2154 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 1987 § 2 (part), 1989)  
15.60.055 - Reinstatement not authorized following revocation. 
A.  A revoked permit shall not be reinstated. Unless appealed, a new temporary use permit application for the same activity must be made and may not be approved until the causes leading to the prior revocation have been corrected. 
B.  Appeals from permit revocations may be made in accordance with Section 15.60.045. The filing of an appeal from a revocation or suspension of an activity covered under the temporary use permit does not permit the activity to continue pending the hearing and decision by the city council. All activity must cease until such time as the appeal is decided in the appellant's favor. 
(Ord. 2154 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 1987 § 2 (part), 1989)  
15.60.060 - Cost recovery fees. 
A.  Pursuant to council policy adopted by resolution, applicants for temporary use permits may be charged cost recovery fees established in the city fee schedule to recapture the city's actual costs for furnishing public services, personnel or equipment for a special event, including salaries and overhead. Fees for police services shall not be charged solely for the protection of the participants or bystanders in parades or demonstrations or other special events determined to be expressive activity, but cost recovery fees may be charged for providing traffic control and other related safety equipment and services for special event activity on the public streets. 
B.  Revenue Sharing. The city reserves the right to require promoters of special events conducted on public property or streets and for which an admission fee is charged to pay a designated percentage of the gross receipts to the city as a condition of the issuance of the permit. Separate regulations shall be as prescribed by council policy, or as negotiated by the city manager with council approval. 
(Ord. 2154 § 2 (part), 1999)  
15.60.065 - Insurance, indemnification and surety bonds. 
To minimize the risk of loss to the city or impacted residents as a result of the conduct of an event pursuant to this chapter, the risk manager may require an applicant to execute an indemnification agreement in a form approved by the city attorney, and to provide proof of insurance and a surety bond or deposit in the amount and form approved by the risk manager. Any requirement to provide insurance specified under this chapter does not constitute the discharge of a duty owed by the city, and inures only to the benefit of the city and not to or for the benefit of any private individual or group. The following standards shall apply to the requirement to provide insurance under this chapter: 
A.  Vehicle Insurance. Vehicle insurance meeting the minimum standards specified in the vehicle code shall be provided whenever an event involves the use of vehicles on public streets or public property. 
B.  Comprehensive General Liability Insurance. Proof of comprehensive general liability insurance in the minimum amount of one million dollars combined single limits, together with any special endorsements required by the nature of the event or equipment—such as workers compensation for employees or products liability endorsements for food or beverage sales—shall be provided, except as follows: 
1.  Expressive activity protected under the first amendment which does not involve animals, structural construction, pyrotechnics or mechanical equipment (other than sound equipment), and for which no fee is charged or donation exacted as a condition of admittance or participation, is exempted; 
2.  For all other events, upon a determination by the risk manager that a greater or lesser amount of insurance for personal injury or property damage is necessary or permissible, according to generally accepted, objective risk management principles applicable to the nature of the event or the equipment to be employed. 
C.  Indemnification Agreement. The risk manager shall require an applicant exempted from the insurance requirements of subsection (B) of this section to execute an indemnification and hold harmless agreement with the city, and may require other applicants to do the same when appropriate to the nature of the event. 
D.  Security for Damages or Surety Bonds. The city council or the building official may require a security deposit to be posted, either in cash, negotiable instrument or surety bond issued by a licensed surety, to cover actual or reasonably anticipated damage to public property in an amount not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars. 
(Ord. 2154 § 2 (part), 1999)  
15.60.070 - Violations. 
A.  Violations of any of the provisions of this chapter are punishable as misdemeanors and carry the penalties prescribed in Chapter 1.20 of this code. 
B.  Except as provided in this chapter it is unlawful and a misdemeanor: (1) to conduct a special event without a temporary use permit; (2) to interfere with or join a special event for which a temporary use permit has been issued without the authorization of the permittee; or (3) to continue to participate in or conduct a special event after the temporary use permit has been revoked or suspended. 
(Ord. 2154 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 1987 § 2 (part), 1989)  
15.60.075 - Exemptions. 
Demonstrations do not require a permit, but it shall be the obligation of the organizer to notify the chief of police at least twenty-four hours in advance of any scheduled demonstration. Demonstrations are required to observe all laws regulating public health and safety, the failure of which may subject the assemblage to be declared an unlawful assembly and the participants to be subject to dispersal and arrest as provided by law. 
(Ord. 2154 § 2 (part), 1999)  
Chapter 15.70 - GRADING[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, adopted Jan. 17, 2017, amended Ch. 15.70 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said chapter to read as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.70, §§ 15.70.005—15.70.170, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2013-2385, § 3, adopted Dec. 3, 2013. 
Prior ordinance history— Ords. 2054, 2164, 2250, 2306 and 2010-2355. 
 
15.70.005 - Adoption of Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code—Amended. 
There is adopted by the city council for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing the excavation and grading on private property, and the issuance of permits, and providing for the inspection thereof, Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code, subject to the amendments, additions and deletions set forth in this chapter based on local climatic, geological, or topographical conditions. A copy of this adopted code is on file in the engineering department. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard life, limb, property, and the public welfare by regulating grading and other earthwork activities, or by controlling existing fills and excavations, and the construction of retaining walls, drainage facilities on private property and to ensure that soil erosion, sedimentation, and storm water runoff are regulated to reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, pollutants entering the storm water conveyance system and waters of the state to protect water quality. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.015 - Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code, Section J101 "General", Subsection J101.1 "Scope"—Amended. 
Section J101, Subsection 1 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
J101.1 Scope . This Ordinance sets forth rules and regulations to control excavation, grading, drainage, earthwork construction, including fills and embankments, and retaining wall construction; establishes the administrative procedure for issuance of permits; and provides for approval of plans and inspection of grading and retaining wall construction. Where conflicts occur between the technical requirements of this chapter and the geotechnical report, the geotechnical report shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.020 - Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code, Section J102 "Definitions"—Amended. 
For the purposes of Chapter 15.70, the following definitions supplement, or modify certain definitions in Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code, Section J102. All other definitions listed in the 2016 Building Code shall remain applicable. 
APPROVAL —The term "approval" does not constitute certification of the project as a whole in terms of completeness, accuracy, design and construction standards, as shown on the plans. 
AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION — means the City Engineer of the City of National City, or designee. 
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPS — means schedules of activities, pollution treatment practices or devices, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices or devices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to Storm Water, Receiving Waters, or the Storm Water Conveyance System. Best Management Practices also include but are not limited to treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. Best Management Practices may include any type of pollution prevention and pollution control measure that can help to achieve compliance with this Chapter. Best Management Practices may include any type of pollution prevention and pollution control measure, which the City Engineer finds, is necessary to reduce pollutants entering the Waters of the State to the Maximum Extent Practicable. 
CITY ENGINEER — means the City Engineer or designee. 
CIVIL ENGINEER — means a professional engineer registered in the State of California to practice in the field of civil engineering as defined in Section 6731 of the California Business and Professions Code. He or she is the person directly responsible for the project design, plan certification, and construction supervision. 
DRAINAGE PLAN — means a plan which shows existing and proposed site drainage within a property that is to be developed or rough graded. The drainage plan shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer, an architect, or other qualified and licensed professionals, and shall comply with the standards and requirements of the City Engineer. If, for a given development, no grading is proposed, or the earthwork quantity involved in the grading is below the established limit of this ordinance, and for which a grading plan is not required, then as a minimum, a drainage plan shall be submitted for the development. 
EROSION CONTROL PLAN — means a plan prepared and signed and stamped/sealed by a civil engineer competent in the preparation of such plans and knowledgeable about current erosion control methods. The plan shall provide for protection of exposed soils, prevention of discharge of sediment, and desiltation of runoff at frequent intervals along flowage areas, at entrances to storm drains, at entrances to streets and driveways, and at the exit of the area being graded. 
EROSION CONTROL SYSTEM — means any combination of desilting facilities, retarding basins, flow decelerates, and/or erosion protection (including effective planning and the maintenance thereof) to protect the project site, adjacent private property, watercourses, public facilities, graded improvements, existing natural facilities, archaeological artifacts, and relieve waters of suspended sediments or debris prior to discharge from the site. 
GRADE — means the vertical location of the ground surface, in relation to a National City benchmark elevation. 
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE or "MEP" — means the standard established in Clean Water Act section 402(p)(3)(B)(iii) that municipal dischargers of storm water must meet. MEP is an acceptability standard for Best Management Practices based on a level of pollutant reduction that can be achieved by the most effective set of BMPs that can be implemented and still remain practicable; MEP generally emphasizes pollution prevention and source control BMPs as the first line of defense in combination with treatment methods as a backup. 
PERMITTEE — means any person, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, non-profit entity, joint venture, association of any type, public entity or any other legal entity, which submits an application for a permit pursuant to this Chapter. 
POLLUTANT — means any agent that may cause or contribute to the degradation of water quality, including, but not limited to, earth materials. 
RAINY SEASON — means the period beginning October 1st and ending April 30th in the next calendar year. The remainder of the year is the dry season. 
RETAINING WALL PLAN — means a plan prepared by a registered civil engineer, an architect, or other qualified professional, which shows pertinent top and bottom of wall elevations and the wall profile, together with the existing and proposed ground elevations and profile at the wall. The plan shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements set forth by the City Engineer, and shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer. The plan shall be required for walls in excess of 3 feet (3') in height, measured from the top of the footing, to the top of the wall, and for walls less than or equal to 3 feet (3') in height measured from the top of the footing, to the top of the wall, supporting a surcharge or a sloped backfill. The retaining walls shall be in accordance with the Regional Standard Drawings, and the Standard Specifications, or shall be specially engineered. 
STORM WATER CONVEYANCE SYSTEM — means private and public drainage facilities within the city by which storm water may be conveyed to waters of the United States, including but not limited to, streets, roads, catch basins, natural and artificial channels, natural and artificial drainage features, aqueducts, canyons, stream beds, gullies, curbs, gutters, ditches, and storm drains. Historic and current development makes use of natural drainage patterns and features as conveyances for urban runoff. Urban streams used in this manner are part of the Storm Water Conveyance System regardless of whether they are natural, man-made, or partially modified features. 
WATERS OF THE STATE — means any water, surface or underground, including saline waters within the boundaries of California, including a municipal storm sewer system (MS4). 
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES — has the same meaning as in 40 Code of Federal Regulations section 122.2. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.025 - Hazards and safety precautions. 
If, at any stage of work, the city engineer determines that authorized grading is likely to endanger any public or private property or result in the deposition of debris on any public way or interfere with any existing drainage course, the city engineer may specify and require reasonable safety precautions to avoid the danger. The permittee shall be responsible for removing excess soil and debris deposited upon adjacent and downstream public or private property resulting from permittee's grading operations. Soil and debris shall be removed and damage to adjacent and downstream property repaired as directed by the city engineer. Erosion and siltation control shall require temporary or permanent siltation basins, energy dissipaters, or other measures as field conditions warrant, whether or not such measures are a part of approved plans. The permittee shall incur cost associated with any work outlined in this section. 
The city engineer shall not issue a grading permit in any case where the city engineer finds that the work, as proposed by the applicant, will damage any private or public property, or interfere with any existing drainage course in a manner which may cause damage to any adjacent property, or result in the depositing of debris on any public way, or create an unreasonable hazard to person or property, or cause or contribute to an exceedance of state water quality objectives, or fail to reduce pollutants from the site to the maximum extent practicable. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.030 - Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code, Section J103 "Permits Required", Subsection J103.2.1 "Exemptions"—Amended. 
Section J103.2.1 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
1.  When approved by the City Engineer, grading in an isolated or self-contained area, provided there is no danger to the public, and such grading will not adversely affect adjoining properties. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.035 - Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code, Section J103 "Permits Required", Subsection J103.2.2 "Exemptions"—Amended. 
Section J103.2.2 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
2.  An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a building, retaining wall or other structure authorized by a valid building permit. This shall not exempt any fill made with the material from such excavation or exempt any excavation having an unsupported height greater than 5 feet (1525 mm) after the completion of such structure. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.040 - Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code, Section J103 "Permits Required", Subsection J103.2.5 "Exemptions"—Amended. 
Section J103.2.5 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
5.  Excavations for wells or trenches for utilities on private property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.045 - Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code, Section J103 "Permits Required", Subsection J103.2.6 "Exemptions"—Amended. 
Section J103.2.6 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
6.  Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing or stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay where established and provided for by law, provided such operations do not affect the lateral support or increase the stresses in or pressure upon any adjacent or contiguous property, excepting the dumping and stockpiling of dirt and rubble, which is strictly prohibited in National City. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.055 - Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code, Section J103 "Permits Required", Subsection J103.2.8 "Exemptions"—Added. 
Section J103.2.8 is added to the 2016 California Building Code to read as follows: 
8.  A fill less than 1 foot (305 mm) in depth and placed on natural terrain with a slope flatter than 1 unit vertical in 5 units horizontal (20% slope), or less than 3 feet (914 mm) in depth, not intended to support structures, that does not exceed 50 cubic yards (38.3 m 3 ) on any one lot and does not obstruct a drainage course. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.060 - Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code, Section J104 "Permit Application and Submittals", Subsection J104.5 "Engineered Grading Requirements"—Added. 
Section J104.5 is added to the 2016 California Building Code to read as follows: 
J104.5 Engineered Grading Requirements —Application for a grading permit shall be accompanied by a work schedule including details of the hauling operation, size of trucks, haul route, dust and debris control measures and time and frequency of haul trips; four sets of plans and specifications; and two sets of supporting data consisting of a soils engineering report, engineering geology report (if necessary), drainage study, structural calculations, cost estimate and applicable fees, and other pertinent information as may be required by the City Engineer and all relevant information listed in the plan checklists as developed by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.065 - Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code, Section J104 "Permit Application and Submittals", Subsection J104.6 "Regular Grading and Retaining Wall Construction Requirements"—Added. 
Section J104.6 is added to the 2016 California Building Code to read as follows: 
J104.6 Regular Grading and Retaining Wall Construction Requirements . Each application for a grading or retaining wall permit shall be accompanied by four sets of plans and specifications, in sufficient clarity, to indicate the nature and extent of the work, as well as supporting data consisting of a soils engineering report, engineering geology report (if necessary), drainage study, structural calculations, cost estimate, and other pertinent information as required by the City Engineer. All grading plans shall be prepared and signed and stamped/sealed by a registered civil engineer and by a registered soil engineer, or registered civil engineer competent in soils engineering. The plans shall include the following information: 
1.  Location of work; 
2.  Name of the person who prepared the plans; 
3.  General vicinity of the proposed site; 
4.  Limiting dimensions and depth of cut and fill with input and export values; 
5.  Location of any buildings or structures where work is to be performed, and the location of any buildings or structures within 15 feet (15') of the proposed grading; 
6.  All other relevant information listed in the plan checklists as developed by the City Engineer. 
The City Engineer may waive the requirement for a grading permit when the proposed grading is on a single lot or parcel not proposed for further subdivision and in the opinion of the City Engineer, the proposed grading entails no hazard to any adjacent property, does not necessitate construction of extensive drainage structures or erosion control facilities, and does not interfere in any way with existing natural or improved drainage courses or channels. 
A retaining wall less than or equal to three feet (3') in height measured from the top of the footing to the top of the wall, when no surcharge is present, the backfill is level, and when not an integral part of a building shall be exempt from a grading permit. However, the construction of said retaining wall shall comply with the Regional Standard Drawings, and is subject to inspection by the City Engineer or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.070 - Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code, Section J104 "Permit Application and Submittals", Subsection J104.7 "Licenses and Insurance"—Added. 
Section J104.7 is added to the 2016 California Building Code to read as follows: 
J104.7 Licenses and Insurance . Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant or the applicant's contractor shall present to the City Engineer evidence of the following: 
I.  Coverage of general liability insurance and worker's compensation in the amounts required by the City Engineer. Such insurance policy shall name the City of National City and its elected officials, officers, agents, and employees as additional insured. The actual endorsements or policy language regarding automatic additional insureds must be provided. 
II.  City business license, which may be obtained from the National City Finance Department. 
III.  Appropriate state contractor license. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.075 - Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code, Section J104 "Permit Application and Submittals", Subsection J104.8 "Conditions"—Added. 
Section J104.8 of the 2016 California Building Code is added to read as follows: 
A.  Standards . All grading, drainage, and retaining wall work done under this ordinance shall be in accordance with the approved plans and the conditions of the required permits. The work shall conform to the Standards of the City of National City, the County of San Diego Regional Standard Drawings (latest adopted edition), the Public Works Inspection Manual (latest adopted edition), the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction (latest adopted edition), and any other conditions as may be determined by the City Engineer to be applicable to the work. Deviations from the requirements of these standards may be permitted by the City Engineer, based upon written reports and recommendations by qualified authorities. 
B.  Water Quality . It shall be a condition of every permit issued under this Chapter that the Permittee shall comply with all the provisions of the City of National City Watercourse Protection, Storm Water Management and Discharge Control Ordinance in Chapter 14.22 of this code. 
C.  Minimum BMPs . The BMPs required by the City of National City Storm Water Best Management Practices Manual adopted in this Municipal Code shall be the minimum BMPs required for issuance of a grading permit and additional BMPs may be required by the City Engineer as a condition of issuance of the grading permit. 
D.  Grading Plan Requirements . All grading plans, regardless of the date of submittal, shall include an erosion control plan designed to limit erosion of all disturbed portions of the property and to eliminate the transport of soil onto adjacent properties or into streets, storm drains, or drainage ways. 
E.  Standard Urban Storm Water Mitigation Plan (SUSMP) Checklist . A SUSMP checklist as created by the City Engineer shall be submitted with plans. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.080 - Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code, Section J105 "Inspections", Subsection J105.3—Added. 
Section J105.3 is added to the California Building Code to read as follows: 
J105.3 The Permittee or his agent shall notify the City Engineer: 
A.  Initial inspection (pre-construction conference) - when he is ready to begin grading and not less than forty-eight (48) hours before any grading is to be commenced. The pre-construction meeting shall be attended by the owner of the property, the soils engineer and the engineering geologist (when necessary) the design engineer, the grading contractor, and the building and engineer inspectors. 
B.  Toe of fill inspection. After the natural ground is exposed and prepared to receive fill, but before any fill is placed. 
C.  Excavation Inspection - After excavation is started, but before the vertical depth of the excavation exceeds 10 feet. 
D.  Fill Inspection. After fill and placement is started, but before the vertical height of the lifts exceeds 10 feet. 
E.  Drainage Device Inspection - Before and after forms and reinforcement are in place, but before any concrete is placed. 
F.  Rough Grading. Upon completion of all rough grading, including installation of all drainage structures and other protective devices, at least twenty-four hours before inspection is to be made. 
G.  Final Inspection. Upon completion and approval by the project Civil Engineer and Soils Engineer of all work shown on the plans and the permit including the installation of all drainage or other structures. 
H.  In addition to the above, inspections for retaining walls shall be per the San Diego County Regional Standard Drawings or special Engineering. 
I.  Modification of approved plans, if changes are to be made in the approved plans during construction, the applicant, or his agent, shall submit an engineering change order to the inspector or to the City Engineer, for review and approval. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.085 - Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code, Section J106 "Excavations", Subsection J106.1.2 "Exceptions"—Deleted. 
Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code, Section J106.1.2 "Exceptions" is deleted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.090 - Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code, Section J107 "Fills", Subsection 1 "General"—Deleted. 
Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code, Section J107 "Fills", Subsection 1 "General" is deleted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.095 - Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code, Section J107 "Fills", Subsection 2 "Surface Preparation"—Amended. 
Subsection J107.2 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
J107.2 Surface Preparation . Fill slopes shall not be constructed on natural slopes steeper than 1 unit vertical in 2 units horizontal (50% slope). The ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, non-complying fill, topsoil and other unsuitable materials scarifying to provide a bond with the new fill and, where slopes are steeper than 1 unit vertical in 5 units horizontal (20% slope) and the height is greater than 5 feet (1524 mm), by benching into sound bedrock or other competent material as determined by the soils engineer. The bench under the toe of fill shall be at least 10 feet (3048 mm) wide. The area beyond the toe of fill shall be at least 10 feet (3048 mm) wide but the cut shall be made before placing the fill and acceptance by the soils engineer or engineering geologist or both, as a suitable foundation for fill. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.100 - Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code, Section J107 "Fills", Subsection J107.4 "Fill material"—Amended. 
Subsection J107.4 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
J107.4 Fill material . Organic material shall not be permitted in fills. Except as permitted by the City Engineer, no rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension greater than 12 inches (305 mm) shall be buried or placed in fills. 
Exception: The City Engineer may permit placement of larger rock when the soils engineer properly devises a method of placement, and continuously inspects its placement and approved the fill stability. The following conditions shall also apply: 
1.  Prior to issuance of the grading permit, potential rock disposal areas shall be delineated on the grading plan. 
2.  Rock sizes greater than 12 inches (305 mm) in maximum dimension shall be 10 feet (3048 mm) or more below grade, measured vertically. 
3.  Rocks shall be placed so as to assure filling of all voids with well-graded soil. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.105 - Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code, Section J108 "Setbacks", Subsection J108.1 "General"—Amended. 
Subsection J108.1 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
J108.1 General . Cut and fill slopes shall be set back from the property lines in accordance with this section. Setback dimensions shall be measured perpendicular to the property line and shall be as shown in amended FIGURE J108.1 as shown in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.110 - Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code, Section J108, "Setbacks", Subsection J108.2 "Top of Slope"—Amended. 
Subsection J108.2 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
J108.2 Top of slope . The setback at the top of a cut slope shall not be less than that shown in amended Figure J108.1 as shown in this chapter, or than is required to accommodate any required interceptor drains, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.115 - Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code, Section J108 "Setbacks", Figure J108.1, "Drainage Dimensions"—Amended. 
Figure J108.1 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.120 - Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code, Section J108 "Setbacks", Subsection J108.3 "Slope Protection"—Amended. 
Subsection J108.3 of the 2016 Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
J108.3 Slope Protection . The toe of fill slope shall be made not nearer to the site boundary line than one-half the height of the slope with a minimum of 2 feet (610 mm) and a maximum of 20 feet (6096 mm). Where a fill slope is to be located near the site boundary and the adjacent off-site property is developed, special precautions shall be incorporated in the work as the City Engineer deems necessary to protect the adjoining property from damage as a result of such grading. These precautions may include but are not limited to: 
1.  Additional setbacks. 
2.  Provision for retaining or slough walls. 
3.  Mechanical or chemical treatment of the fill slope surface to minimize erosion. 
4.  Provisions for the control of surface waters. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.125 - Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code, Section J109 "Drainage and Terracing", Subsection J109.4 "Drainage across property lines"—Amended. 
Subsection J109.4 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
J109.4 Drainage Across property lines . Surface runoff shall not be permitted to flow from one lot to another, unless proper drainage agreements between affected property owners are executed and submitted to the City Engineer. Such agreements shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer, and recorded prior to issuance of the grading permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.130 - Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code, Section J109 "Drainage and Terracing", Subsection J109.5 "Surface Run-off Interception"—Added. 
Subsection J109.5 is added to the 2016 California Building Code to read as follows: 
J109.5 Surface Run-off Interception . Surface run-off from new landscaping areas shall be intercepted by and directed to approved drainage facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.135 - Appendix J of the 2016 California Building Code, Section J109 "Drainage and Terracing", Subsection J109.6 "Easements and Encumbrances"—Added. 
Subsection J109.6 is added to the 2016 California Building Code to read as follows: 
J109.6 Easements and Encumbrances . For all private water courses where the continuous functioning of the drainageway is essential to the protection and use of multiple properties, a covenant, a maintenance agreement, and/or deed restriction shall be recorded by the applicant, placing the responsibility for the maintenance of the drainageway(s) on the owners of record of each respective lot affected. Permanent off-site drainage easements, as required by the City Engineer, shall be acquired by the applicant. Such easements shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer and recorded prior to issuance of the grading permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.140 - Appendix J of the California Building Code, Section J110 "Erosion Control", Subsection J110.33 "Storm Water Erosion and Sediment"—Added. 
Subsection J110.3 is added to the 2016 California Building Code to read as follows: 
J110.3 Stormwater Erosion and Sediment . 
A.  Plans for an erosion control system shall be prepared and submitted for the review and approval of the City Engineer as a part of any application for a grading permit. The erosion control system shall comply with the requirements of the latest National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit and Chapter 14.22 of this code to satisfy the requirements for erosion control and eliminate the discharge of sediment and pollutants. The erosion control plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
1.  Name, address, and a twenty-four-hour phone number of the owner or responsible party, and the person or contractor responsible for installing and maintaining the erosion control system and performing emergency erosion control work; 
2.  The name, address, and signature of the Civil Engineer or person who prepared the plan; 
3.  All desilting basins, debris basins, silt traps, and other desilting, velocity retarding and protection facilities necessary to adequately protect the site and downstream properties from erosion and its effects, preserve natural hydrologic features, and preserve riparian buffers and corridors; 
4.  The streets, easements, drains, and other improvements; 
5.  The location and placement of gravel bags, diverters, check dams, slope planting, drains, and other erosion controlling devices and measures; 
6.  Access routes to all such erosion control facilities and how access shall be maintained during inclement weather. 
B.  Erosion control system standards shall be as follows: 
1.  The faces of cut-and-fill slopes and the project site shall be prepared and maintained to control against erosion. Where cut slopes are not subject to erosion due to the erosion-resistant character of the materials, such protection may be omitted upon approval of the City Engineer. 
2.  Where necessary, temporary and/or permanent erosion control devices such as desilting basins, check dams, cribbing, riprap, or other devices or methods as approved by the City Engineer, shall be employed to control erosion, prevent discharge of sediment, and provide safety. 
3.  Temporary desilting basins constructed of compacted earth shall be compacted to a relative compaction of ninety percent of maximum density. A gravel bag or plastic spillway must be installed for overflow, as designed by the engineer of work, to avoid failure of the earthen dam. A soils engineering report prepared by the Soils Engineer, including the type of field-testing performed, location and results of testing shall be submitted to the City Engineer for approval upon completion of the desilting basins. 
4.  Desilting facilities shall be provided at drainage outlets from the graded site, and shall be designed to provide a desilting capacity capable of containing the anticipated runoff for a period of time adequate to allow reasonable settlement of suspended particles. 
5.  Desilting basins shall be constructed around the perimeter of projects, whenever feasible, and shall provide improved maintenance access from paved roads during wet weather. Grading cost estimates must include maintenance and ultimate removal costs for temporary desilting basins. 
6.  The erosion control provisions shall take into account drainage patterns during the current and future phases of grading. 
7.  All removable protective devices shown shall be in place at the end of each working day when there is a fifty percent chance of rain within a forty-eight hour period. If the Permittee does not provide the required installation or maintenance of erosion control structures within two hours of notification at the twenty-four hour number on the plans, the City Engineer may order City crews to do the work or may issue contracts for such work and charge the cost of this work along with reasonable overhead charges to the cash deposits or other instruments implemented for this work without further notification to the owner. No additional work on the project except erosion control work may be performed until the Permittee restores the full amount drawn from the deposit. 
8.  At any time of year, an inactive site shall be fully protected from erosion and discharges of sediment. Flat areas with less than five percent grade shall be fully covered unless sediment control is provided through desiltation basins at all project discharge points. A site is considered inactive if construction activities have ceased for a period of ten or more consecutive days. 
9.  Permittee shall implement the following minimum erosion prevention methods to minimize the erosion potential: 
a.  If feasible, Permittee shall grade only during the dry season, especially in areas at high risk for erosion. 
b.  Permittee shall minimize the length of time that soils are left exposed to elements of wind and water. 
c.  If grading must occur during the rainy season, the total area of exposed soil shall be reduced during the rainy season. 
d.  Critical areas, such as drainage channels, streams, and natural watercourses shall be properly protected. 
e.  Exposed areas shall be stabilized as quickly as feasible. 
f.  Sufficient waste disposal facilities shall be provided for all proposed activities. 
g.  Sufficient storage facilities shall be provided for all materials and equipment. 
h.  Permittee shall ensure that materials used for erosion and sediment control are on site at all times during the rainy season. 
i.  All slopes shall be protected against erosion and any unstable slopes shall be stabilized. 
j.  Erosion prevention shall be considered the most important erosion control measure with sediment controls as a backup. 
10.  During Dry Season (May 1 through September 30), Permittee shall implement the following minimum erosion prevention methods to minimize the erosion potential: 
a.  Adequate perimeter protection BMPs must be installed and maintained. 
b.  Adequate sediment control BMPs must be installed and maintained. 
c.  Adequate BMPs designed to control off-site sediment tracking must be installed and maintained. 
d.  At a minimum, 125% of the materials needed to install standby BMPs necessary to completely protect exposed portions of the site from erosion and prevent sediment discharges must be stored on the site. 
e.  An approved "weather triggered" response plan is mandated for implementation in the event that a predicted storm event has a 50% chance of rain. The proponent must have the capacity to deploy the standby BMPs within 48 hours of the predicted storm event. 
f.  All slopes must be equipped with erosion prevention BMPs as soon as slopes are completed for any portion of the site. 
g.  Cleared or graded areas left exposed at any given time are limited to the amount of acreage that the project proponent can adequately protect prior to a predicted storm event. 
11.  During Wet Season (October 1 through April 30), Permittee shall implement the following BMPs, in addition to the Dry Season Requirements: 
a.  Perimeter protection and sediment control BMPs must be upgraded if necessary to provide sufficient protection for storms. 
b.  Adequate erosion prevention BMPs must be installed and established for all completed slopes prior to October 1 and maintained throughout the wet season. If a BMP fails, it must be repaired, improved, or replaced with an acceptable alternate as soon as it is safe to do so. 
c.  The amount of exposed soil allowed at one time shall not exceed standby erosion and sediment control BMP capacity. 
d.  An incomplete disturbed area that is not being actively graded must be fully protected from erosion if left for 10 days or more. 
12.  BMP Maintenance. All BMPs for erosion prevention and sediment control shall be functional at all times. Prior to the rainy season and after each major storm, all source control and structural treatment BMPs shall be inspected by the Permittee to assure the functionality and effectiveness. Proper BMP maintenance shall be conducted throughout the life of the project. 
13.  No grading shall be allowed from October 1st through the following April 30th on any site if the City Engineer determines that erosion, mudflow or sediment of silt discharge may adversely affect water quality, downstream properties, drainage courses, storm drains, streets, easements, or public or private facilities or improvements unless an approved erosion control system has been implemented on the site. If the City determines that it is necessary for the City to cause erosion control measures to be installed or cleanup to be done, the Permittee shall pay all of the City's direct and indirect costs including extra inspection, supervision, and reasonable overhead charges. 
14.  Preservation of Natural Hydrologic Features, Riparian Buffers and Corridors. All natural hydrologic features and riparian buffer zones and corridors must be preserved to eliminate or minimize runoff from construction sites. 
15.  Phased Grading. Grading shall be phased whenever the City Engineer finds that phasing is feasible and necessary to protect the Waters of the State. Areas that are cleared and graded shall be minimized to only portions of the site that are necessary for construction, and the exposure time of disturbed soil areas shall be minimized. 
16.  Cleared or graded areas left exposed at any given time are limited to the amount of acreage that the project proponent can adequately protect prior to a predicted storm event or 17 acres, whichever is smaller, unless the disturbance of a larger area is approved in writing by the City engineer. In the event that a project proponent requests approval to disturb an area greater than 17 acres, the project proponent shall first submit to the City Engineer, written documentation describing how it will ensure that discharges of pollutants are reduced to the Maximum Extent Practicable (MEP) and prevents discharges of pollutants that would cause or contribute to a violation of water quality standards despite the larger disturbed area. 
17.  Advanced Treatment. 
a.  Treatment for sediment is required. For the purpose of this requirement, exceptional threat to water quality shall be defined as a site, which meets all of the following, except as provided in number 16 above: 
1.  A portion of the site is located within or directly adjacent to receiving waters listed on the CWA Section 303(d) list of Water Quality Limited Segments as impaired for sedimentation or turbidity; 
2.  Disturbance is greater than five acres, including all phases of the development; 
3.  Disturbed slopes are steeper than 4:1 (horizontal:vertical), higher than 10 feet, and drain to the 303(d) listed receiving water; 
4.  Contains a predominance of soils with USDA-NRCS Erosion factors if greater than or equal to 0.4. 
Alternatively, applicants may perform a RUSLE or MUSLE analysis to prove to the City Engineer's satisfaction that advanced treatment is not required. 
b.  Even if based on the criteria in number 16, above, advanced treatment would not ordinarily be required, advanced treatment may be required at the discretion of the City Engineer based on a record of noncompliance. 
c.  Treatment effluent water quality shall meet or exceed the water quality objectives for turbidity, pH, toxicity, and any other parameter deemed necessary by the City Engineer, as listed in the Water Quality Control Plan for the San Diego Basin for inland surface waters and lagoons and estuaries for the appropriate hydrologic unit. 
d.  Applicant shall provide design, operations and maintenance schedule, monitoring plan, certification of training of staff to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
18.  Establishment of Permanent Vegetation. 
a.  General. The face of all cut and fill slopes, in excess of 3 feet in vertical height, but only final slopes of any borrow pit, shall be planted and maintained with a ground cover or other planting to protect the slopes against erosion and instability. Planting shall commence as soon as slopes are completed on any portion of the site and shall be established upon all slopes prior to the final approval of the grading. In order to minimize the period during which a cut or filled surface remains exposed, such planting shall provide for rapid short-term coverage of the slope as well as long-term permanent coverage. Planting materials and procedures shall conform to regulations adopted by the City Engineer. The City Engineer may approve other plant materials as specified by a landscape architect. The Permittee shall maintain such planting until it is well established as determined by the City Engineer. 
b.  Minimum Requirements. In addition to planting with ground cover, slopes in excess of fifteen (15) feet in vertical height shall be planted with shrubs in 2¼ inch pots or trees having a one (1) gallon minimum size at ten (10) feet on center in both directions on the slope. The City Engineer may vary the plant and planting pattern, but not the quantity, upon the recommendation of landscape architect and approval. 
c.  Where cut slopes are not subject to erosion due to their rocky character or where the slopes are protected with pneumatically applied concrete mortar or otherwise treated to protect against erosion and instability to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, the requirement of this subsection may be waived by the City Engineer. 
d.  The City Engineer may require the applicant to temporarily stabilize and reseed disturbed soil areas to protect the Waters of the State. If grass or ground cover is not established by the beginning of the wet season, temporary erosion control measures such as erosion control mats or blankets shall be installed on the slopes. 
19.  Irrigation System Requirements. 
a.  General. Except for agricultural grading permits, all slopes to be constructed, but only final slopes of any borrow pit, shall be provided with an irrigation system which shall be used by the Permittee to promote the growth of plants to protect the slopes against erosion. The Permittee shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of the irrigation system until the City Engineer determines that the system has been properly installed and meets the minimum requirements of this section. When the City Engineer finds that a slope less than fifteen (15) feet in height is located in an area as to make hand watering possible, conveniently located hose bibs may be accepted in lieu of the required irrigation system when a hose no longer than fifty (50) feet would be required. 
b.  Minimum Requirements. (1) Plans for the irrigation system shall be in accordance with San Diego Regional Standard Specifications for Sprinkler Irrigation Systems and shall be approved by the National City City Engineer prior to installation. (2) The irrigation system shall be located relative to existing and proposed property lines to ensure that the irrigation system and the slopes sprinkled thereby will both be within the same property boundaries. The irrigation system shall be supplied or be readily converted so as to be supplied through the metered water service line serving each individual property. (3) The irrigation system shall provide uniform coverage for the slope area at a rate of not less than 0.03 inches per hour, nor greater than 0.30 inches per hour. A functional test of the irrigation systems shall be performed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer prior to final approval of the grading. (4) A check valve and balance cock shall be installed in the system where drainage from sprinkler heads will create an erosion problem. (5) Adequate back flow protection devices shall be installed in each irrigation system. Such devices shall be protected against physical damage during construction operations. 
20.  Waiver Of Planting And Irrigation Requirements. The City Engineer may modify or waive the requirements for planting and/or irrigation systems if he/she finds that said requirements would be unreasonable or unnecessary for any of the following reasons: (a) the area is subject to periodic inundation, or (b) water is unavailable to the area such that irrigation would be impractical or impossible, or (c) the area is naturally devoid of vegetation. 
21.  General Construction Permit Requirements. 
a.  Notice of Intent. Permittees required to comply with the State Construction General Storm Water Permit shall maintain on site and make available for inspection on request by the City any state-issued Waste Discharge Identification Number (WDID) for the site, and a copy of the Notice of Intent (NOI) filed with the State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB) pursuant to that permit. 
b.  Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan. Permittees required to prepare a SWPPP under the State General Construction Storm Water Permit must prepare the Plan, implement the Plan and maintain it at the site, readily available for review. Failure to comply with an applicable state-required SWPPP is a violation of this Chapter. 
c.  Facility Monitoring. Permittees required to conduct monitoring under the State Construction General Storm Water Permit must conduct such monitoring in conformance with requirements specified by the State, retain records of such monitoring on site, and make such records available for inspection by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.145 - Grading fees. 
The plan review and permit fees shall be assessed in accordance with the current city of National City Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.146 - Work commencing prior to permit issuance—Added. 
Any person who commences any work where an engineering permit is required prior to obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to an administrative penalty fee equal to the amount of the permit fee that would be required by this code if a permit were to be issued. The administrative penalty fee is in addition to a permit fee. The payment of such administrative penalty shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code or from any penalty prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.150 - Completion of work. 
Final approval shall not be given, grading securities shall not be released, and a notice of completion or certificate of use and occupancy shall not be issued, until all work, including installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices, and all erosion-control measures have been completed in accordance with the final approved grading plan, and the required reports and the as-built plans have been submitted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.155 - Rough grading permit. 
When grading is to be performed on a property for which no prior site development plans have been approved, and on which no other construction is proposed, the applicant shall obtain special approval of the city engineer, as well as the principal planner for such grading. The rough-grading permit thus issued shall be subject to the special requirements of both the city engineer and the principal planner. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.160 - Parking lots. 
Existing or new parking lots, which are exempted from the requirements of a grading permit, shall be paved or resurfaced in accordance with an approved drainage plan. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.165 - Bonds. 
The city engineer shall require a surety bond in the amount of one hundred percent of the engineers' cost estimate to ensure that the work, if not completed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications, will be corrected to eliminate any potentially hazardous conditions. 
In lieu of a surety bond the applicant may file a cash deposit or instrument of credit with the city engineer in an amount equal to that which would be required in the surety bond. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.170 - Violation a misdemeanor. 
Any person who commences or does any grading in violation of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Every day that a violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted to exist is a separate violation, punishable as provided in this code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.70.175 - Board of appeals. 
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations of the city engineer relative to the application and interpretation of this code, the city council shall appoint an ad hoc board of appeals comprised of three members who are qualified by experience and training to pass judgment upon matters pertaining to building codes, regulations, and ordinances, and who are not employees of the city. City engineer board members shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The board shall comply with Rosenberg's Rules of Order in conducting their business, and shall render written decisions and findings to the appellant with a copy to the city engineer. Decisions of the board may be appealed to the city council by the appellant or by the city engineer within thirty days of the decision of the board, by the filing of a written notice of appeal with the city engineer stating the reasons for the appeal. The person filing the appeal and the opposing party shall be given at least ten days' notice of the time and place of the hearing on the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2422, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
Chapter 15.75 - CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE 
 
15.75.010 - 2016 California Energy Code—Adopted. 
The city council adopts and incorporates herein, for the purpose of prescribing regulations for the conservation of energy, the, 2016 California Energy Code, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 6. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, all construction of buildings where energy will be utilized shall be in conformance with the 2016 California Energy Code. 
(Ord. 2302 § 2, 2008; Ord. No. 2010-2350, § 1, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 2013-2388, § 1, 12-3-2013; Ord. No. 2017-2421, §§ 1, 2, 1-17-2017)  
Chapter 15.78 - CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE 
 
15.78.010 - 2016 California Green Building Standards Code—Adopted. 
The city council adopts and incorporates herein for the purpose of prescribing regulations for the reduction of negative impacts or increasing positive environmental impacts and encouraging sustainable construction practices, the 2016 California Green Building Standards Code, California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 11. All construction of buildings shall be in conformance with the 2016 California Green Building Standards Code, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-2354, § 1, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 2013-2389, § 2, 12-3-2013; Ord. No. 2017-2423, §§ 1, 2, 1-17-2017)  
Chapter 15.79 - CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-2426, §§ 1—3, adopted Jan. 17, 2017, amended Ch. 15.79 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said chapter to read as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.79, §§ 15.79.010—15.79.095, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2013-2393, § 3, adopted Dec. 3, 2013. 
 
15.79.010 - California Residential Code adopted. 
The city council adopts, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, use, height, area, fire resistance and maintenance of one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than three stories above grade, the 2016 California Residential Code, published by the California Building Standards Commission based on the International Residential Code 2015 Edition, including specified Appendices, including Administration Divisions I and II, California Code of Regulations Title 24, and Part 2.5 of the California Health and Safety Code beginning with Section 18901, and save and except such portions as are deleted, added, or modified based on the climatic, topographic, or geologic conditions. Copies of the codes are filed in the office of the building official, and are adopted and incorporated as fully set out in this chapter, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2426, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.79.025 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section R-104 "Duties and powers of the Building Official", Subsection R104.6 "Right of entry"—Amended. 
Section R104.6 of the 2016 California Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
R104.6 Right of Entry . When necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provision of this code, or when the Authority Having Jurisdiction has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises a condition or code violation which make such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Authority Having Jurisdiction, or designee, may request entry as specified in Chapter 1.12 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2426, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.79.030 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section R105 "Permits", Subsection R105.2 "Work exempt from permit - Building"—Amended. 
Chapter 1, Division II, Section R105.2 of the 2016 California Residential Code is amended by adding the following Subsections 11 through 14: 
11.  Playground, gymnastic and similar equipment and structures used for recreation and athletic activities accessory to Group R Division 3 structures. 
12.  Repairs to lawfully existing Group R Division 3 structures and Group U occupancy structures accessory to Group R Division 3 structures constructed pursuant to a building permit which involves only the replacement of component parts or existing work completed with similar materials only for the purpose of maintenance and do not affect any structural components or plumbing, mechanical or electrical installations. Repairs exempt from permit requirements shall not include any addition, change, or modification in construction, exit facilities or permanent fixtures or equipment. Specifically exempt from permit requirements are: 
A.  Painting and decorating including refinishing of exterior stucco finishes. 
B.  Installation of floor covering. 
C.  Cabinet work. 
D.  Outside paving on private property not within the public right-of-way. 
E.  Replacement of existing windows with no structural modification of the existing window opening. 
13.  Ground mounted satellite antennas not exceeding ten feet in diameter and roof mounted satellite antennas not exceeding eight feet in diameter. 
14.  Painted wall signs and Styrofoam or other foam mounted wall signs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2426, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.79.040 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section R105 "Permits", Subsection R105.5 "Expiration"—Amended. 
Section R105.5 of the 2016 California Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section R105.5 Expiration . Every permit issued by the Authority Having Jurisdiction under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within six calendar months from the date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is stopped at any time after the work is commenced for a period of six calendar months, or if the building or work authorized by such permit exceeds three calendar years from the issuance date of the permit. Work shall be presumed to have commenced if the permittee has obtained a required inspection approval of work authorized by the permit by the Authority Having Jurisdiction within six calendar months of the date of permit issuance. 
Work shall be presumed to be stopped if the permittee has not obtained a required inspection approval of work by the Authority Having Jurisdiction within each six-month period upon the initial commencement of work authorized by such permit. 
Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit, or a renewal permit as specified below, shall be first obtained. 
1.  Permits where work has not commenced. For permits for which work has not commenced in the first six calendar months from the date of issuance, a renewal permit may be obtained provided that: 
A.  No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; 
B.  The expiration has not exceeded three years from the original issuance date; 
C.  The same edition of the California codes is in effect as used in the initial plan check; 
D.  A fee equal to one-half the amount required for a new permit is paid; and 
E.  The renewal permit shall expire three calendar years from the date of initial permit issuance. 
Where later editions of the California codes have been adopted than used in the initial plan check, such applications for renewal shall be considered as a new plan check submittal. Accordingly, plans shall reflect the requirements of the current codes in effect, a full new plan check is required, and a full new plan check fee shall be paid. Upon completion of a new plan check, the permit may be renewed upon payment of a permit fee equal to one-half the amount required for a new permit. 
2.  Permits where work has commenced. For permits where work has commenced and was subsequently stopped as defined herein, a renewal permit may be obtained provided that: 
A.  No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; 
B.  The expiration has not exceeded three years from the original issuance date; 
C.  A fee equal to one-half the amount required for a new permit is paid, except that where construction has progressed and has been approved to the point of requiring only a final inspection, a fee equal to one-quarter the amount required for a new permit shall be paid; 
D.  A renewal permit shall expire three calendar years from the date of initial permit issuance. 
3.  Permits that have exceeded three years. For permits that have exceeded three years beyond the issuance date, a renewed permit may be obtained provided that: 
A.  Construction in reliance upon the building permit has commenced and has been approved; 
B.  No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; 
C.  A fee equal to the full amount required for a new permit is paid except that where the Authority Having Jurisdiction determines that construction has progressed to the point that a lesser fee is warranted, such lesser fee shall be paid. 
The maximum life of a permit renewal in accordance with subsection 15.70.040.3 shall be one calendar year from the date of renewal. The permit may be renewed for each calendar year thereafter provided that all requirements of A, B, and C as stated in subsection 15.70.040.3 are met. 
4.  Extension of an unexpired permit. For an extension of an unexpired permit, the permittee may apply for an extension of the time within which work under that permit may be continued when for good and satisfactory reasons, as determined by the Authority Having Jurisdiction, in his or her sole discretion, the permittee is unable to continue work within the time required by section 15.79.040. The Authority Having Jurisdiction may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding six calendar months beyond the expiration date in effect at the time of the extension application, upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. 
5.  Permits issued where the permittee has been deployed to a foreign country, may be held in abeyance until six months after the return of the permittee from his/her deployment if necessary, upon application for such relief by the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2426, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.79.045 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section R105 "Permits", Subsection R105.7 "Placement of permit"—Amended. 
Section R105.7 of the 2016 California Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section R105.7 Placement of permit . The building permit or a copy, the inspection record, and the approved plans shall all be kept on site until the completion of the project. The inspection record is to be kept on the job unless removed by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2426, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.79.050 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section R105 "Permits", Subsection R105.8.1 "Permit denial"—Added. 
Section R105.8.1 is added to the 2016 California Residential Code to read as follows: 
Section R105.8.1 Permit denial . The Authority Having Jurisdiction may deny the issuance of a building permit on any property where there exists an unsafe or a substandard building as provided in the Chapters 15.10 and 15.16 of the National City Municipal Code, or where there exists unlawful construction, or where there exists a violation of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2426, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.79.055 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section R108 "Fees", Subsection R108.2—"Schedule of permit fees"—Amended. 
Section R108.2 of the 2016 California Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section R108.2 Schedule of permit fees . Permit fees, including plan review fees, shall be assessed in accordance with the current City of National City Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2426, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.79.060 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section R108 "Fees", Subsection R108.6 "Work commencing before permit issuance"—Amended. 
Section R108.6 of the 2016 California Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section R108.6 Work commencing before permit issuance . Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to an administrative penalty equal to the inspection fee portion [of] the permit fee that would be required by this code if a permit were to be issued. The administrative penalty is in addition to a permit fee. When a plan review is required for issuance of such permit, the plan review fee portion will not be subject to said penalty. The payment of such administrative penalty shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code or from any penalty prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2426, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.79.065 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section R109 "Inspections", Subsection 109.3.1 "Re-inspections"—Added. 
Chapter 1, Division II, Section R109.3.1 is added to the 2016 California Residential Code to read as follows: 
Section R109.3.1 Reinspections . A reinspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or re-inspection when any of the following occurs: 
1.  The portion of work for which the inspection was called is not complete or the corrections previously required and called for are not made; 
2.  Calling for an inspection before the job is ready for such inspection or re-inspection; 
3.  The inspection record card or the approved plans are not posted or otherwise available to the inspector; 
4.  Failure to provide access on the date for which the inspection is requested; or, 
5.  Deviating from the approved plans when such deviation or change required approval of the building official. 
To obtain a re-inspection, the permittee shall file an application in writing on a form provided for that purpose and pay the re-inspection fee in accordance with the current City of National City Fee Schedule. In instances where a re-inspection fee has been assessed, no further inspections shall be performed until the fees have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2426, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.79.070 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section R110 "Certificate of Occupancy", Subsection R110.4 "Temporary occupancy"—Amended. 
Section R110.4 of the 2016 California Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section R110.4. Temporary Certificate of Occupancy . Where a project or a major portion thereof is substantially complete and can be safely occupied, but practical difficulties delay completion of work, the building official may issue a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy for the use of a portion or portions of the building or structure prior to the completion of the entire project. 
Prior to issuance of a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy, the premises shall be inspected by all affected city departments who shall prepare a list of work required to be completed and shall forward the list along with a recommendation for approval or disapproval of the issuance of a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy to the building official. 
Upon receipt of a recommendation for approval from all affected city departments. The building official may prepare a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy granting temporary occupancy that shall include the following: 
1.  Work yet to be completed; 
2.  Maximum time allotted for completion of said work; 
3.  Property owner's signature and the signature of the contractor agreeing to complete the work within the prescribed time or vacate the premises upon order of the building official until such work is completed; 
4.  Evidence that a faithful performance bond has been posted if required by any affected city department; and 
5.  A copy of the Temporary Certificate of Occupancy granting temporary occupancy shall be provided to all affected city departments. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2426, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.79.075 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section R112 "Board of Appeals", Subsection R112.1 "General"—Amended. 
Section R112.1 of the 2016 California Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section R112.1 Board of Appeals . In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations of the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, the City Council shall appoint an ad hoc Board of Appeals comprised of three (3) members who are qualified by experience and training to pass judgment on matters pertaining to construction, and who are not employees of the City. Board members shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. The Board shall comply with Rosenberg's Rules of Order in conducting their business, and shall render written decisions and findings to the appellant, with a copy to the Building Official. Decisions of the Board may be appealed to the City Council by the appellant or by the Building Official within thirty (30) days of the decision of the Board by the filing of a written notice of appeal with the Director of Emergency Services stating the reasons for the appeal. The person filing the appeal and the opposing party shall be given at least ten (10) days' written notice of the time and place of the hearing on the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2426, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.79.076 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 112 "Board of Appeals," Subsection R112.4 "Administration"—Amended. 
Section R112.4 of the 2016 California Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section R112.4 Administration . The Building Official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board, unless such decision is appealed to the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2426, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.79.080 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section R113 "Violations", Subsection R113.1 "Unlawful acts"—Amended. 
Section R113.1 of the 2016 California Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section R113.1 Unlawful acts . It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this code. 
Violation of any provision of this code shall be punishable as a misdemeanor and shall carry the penalties as prescribed in Chapter 1.20 of the National City Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2426, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.79.082 - Section R202 Definitions "Building Existing"—Amended. 
Section R202 Definitions "Building, Existing" of the 2016 California Residential Code is amended to read: 
Building, Existing . An "existing building" is a building erected prior to the adoption of the 2016 California Residential Code, or one for which a legal building permit has been issued. If more than fifty-percent of a structural roof or more than fifty-percent of all exterior walls are removed as part of a project, the building is not an existing building. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2426, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.79.085 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section R319 "Site Addresses", Subsection R319.1 "Address Identification"—Amended. 
Section R319.1 of the 2016 California Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section R319.1 Address Identification . Every principal building or structure within the incorporated limits of the city of National City shall be identified by a designated street number as issued by the National City Fire Department. 
Approved numbers or addresses shall be placed on all new and existing buildings, adjacent to the principal entrance to the premises or at a point that is highly visible and legible from the street. If necessary, directional signs shall be posted showing proper access to the given address from a point where the Fire Department access roadway leaves the dedicated street, to the entrance of each addressed building. All such numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabetical letters and shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inches (12.7mm), and shall be placed on a contrasting background. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2426, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.79.090 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section R902 "Roof Classification", Subsection R902.1.3 "Roof Coverings in all other areas"—Amended. 
Section R902.1.3 of the 2016 California Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section R902.1.3 Roof Coverings in all other areas . The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than fifty percent (50%) of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class B. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2426, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
15.79.095 - Plan review fees. 
When plans are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review, an additional plan review fee shall be charged in accordance with the current city of National City Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2426, §§ 1—3, 1-17-2017)  
Chapter 15.80 - CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS 
Sections: 
 
15.80.010 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to divert building materials from landfills, and process and return the materials into the economic mainstream, thereby conserving natural resources and stimulating markets for recycled and salvaged materials. 
B.  To ensure compliance with this chapter and to ensure that those contractors that comply with this chapter are not placed at a competitive disadvantage, it is necessary to impose a waste diversion security deposit requirement. 
(Ord. 2309 § 1 (part), 2008)  
15.80.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Applicant" means any person, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever who applies to the city for the applicable permits to undertake any construction, demolition, or renovation project within the city. 
"Building official" means the director of the building and safety department or their designee. 
"Certified recycling facility" means a recycling, composting, materials recovery or reuse facility which accepts construction and demolition debris and which has been certified by the building official pursuant to rules promulgated by the director. 
"City sponsored project" means a capital improvement project constructed by the city or its contractor, agent, or designee. 
"Construction" means the building of any facility or structure or any portion thereof including any tenant improvements to an existing facility or structure. Construction does not include a project limited to interior plumbing work, interior electrical work or interior mechanical work. 
"Construction and demolition (C&D) debris" means the waste building materials, packaging, and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, alteration, and/or demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings, and other structures and may include, but is not limited to, concrete, asphalt, wood, cardboard, metals, bricks, dirt, rocks, vegetative or woody landclearing/landscaping materials, and other inert waste. 
"Conversion rate" means the rate set forth in the standardized conversion rate table approved by the city pursuant to this chapter for use in estimating the volume or weight of materials identified in waste diversion form. 
"Covered project" means all projects which require a permit pursuant to this chapter, unless exempted by Section 15.80.040. 
"Deconstruction" means a process to dismantle or remove useable materials from structures, in a manner that maximizes the recovery of building materials for reuse and recycling and minimizes the amount of waste transported for disposal in landfills and transformation facilities. 
"Demolition" means the destruction, razing, ruining, tearing down or wrecking of any facility, structure, pavement or building, whether in whole or in part, whether interior or exterior. 
"Disposal" means the final deposition of solid waste at a permitted landfill. 
"Diversion or divert" means the reduction or elimination of solid waste from landfill disposal. 
"Diversion requirement" means the diversion of at least fifty percent of the total construction and demolition debris generated by a covered project by reuse or recycling. 
"Exempt project" has the meaning set forth in Section 15.80.040 of this chapter. 
"Inert debris" means asphalt, concrete, brick, masonry, and tile. 
"Recycling" means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, deconstructing, treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise be solid waste, and the return of those materials to the economic mainstream in the form of materials which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace for new, reused, or reconstituted products. 
"Renovation" means any change, addition, or modification in an existing structure that requires a building permit or demolition permit but does not include a project limited to interior plumbing work, electrical work or mechanical work. 
"Reuse" means further or repeated use of construction or demolition debris. 
"Salvage" means the controlled removal of construction or demolition debris from a permitted building or demolition site for the purpose of recycling, reuse, or storage for later recycling or reuse. 
"Solid waste" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes, including, but not limited to, garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, construction and demolition debris, abandoned vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, dewatered, treated, or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous waste, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes, and other discarded solid and semisolid wastes. 
"Tenant improvement" means a "project" involving structural or other modifications of an existing commercial structure resulting in the generation of construction and demolition debris. 
"Total construction value" means the cost of the project, as stated in the building or demolition application. 
"Waste diversion form (WDF)" means the form prepared by the building official which an applicant for a building permit or demolition permit shall provide information including, but not limited to the: 
1.  Types and amounts of construction and demolition debris the applicant estimates the covered project will generate; 
2.  Expected construction and demolition debris diversion the applicant expects to achieve for the covered project; 
3.  Actual quantity of construction and demolition debris the applicant diverted; 
4.  Name and address of the person to whom a deposit refund, if any, shall be issued; and 
5.  Documentary evidence demonstrating the construction and demolition debris diversion the applicant achieved for the project. 
"Waste diversion security deposit" means any performance bonds, surety bond, money order, letter of credit, cash, certified check or certificate of deposit in a form acceptable to the city, submitted to the city as pursuant to Section 15.80.070 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2309 § 1 (part), 2008)  
15.80.030 - Covered projects. 
The building official is authorized to impose the conditions and requirements set forth in this section upon permits that are issued for construction or demolition projects described below. Projects that meet the criteria listed below are deemed to be "covered projects." 
A.  The construction of one new single-family residential structure that involves at least two thousand square feet or more of floor area. 
B.  The construction of more than one new single-family residential structure, regardless of the square footage of the floor area. 
C.  The construction of all new multifamily residential structures, including condo conversions, regardless of the square footage of the floor area. 
D.  The construction of a new commercial building regardless of the square footage of the floor area. 
E.  Tenant improvements that involve at least two thousand five hundred square feet or more of floor area. 
F.  All roofing projects involving concrete tiles, in which the roofing project is at least one thousand square feet and includes tear-off or removal of existing roofing material. 
G.  Any demolition project that involves a residential or commercial structure regardless of the square footage of the floor area, including partial and entire demolitions. 
H.  The construction of an accessory structure to an existing commercial structure that involves at least five thousand square feet or more of floor area. 
I.  The construction of an addition to an existing commercial structure that involves at least one thousand five hundred square feet or more of floor area. 
J.  City or community development commission projects for which the city or community development commission provide funding in excess of two hundred fifty thousand dollars, or fall within one of the above categories. 
(Ord. 2309 § 1 (part), 2008)  
15.80.040 - Exempt projects. 
No waste diversion form shall be required for any of the following activities alone or in combination with one another, except if the activity or activities is/are undertaken in conjunction with a project that is otherwise subject to this division: 
A.  All roofing projects not specified as a covered project in Section 15.80.030(F). 
B.  Installation or repair of a retaining wall. 
C.  Installation, replacement or repair of a carport, patio cover, balcony, trellis or fireplace. 
D.  Installation, replacement or repair of a deck. 
E.  Installation, replacement or repair of a fence, not including the replacement of a concrete or cinder block wall that exceeds three hundred square feet. 
F.  Installation, replacement or repair of a swimming pool or a spa. 
G.  Installation, replacement, or repair of a pre-fabricated sign or the structure to which the sign is attached. 
H.  Installation, replacement or repair of storage racks. 
I.  Projects for which only a plumbing, electrical or mechanical permit is required. 
J.  Demolition or construction required to protect the public health or safety in an emergency, as defined in Public Resources Code Section 21060.3. 
(Ord. 2309 § 1 (part), 2008)  
15.80.050 - Diversion of construction and demolition debris. 
A.  For the purposes of this chapter, diversion of C&D debris may be achieved by any of the following methods: 
1.  On-site reuse; 
2.  Acceptance of the C&D debris by a recycling facility; or 
3.  Salvage, other donation or reuse of the C&D debris acceptable to the building official. 
B.  C&D debris shall be measured by weight or by volume, whichever is most accurate and practicable. To the extent practicable, all C&D debris shall be weighed on a scale. 
1.  For C&D debris that is weighed, the applicant shall use a scale that is in compliance with all federal, state, and local regulatory requirements for accuracy and maintenance of such scale. 
2.  For C&D debris for which measurement by weight is not practicable, the applicant shall measure by volume and convert the volumetric measurements to weight using the city's conversion rate tables. 
C.  Applicants for construction, demolition, renovation, and roofing projects within the city for noncovered projects shall be encouraged to divert at least fifty percent of all project-related C&D debris. 
(Ord. 2309 § 1 (part), 2008)  
15.80.060 - Diversion requirements. 
It is required that at a minimum the following specified percentages of the waste tonnage of demolition and construction debris generated from the following categories of covered projects shall be diverted from landfills by using recycling, reuse and diversion programs: 
A.  Seventy-five percent of inert debris; and 
B.  Fifty percent of remaining construction and demolition debris generated by a covered project. 
(Ord. 2309 § 1 (part), 2008)  
15.80.070 - Certified recycling facility. 
The building official may identify individual facilities as certified recycling facilities, and require contractors working on covered projects to deliver nonsource-separated construction and demolition debris to these facilities for the purpose of helping to increase the city's diversion rates. 
(Ord. 2309 § 1 (part), 2008)  
15.80.080 - Waste diversion form submittal requirement. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all applicants for a building permit or demolition permit for a covered project shall submit a properly completed waste diversion form with the building permit or demolition permit application. 
B.  The waste diversion form shall contain the following: 
1.  The type of project; 
2.  The total square footage of the project; 
3.  The estimated volume or weight of project construction and demolition debris, by materials type, to be generated; 
4.  The maximum volume or weight of construction and demolition debris that will disposed of in a landfill; and 
5.  The vendors or facilities that the applicant proposes to use to collect, process, or receive that construction and demolition debris. 
C.  The city will provide a conversion rate table for the purpose of calculating the volume and weight of construction and demolition debris. The applicant shall use the conversion rates tables in estimating the volume or weight of materials identified in the waste diversion form. 
D.  No building permit or demolition permit shall be issued for a covered project unless the applicant has submitted a properly completed waste diversion form to the satisfaction of the building official. 
E.  In preparing the WDF, an applicant for a plan check involving the removal of all or part of an existing structure shall consider deconstruction to the maximum extent feasible, and shall make the materials generated thereby available for salvage before placing in a landfill. These salvaged materials shall be included as part of the overall diversion rate. 
F.  Acknowledgment of Responsibility. The WDF shall be signed by both the contractor and owner indicating: (1) an understanding of consequences of not meeting the diversion requirement, and (2) that they are responsible for the actions of their subcontractors with regard to this diversion requirement. 
(Ord. 2309 § 1 (part), 2008)  
15.80.090 - Waste diversion security deposit requirements. 
Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, the applicant shall pay a refundable deposit at the time of submitting the building permit or demolition permit application. The amount of the deposit shall be calculated based on the square footage and type of project, per the following table: 
Project Type 	Deposit per Square Foot 	Maximum Deposit Required 
New construction 	$ .20 	$35,000 
Renovation, remodel or demolition 	.35 	35,000 
Solely roofing, not part of another project 	.10 	10,000 
 
(Ord. 2309 § 1 (part), 2008)  
15.80.100 - Failure to meet diversion requirements. 
If the building official determines that the applicant of a covered project has not made a good faith effort to achieve the required percentage of diversion specified in the waste diversion form, then the applicant's deposit shall be forfeited to the city. The building official may authorize a partial refund, up to seventy-five percent of the deposit, where the applicant did not achieve the required percentage of diversion specified in the waste diversion form, but the building official determines that the applicant made a good faith effort to comply and that the attainment of those requirements was not feasible under the circumstances. 
(Ord. 2309 § 1 (part), 2008)  
15.80.110 - Entitlement to refund of deposit. 
An applicant of a covered project is eligible for a refund of the deposit paid provided the applicant does all of the following: 
A.  Requests a refund within thirty days of the final inspection date for the covered project for which the deposit was paid or requests a refund prior to final inspection when: 
1.  The project has a master developer and multiple commercial and/or retail tenants constructing their own tenant improvements; 
2.  The developer has achieved the diversion rates as set forth in Sections 15.80.050 and 15.80.060; and 
3.  The developer has completed construction of the project, except for the tenant improvements when the tenant improvements are the sole responsibility of the commercial and/or retail tenant. 
B.  Provides evidence satisfactory to the building official that the construction and demolition debris generated by the covered project was diverted at the rates set forth in Section 15.80.060. Such evidence shall include documentation of the following: 
1.  Receipts from the vendor or facility which collected or received each material showing the actual weight or volume of that material, or if the improvements are part of a larger construction project, evidence of cumulative weight or volume of C&D material dated within thirty calendar days of the date of the request for a certificate of occupancy or final inspection; 
2.  For materials reused on site (e.g., crushed concrete for base material, wood for mulch) photographs are encouraged; 
3.  A copy of the previously approved WDF for the project with the additional information of the actual weight or volume of each material diverted and landfilled; 
4.  Any additional information the applicant believes is relevant to determining its efforts to comply in good faith. 
C.  The construction and demolition debris generated by the covered project was diverted consistent with the applicant's waste diversion form. 
D.  Weighing of Materials. Applicants shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that all C&D debris diverted or landfilled are measured and recorded using the most accurate method of measurement available. To the extent practical, all C&D debris shall be weighed by measurement on scales. Such scales shall be in compliance with all regulatory requirements for accuracy and measurement. For C&D debris for which weighing is not practical due to small size or other considerations, a volumetric measurement shall be used. For conversion of volumetric measurements to weight, the applicant shall use the standardized conversion rate table approved by the city for this purpose. 
(Ord. 2309 § 1 (part), 2008)  
15.80.120 - Appeals. 
Appeals of a determination made by the building official or designee shall be made to the city manager or designee. The appeal shall be in writing and sent to the city, postmarked within ten calendar days from the post-marked date of the building official's, or their designee's decision regarding the applicant's failure to meet diversion requirements. The appeal shall be limited to the following issues: (1) whether the applicant is entitled to a refund pursuant to Section 15.80.090; (2) whether the applicant made a good faith effort to comply with the required percentage of diversion specified in the waste diversion form; (3) in the case of a partial refund, the percentage of the deposit the building official authorizes; and (4) whether the project is covered or exempt from this chapter. The building official, or designee, shall have the opportunity to provide a written response to the applicant's appeal. Appeals shall be reviewed by an objective third party hearing officer. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
(Ord. 2309 § 1 (part), 2008)  
15.80.130 - Final inspection or certificate of occupancy requires proof of diversion achieved. 
Prior to a certificate of occupancy, or a final inspection if a certificate of occupancy is not required, applicant shall provide at least one of the following as evidence of the diversion rate applicant achieved: 
A.  Receipts from the vendor or facility which collected or received each C&D debris material showing the actual weight or volume of that material, or if the improvements are part of a larger construction project, evidence of cumulative weight or volume of C&D material dated within thirty calendar days of the date of the request for a certificate of occupancy or final inspection; 
B.  For C&D debris materials reused on site (e.g., crushed concrete for base material, wood for mulch) photographs are encouraged; 
C.  A copy of the previously approved WDF for the project with the additional information of the actual weight or volume of each C&D debris material diverted and landfilled; 
D.  Any additional information the applicant believes is relevant to determining its diversion rate. 
(Ord. 2309 § 1 (part), 2008)  
15.80.140 - Unclaimed and not refunded deposits and accrued interest. 
A deposit which is not refunded or claimed in accordance with this chapter is the property of the city. All interest accruing on each deposit is the property of the city, and the applicant shall have no claim upon the interest. 
(Ord. 2309 § 1 (part), 2008)  
15.80.150 - Use of deposits. 
Deposits received and interest accrued thereon by the city shall be used for the following purposes: 
A.  The payment of refunds of deposits, as determined by the building official. 
B.  The payment of costs incurred in administering the city's waste diversion program, which costs are not covered by the administrative fee referenced herein in Section 15.80.160. 
C.  The development and implementation of additional policies and programs that are approved by the city council to promote diversion of construction and demolition debris from landfill disposal and to encourage the salvage, reuse, and recycling of that waste. 
D.  The payment of costs to develop or improve infrastructure, including the costs of programs designed to develop or improve infrastructure, to divert construction and demolition debris from landfill disposal. 
E.  The cost of programs and activities whose purpose is to promote diversion and recycling in the city. 
(Ord. 2309 § 1 (part), 2008)  
15.80.160 - Administrative fees for processing waste diversion forms and program. 
An applicant shall pay to the city a fee sufficient to compensate the city for all costs incurred in administering the waste diversion program. The amount of the fee shall be determined in accordance with the then current resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2309 § 1 (part), 2008)  
15.80.170 - Severability. 
This chapter and the various parts thereof are declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. 2309 § 1 (part), 2008)  
Chapter 15.81 - SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEMS 
Sections: 
 
15.81.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014, California Government Code Section 65850.5) in order to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter encourages the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city and facilitating property owners to install solar energy systems. This chapter allows the city to achieve those goals while protecting the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 2015-2405, § 2, 9-1-2015)  
15.81.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter: 
"Electronic submittal" means the utilization of one or more of the following: 
a.  E-mail, 
b.  The internet, 
c.  Facsimile. 
"Small residential rooftop solar energy system" means all of the following: 
a.  A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty kilowatts thermal. 
b.  A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city and paragraph (iii) of subdivision (c) of Section 714 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time. 
c.  A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling. 
d.  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the city of National City. 
e.  "Solar energy system" has the same meaning set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subdivision (a) of Section 801.5 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time. 
"Eligibility Checklist" means the submittal checklist required by the city of National City to be submitted with the small residential rooftop solar energy system demonstrating compliance. 
"Specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
"Reasonable restrictions" on a solar energy system are those restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits. 
"Restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance" means: 
a.  For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating systems: an amount exceeding ten percent of the cost of the system, but in no case more than one thousand dollars, or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding ten percent, as originally specified and proposed. 
b.  For photovoltaic systems: an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding ten percent as originally specified and proposed. 
(Ord. No. 2015-2405, § 2, 9-1-2015)  
15.81.030 - Applicability. 
A.  This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city. 
B.  Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2015-2405, § 2, 9-1-2015)  
15.81.040 - Solar energy system requirements. 
A.  All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the city. 
B.  Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code. 
C.  Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. 
(Ord. No. 2015-2405, § 2, 9-1-2015)  
15.81.050 - Applications and documents. 
A.  All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available on the city website. 
B.  The planning and building department shall adopt an eligibility checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. 
C.  Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall: 
1.  Verify to the applicant's reasonable satisfaction through the use of standard engineering evaluation techniques that the support structure for the small residential rooftop solar energy system is stable and adequate to transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated with the system to the building foundation; and 
2.  At the applicant's cost, verify to the applicant's reasonable satisfaction using standard electrical inspection techniques that the existing electrical system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the existing electrical system's current use, to carry all new photovoltaic electrical loads. 
D.  The permit application and associated documentation may be submitted to the building division in person, by mail, together with required permit processing and inspection fees. Electronic submittal is currently not available in the city of National City. 
E.  The small residential rooftop solar system permit process and eligibility checklist shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. 
(Ord. No. 2015-2405, § 2, 9-1-2015)  
15.81.060 - Permit review and inspection requirements. 
A.  The planning and building department shall implement an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. 
B.  Review of the application shall be limited to the chief building official's review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements. 
C.  If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. 
D.  Upon confirmation by the building official of the application and supporting documentation being complete and meeting the requirements of the eligibility checklist, the building official shall administratively approve the application and issue all required permits or authorizations. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to connect the small residential rooftop energy system to the local utility provider's electricity grid. The applicant is responsible for obtaining such approval or permission from the local utility provider. 
E.  The chief building official may require an applicant to apply for a minor use permit if the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the city planning commission. If a minor use permit is required, the city may deny such application if it makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the city planning commission. 
F.  Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. 
G.  "A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact" includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of Section 714 of the Civil Code defining restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance. 
H.  Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the building division, and may include a consolidated inspection with the fire marshal, for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. 
I.  The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections. 
J.  If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized; however, the subsequent inspection need not conform to the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2015-2405, § 2, 9-1-2015)  
Chapter 15.82 - EXPEDITED PERMIT PROCESSING FOR ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS 
 
15.82.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations that complies with AB 1236 (Chapter 598, Statutes 2015, California Government Code Section 65850.7) in order to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of electric vehicle charging stations. This chapter encourages the installation of electric vehicle charging stations by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to applicants and the city, and facilitating the installation of electric vehicle charging stations. This chapter allows the city to achieve those goals while protecting the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2430, § 2, 2-7-2017)  
15.82.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter: 
A.  "A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact" means any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. 
B.  "Electric vehicle charging station" or "charging station" means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with the California Electrical Code, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle. 
C.  "Specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2430, § 2, 2-7-2017)  
15.82.030 - Electric vehicle charging stations. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to adopt an expedited permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations pursuant to Government Code 65850.7(g). 
B.  Permitting. Applicants desiring to qualify for the expedited review shall submit an application to the city, in a form approved by the city's building official. The building official is authorized to administratively act on such applications pursuant to this section. Decisions of the building official may be appealed to the planning commission. 
C.  Checklists. The city building official is authorized and directed to develop checklists of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. An application that satisfies the requirements of the eligibility checklists, as determined by the building official, shall be deemed complete and eligible for the expedited permitting process. The checklist and required permitting documentation shall be published on the city's website. Electronic submittal of permit applications and electronic signatures shall be accepted. Upon receipt of an incomplete application, the building official shall issue a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible. 
D.  Issuance of Permits. Upon confirmation by the building official of the application and supporting documentation being complete and that the electric vehicle charging stations substantially conform to all applicable local, state, and federal health and safety requirements, the building official shall administratively approve the application and issue required permits. 
E.  Use Permit. If the building official makes a finding, based on substantial evidence, that the proposed project could have a specific, adverse impact on the public health and safety, the building official may require the applicant to apply for a conditional use permit. 
F.  Conditions. Any conditions imposed on an application to install an electric vehicle charging station shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety at the lowest cost possible. 
G.  Denial. The city may deny an application if it makes written findings based on substantial evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact on the public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. 
H.  Prioritization. The city may establish a process to prioritize competing applications for expedited permits. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2430, § 2, 2-7-2017)  
15.82.040 - Fees. 
Permit fees for eligible electric vehicle charging stations shall be as specified in the master fee schedule of the city of National City. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2430, § 2, 2-7-2017)  
Title 16 - CITY BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 16.01 - BOARD OF LIBRARY TRUSTEES 
 
16.01.010 - Created. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 18900 et seq., of the California Education Code, there is hereby created a board of library trustees, consisting of five members to be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the city council, and serving at the pleasure of the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.01.020 - Term—Vacancy. 
A.  The members of the board of library trustees shall be appointed for staggered terms of three years. 
B.  If a vacancy occurs other than by expiration of a term, such vacancy shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of said term in the same manner as original appointments are made. Each member of the board shall serve until their successor is appointed and sworn into office. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.01.030 - Chair—Offices—Staff support. 
The board of library trustees shall annually elect its chair from among the appointed members and, subject to the provisions of law, may create and fill such other offices as it deems necessary. The city council shall provide such staff assistance to the board as the council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.01.040 - Bylaws and operating procedures. 
The board of library trustees may adopt bylaws and operating procedures from time to time, provided that if any provision of such bylaws or operating procedures conflicts with this Chapter 16.01, this chapter shall prevail. The bylaws shall contain provisions relating to attendance of board members. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.01.050 - Meetings—Functions and authority. 
A.  The board of library trustees shall hold at least one regular meeting each month, shall annually adopt a schedule for such meetings, and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which record shall be a public record unless the city attorney determines otherwise. Any regular meeting may be dispensed with by a majority vote of the board. Special meetings as are necessary may be called by the chair or a majority of the members of the board after at least twenty-four hours' written notice posted and served upon the members of the board. All meetings shall be conducted in compliance with the Ralph M. Brown Act (the "Open Meeting Law," California Government Code Section 54950 et seq.). 
B.  A quorum to conduct business consists of a majority of the members of the board. 
C.  A majority of a quorum vote is necessary to act upon a matter. 
D.  The board may administer any trust declared or created for the library, and receive by gift, devise or bequest, and hold in trust or otherwise, property situated in this state or elsewhere, and where not otherwise provided, dispose of the property for the benefit of the library. 
E.  The board may purchase necessary books, journals, publication and other personal property. The board may purchase real property, and erect or rent and equip such buildings or rooms as may be necessary, when in its judgment a suitable building has not been provided. 
F.  The board may request the appropriate state officials to furnish the library with copies of any and all reports, laws and other publications of the state not otherwise disposed of by law. 
G.  The board may borrow books from, lend books to, and exchange books with other libraries, and may allow nonresidents to borrow books upon such conditions as the board may prescribe. The board may contract with neighboring cities or the County of San Diego for lending the books of the library to residents of neighboring cities or the county, upon reasonable compensation being paid by the neighboring cities or the county. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.01.060 - Residency requirement—Compensation. 
The members of the board of library trustees shall be residents, but need not be electors of the city. Board members shall serve without compensation, except that the city council may from time to time pay such expenses of board members that are incurred during the conduct of board business as the council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.01.070 - Annual report to city council and to state librarian. 
The chair of the board of library trustees shall, on or before August 31 of each year, report to the city council and to the state librarian on the condition of the library for the year ending the previous June 30. The report shall, in addition to other matters deemed expedient by the board, contain such statistical and other information as is deemed desirable by the state librarian. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
Chapter 16.02 - CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION 
 
16.02.010 - Created. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by Government Code Section 45000 et seq., there is hereby created a civil service commission, consisting of five members to be appointed by and serving at the pleasure of the city council. No person shall be appointed to the commission who holds any salaried city office or employment. Nor shall any member, while on the commission or for a period of one year after their membership on the commission has ended, be eligible for appointment to any position in the competitive service. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.02.020 - Term—Vacancy. 
A.  The members of the civil service commission shall be appointed for staggered terms of five years. Not more than two terms shall expire in the same year. 
B.  If a vacancy occurs other than by expiration of a term, such vacancy shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of said term in the same manner as original appointments are made. Each member of the board shall serve until their successor is appointed and sworn into office. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.02.030 - Chair—Offices—Staff support. 
The civil service commission shall annually elect its chair from among the appointed members and, subject to the provisions of law, may create and fill such other offices as it deems necessary. The city council shall provide such staff assistance to the commission as the council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.02.040 - Bylaws and operating procedures. 
The civil service commission may adopt bylaws and operating procedures from time to time, provided that if any provision of such bylaws or operating procedure conflicts with this Chapter 16.02, this chapter shall prevail. The bylaws shall contain provisions relating to attendance of commission members. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.02.050 - Meetings—Functions and authority. 
The civil service commission shall: 
A.  Determine the order of business for the conduct of its meetings and hold regular meetings once every other month, and such special meetings as are necessary on call of the chair or a majority of the members of the commission after at least twenty-four hours' written notice has been posted and served upon the members. A majority of the members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. A majority of a quorum vote is necessary to act upon a matter. All meetings shall be conducted in compliance with the Ralph M. Brown Act (the "Open Meeting Law," California Government Code Section 549850 et seq.) 
B.  Act in an advisory capacity to the city council and the director of human resources on personnel matters in the city service, and when requested by the city council or the director of human resources, hold hearings and make recommendations on any matter of personnel administration. 
C.  Hear appeals submitted by persons in the competitive service, or candidates for a position in the competitive service, relative to any alleged infringement upon their rights and privileges granted by this title or the civil service rules, and certify its findings and recommendations. 
D.  In any investigation or hearing conducted by the commission, have the power to examine witnesses under oath and compel their attendance or production of evidence by subpoena issued in the name of the city and attested by the city clerk. It shall be the duty of the chief of police or his/her designee to cause all such subpoenas to be served, and refusal of a person to attend or to testify in answer to such a subpoena shall subject the person to prosecution in the same manner set forth by law for failure to appear before the city council in response to a subpoena issued by the city council. Each member of the civil service commission shall have the power to administer oaths to witnesses. 
E.  Publish and post notices of the examinations for positions in the competitive service, receive applications therefore, conduct and score examinations, and certify to the appointing power a list of all persons eligible for appointment in the appropriate class in the competitive service. The civil service commission shall cause the duties imposed upon it by this paragraph to be performed by the director of human resources. 
F.  Keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which record shall be a public record unless the city attorney determines otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.02.060 - Residency requirement—Compensation. 
The members of the civil service commission shall be residents, but need not be electors, of the city. Commission members shall serve without compensation, except that the city council may from time to time pay such expenses of commission members that are incurred during the conduct of commission business as the council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
Chapter 16.03 - COMMITTEE ON HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 
 
16.03.010 - Created. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 34120.5 of the California Health and Safety Code, on March 28, 1978, the city council enacted Ordinance No. 1619, establishing the committee on housing and community development. The committee consists of nine members, to be appointed by and serving at the pleasure of the city council. On November 3, 2009, the city council enacted Ordinance No. 2009-2326, transferring the functions of the committee to the planning commission. The committee shall be comprised of the seven members of the planning commission, and two ex officio members, as provided in Chapter 16.06. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.03.020 - Functions and authority. 
The functions and authority of the committee on housing and community development are carried out by the planning commission. Said functions and authority are set forth in Section 16.06.060 of Chapter 16.06 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.03.030 - Meetings. 
The committee on housing and community development shall hold at least one regular meeting per year. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
Chapter 16.04 - COMMUNITY AND POLICE RELATIONS COMMISSION 
 
16.04.010 - Created. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by Sections 36505 and 36506 of the California Government Code, there is hereby created a community and police relations commission, consisting of eight members to be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council, and serving at the pleasure of the mayor and city council. Of the eight members, seven shall be voting members, of which at least five shall be residents, and up to two may be non-residents. The non-voting member shall be a member of the National City Police Officers' Association. A commission member need not be an elector of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.04.020 - Term—Vacancy. 
A.  The members of the community and police relations commission shall be appointed for staggered three year terms. 
B.  If a vacancy shall occur other than by expiration of a term, such vacancy shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of said term in the same manner as original appointments are made. Each member of the commission shall serve until their successor is appointed and sworn into office. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.04.030 - Chair—Offices—Staff support. 
The community and police relations commission shall annually elect its chair from among the appointed members and, subject to the provisions of law, may create and fill such other offices as it deems necessary. The city council shall provide such staff assistance to the commission as the council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.04.040 - Bylaws and operating procedures. 
The community and police relations commission may adopt bylaws and operating procedures from time to time, which shall be approved by the city council, provided that if any provision of such bylaws or operating procedures conflicts with this Chapter 16.04, this chapter shall prevail. The bylaws shall contain provisions relating to attendance of commission members. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.04.050 - Mission statement. 
The following shall be the mission statement of the community and police relations commission: 
The commission will 1) provide a forum for citizens to voice their concerns about police conduct, practices, and policies; 2) examine police practices and policies as they pertain to conduct issues; and 3) identify opportunities to ameliorate adversity between the National City Police Department and citizen complainants. It is the intent of the mayor and city council that because of the commission's actions, the relations between the citizens of this city and the police department will improve, and positive communications and cooperation between the police department and the community will be facilitated. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.04.060 - Meetings—Functions and authority. 
The community and police relations commission shall: 
A.  Determine the order of business for the conduct of its meetings, and hold regular meetings once every three months, and such special meetings as are necessary on call of the chair or a majority of the members of the commission after at least twenty-four hours' notice in writing has been served upon the members. A majority of the members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. A majority of a quorum is necessary to act upon a matter. All meetings shall be conducted in compliance with the Ralph M. Brown Act (the "Open Meeting Law," California Government Code Section 54950 et seq.). 
B.  Receive and monitor or investigate citizen complaints regarding police conduct, but without interfering with the administration of the police department. 
C.  Request and receive supplemental information from the police department regarding citizen complaints and such other matters as the commission may request. 
D.  Allow parties the opportunity to mediate their disputes. 
E.  Make recommendations to the city council regarding additional duties that the commission may perform. 
F.  Make an annual report of its activities, findings and recommendations to the city council. 
G.  Advise on police department operations, and make recommendations on police policy issues. 
H.  Conduct investigations and hold public hearings. The commission has the power to examine witnesses under oath and compel their attendance or production of evidence by subpoena issued in the name of the city and attested by the city clerk. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to cause all such subpoenas to be served, and refusal of a person to attend or testify in answer to such a subpoena shall subject the person to prosecution in the same manner as set forth by law for failure to appear before the city council in response to a subpoena issued by the city council. Each member of the commission shall have the power to administer oaths to witnesses. 
I.  Keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which record shall be a public record unless the city attorney determines otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.04.070 - Compensation. 
Members of the community and police relations commission shall serve without compensation, except that the city council may from time to time pay such expenses of commission members that are incurred during the conduct of commission business as the council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
Chapter 16.05 - PARK, RECREATION AND SENIOR CITIZENS' ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
 
16.05.010 - Created. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by Sections 36505—36506 of the California Government Code, the park and recreation advisory board and senior citizens' advisory board are dissolved as separate bodies, and are hereby consolidated into the park, recreation, and senior citizens' advisory board. The park, recreation, and senior citizens' advisory board shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the city council, and serving at the pleasure of the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.05.020 - Term—Vacancy. 
A.  The members of the park, recreation, and senior citizens' advisory board shall be appointed for staggered terms of three years. 
B.  If a vacancy occurs other than by expiration of a term, such vacancy shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of said term in the same manner as original appointments are made. Each member of the board shall serve until their successor is appointed and sworn into office. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.05.030 - Chair—Offices—Staff support. 
The park, recreation, and senior citizens' advisory board shall annually elect their chair from among the appointed members and, subject to the provisions of law, may create and fill such other offices as it deems necessary. The city council shall provide such staff assistance as the council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.05.040 - Bylaws and operating procedures. 
The park, recreation, and senior citizens' advisory committee may adopt bylaws and operating procedures from time to time, provided that if any provision of such bylaws or operating procedures conflicts with this Chapter 16.05, this chapter shall prevail. The bylaws shall contain provisions relating to attendance of committee members. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.05.050 - Meetings—Functions and authority. 
A.  The park, recreation, and senior citizens' advisory board shall hold at least one regular meeting every two months, and shall keep a record of their resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which record shall be a public record unless the city attorney determines otherwise. A quorum to conduct business consists of a majority of the members of the board. A majority of a quorum is necessary to act upon a matter. Any regular meeting may be dispensed with by a majority vote of the board. Special meetings as are necessary may be called by the chair or a majority of the members of the board after at least twenty-four hours' written notice has been posted and served upon the members of the board. All meetings shall be conducted in compliance with the Ralph M. Brown Act (the "Open Meeting Law," California Government Code Section 54950 et seq.). 
B.  The park, recreation, and senior citizens' advisory board shall advise the city council upon policy and administrative matters concerning the parks owned and operated by the city and concerning the recreation activities conducted in said parks, and serve in an advisory capacity to the city council in all matters pertaining to the senior citizens of the city. The board shall also conduct such investigations and prepare such reports as they are directed so to do by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.05.060 - Residency requirement—Compensation. 
The members of the park, recreation, and senior citizens' advisory board shall be residents, but need not be electors, of the city. Board members shall serve without compensation, except that the city council may from time to time pay such expenses of board members that are incurred during the conduct of board business as the council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
Chapter 16.06 - PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
16.06.010 - Created. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 65000 et seq., of the California Government Code, there is hereby created a planning commission, consisting of seven members to be appointed by and serving at the pleasure of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.06.020 - Meetings—Functions and authority. 
A.  The planning commission shall hold two regular meetings each month, shall annually adopt a schedule for such meetings, and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which record shall be a public record unless the city attorney determines otherwise. Any regular meeting may be dispensed with by a majority vote of the planning commission. Special meetings as are necessary may be called by the chair or a majority of the commission after at least twenty-four hours' written notice has been posted and served upon the members of the commission. All meetings shall be conducted in compliance with the Ralph M. Brown Act (the "Open Meeting Law," California Government Code Section 54950 et seq.). 
B.  The functions of the planning commission include periodically reviewing and revising, as necessary, the general plan; implementing the general plan through actions including, but not limited to, the administration of specific plans and zoning and subdivision ordinances; annually reviewing the capital improvement program of the city and local public works projects of other local agencies for their consistency with the general plan; endeavoring to promote public interest in, comment on, and understanding of the general plan and regulations relating to it; consulting and advising with public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional, as well as other organizations, and citizens generally concerning implementation of the general plan; promoting the coordination of local plans and programs with the plans and programs of other public agencies; performing other functions as the city council provides, including conducting studies and preparing plans other than those required or authorized by the Government Code; conducting hearings, taking evidence, examining witnesses under oath and compelling their attendance or production of evidence by issuance of subpoenas, and making decisions. 
C.  A quorum to conduct business consists of a majority of the members holding office. 
D.  A majority of a quorum vote is necessary to act upon a matter, and a tie-vote on an appeal authorized regarding a decision of the development services director shall affirm the action of the development services director. 
E.  The planning commission may sit as a body to hear and determine an appeal it is authorized to conduct or it may appoint a hearing panel to consist of one or more members to hear the appeal, take evidence, and render a decision in any individual case, in which event the decision so rendered on the appeal shall then constitute the decision of the commission. A decision rendered pursuant to this subsection is appealable to the city council only when authorized by the municipal code. 
F.  In any investigation or hearing conducted by the commission, it has the power to examine witnesses under oath and compel their attendance for production of evidence by subpoena issued in the name of the city and attested by the city clerk. It shall be the duty of the chief of police or his/her designee to cause all such subpoenas to be served, and refusal of a person to attend or to testify in answer to such a subpoena shall subject the person to prosecution in the same manner set forth by law for failure to appear before the city council in response to a subpoena issued by the city council. Each member of the commission shall have the power to administer oaths to witnesses. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.06.030 - Terms—Vacancy. 
A.  The members of the planning commission shall be appointed for staggered terms of four years. Not more than two terms shall expire in the same year. 
B.  If a vacancy occurs other than by expiration of a term, such vacancy shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of said term. Each member of the commission shall serve until their successor is appointed and sworn into office. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.06.040 - Chair—Offices—Staff support. 
The planning commission shall elect its chair from among the appointed members for a term of one year and, subject to the provisions of law, may create and fill such other offices as it deems necessary. The city council shall provide such staff assistance to the commission as the council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.06.050 - Bylaws and operating procedures. 
The planning commission may adopt bylaws and operating procedures from time to time, provided that if any provision of such bylaws or operating procedure conflicts with this Chapter 16.06, this chapter shall prevail. The bylaws shall contain provisions relating to attendance of commission members. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.06.060 - Functions and authority—Planning commission to function as committee on housing and community development—Ex officio members. 
A.  In addition to the functions conferred upon it by the municipal code and by state law, the planning commission shall also act in the capacity and carry out the functions of the board of the committee on housing and community development (the "committee"). 
B.  The committee shall be comprised of the seven members of the planning commission (the "commission"), who shall sit as the board of the committee when the commission is acting in the capacity and carrying out the functions of the committee. In addition, the city council shall appoint two ex officio members to four-year terms, who shall be tenants of the community development commission of the city of National City (the "CDC"), and one of whom shall be over sixty-two years of age. Said ex officio members shall sit with the seven members of the commission on such occasions as the commission is acting in the capacity and carrying out the functions of the committee. Said ex officio members shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. 
C.  The commission, when acting in the capacity and carrying out the functions of the committee, shall utilize a committee agenda, which shall be separate and distinct from the commission agenda. Except for special meetings of either body, meetings of the commission and the committee shall be scheduled for the same date and time, unless it is impracticable to do so, with the meeting of one body to be held consecutively after the other. 
D.  The chair and vice-chair of the planning commission shall also be the chair and vice-char of the committee. The two ex officio members shall not receive compensation, but shall be eligible for reimbursement of expenses incurred in the performance of official duties. The two ex officio members shall disclose reportable financial interests as members of the housing and community development committee pursuant to the city's conflict of interest code. 
E.  The purpose of the committee shall be to encourage communication from persons, organizations and institutions in the city of National City, and to give advice and make recommendations to the CDC or to the projects, programs and policies, including the following: 
1.  The Housing and Urban Development Section 8 Housing Assistant Payments Program for existing housing and for new construction. 
2.  Housing improvement, housing assistance and neighborhood improvement projects, programs and policies in connection with federal and state laws relating to housing and neighborhood improvements. 
The committee shall, after its establishment, limit its review and recommendations to those matters set forth in this subsection E through its by-laws. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.06.070 - Residency requirement—Compensation. 
The members of the planning commission shall be residents, but need not be electors, of the city. Compensation shall be determined periodically by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.06.080 - Advisory members. 
The city attorney and the city manager or their designees shall be advisory members of the planning commission, and shall be without power to vote on any matters submitted to said planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
Chapter 16.07 - PUBLIC ART COMMITTEE 
 
16.07.010 - Created. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by Sections 36505—36506 of the California Government Code, there is hereby created a public art committee, consisting of five members to be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the city council, and serving at the pleasure of the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.07.020 - Term—Vacancy. 
A.  The members of the public art committee shall be appointed for staggered terms of three years. 
B.  If a vacancy occurs other than by expiration of a term, such vacancy shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of said term in the same manner as original appointments are made. 
Each member of the committee shall serve until their successor is appointed and sworn into office. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.07.030 - Chair—Offices—Staff support. 
The public art committee shall annually elect its chair from among the appointed members and, subject to the provisions of law, may create and fill such other offices as it deems necessary. The city council shall provide such staff assistance as the council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.07.040 - Bylaws and operating procedures. 
The public art committee may adopt bylaws and operating procedures from time to time, provided that if any provision of such bylaws or operating procedures conflicts with this Chapter 16.07, this chapter shall prevail. The bylaws shall include provisions relating to attendance of committee members. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.07.040 - Meetings—Functions and authority. 
A.  The public art committee shall hold at least one regular meeting quarterly and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which record shall be a public record unless the city attorney determines otherwise. Any regular meeting may be dispensed with by a majority vote of the committee. Special meetings as are necessary may be called by the chair or a majority of the members of the committee after at least twenty-four hours' written notice has been posted and served upon the members of the committee. All meetings shall be conducted in compliance with the Ralph M. Brown Act (the "Open Meeting Law," California Government Code Section 54950 et seq.). 
B.  The committee shall consider and advise the city council on matters relating to public art. 
C.  A quorum to conduct business consists of a majority of the members of the committee. 
D.  A majority of a quorum is necessary to act upon a matter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.07.050 - Residency requirement—Compensation. 
The members of the public art committee may be residents or non-residents of the city. Committee members shall serve without compensation, except that the city council may from time to time pay such expenses of committee members that are incurred during the conduct of committee business as the council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
Chapter 16.08 - TRAFFIC SAFETY COMMITTEE 
 
16.08.010 - Created. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by Sections 36505—36506 of the California Government Code, there is hereby created a traffic safety committee, consisting of five members to be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the city council, and serving at the pleasure of the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.08.020 - Term—Vacancy—Alternate members. 
A.  The members of the traffic safety committee shall be appointed for staggered terms of three years. 
B.  If a vacancy occurs other than by expiration of a term, such vacancy shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of said term in the same manner as original appointments are made. 
C.  Each member of the committee shall serve until their successor is appointed and sworn into office. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.08.030 - Chair—Offices—Staff support. 
The traffic safety committee shall annually elect its chair from among the appointed members and, subject to the provisions of law, may create and fill such other offices as it deems necessary. The city council shall provide such staff assistance as the council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.08.040 - Bylaws and operating procedures. 
The traffic safety committee may adopt bylaws and operating procedures from time to time, provided that if any provision of such bylaws or operating procedures conflicts with this Chapter 16.08, this chapter shall prevail. The bylaws shall contain provisions relating to attendance of committee members. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.08.050 - Meetings—Functions and authority. 
A.  The traffic safety committee shall hold at least one regular meeting each month, and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which record shall be a public record unless the city attorney determines otherwise. Any regular meeting may be dispensed with by a majority vote of the committee. Special meetings as are necessary may be called by the chair or a majority of the members of the committee after at least twenty-four hours' written notice has been posted and served upon the members of the committee. All meetings shall be conducted in compliance with the Ralph M. Brown Act (the "Open Meeting Law," California Government Code Section 54950 et seq.). 
B.  The committee shall investigate, consider and act upon all matters referred to it by appropriate public officials or agencies or private citizens concerning traffic safety in the city; conduct such investigations and prepare such reports as it is directed so to do by the city council; conduct investigations and prepare such reports as it deems appropriate upon request of responsible private citizens or organizations. 
C.  A quorum to conduct business consists of a majority of the members of the committee. 
D.  A majority of a quorum is necessary to act upon a matter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
16.08.060 - Residency requirement—Compensation. 
The members of the traffic safety committee shall be residents, but need not be electors, of the city. Committee members shall serve without compensation, except that the city council may from time to time pay such expenses of committee members that are incurred during the conduct of committee business as the council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013)  
Chapter 16.09 - VETERANS AND MILITARY FAMILIES ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
 
16.09.010 - Created. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by Sections 36505—36506 of the California Government Code, there is hereby created a veterans and military families advisory committee, consisting of eleven members to be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the city council, and serving at the pleasure of the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2432, § 2, 2-21-2017)  
16.09.020 - Purpose. 
The National City Veterans and Military Families Advisory Committee serves in an advisory capacity to the city council of the city of National City on matters related to the support of our veterans and military community. The committee makes recommendations to the city council with respect to veterans and military service member-related issues, ceremonies, and other activities that occur within National City. Committee meetings provide a forum for discussion of issues relating to veterans and military families. The committee provides advice and assistance to National City residents regarding resources available for veterans, military personnel, and their families. The committee acts as a conduit of communication and coordination between the local veteran and military community, and the city of National City. 
The committee's responsibilities may include providing recommendations to the city council on issues of interest to veterans, military personnel, and their families; providing a forum to discuss and help resolve issues, encouraging and promoting awareness, planning and assisting the city with planning of events honoring the heritage of our veterans and military community to establish and promote positive relations within the city; and serving as a liaison between the city of National City and community partners. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2432, § 2, 2-21-2017)  
16.09.030 - Term—Vacancy. 
A.  The members of the veterans and military families advisory committee shall be appointed for staggered terms of four years. 
B.  If a vacancy occurs other than by expiration of a term, such vacancy shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of said term in the same manner as original appointments are made. 
C.  In the event of expiration of a term, the member of the committee whose term has expired shall continue to serve until their successor is appointed and sworn into office. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2432, § 2, 2-21-2017)  
16.09.040 - Chair—Offices—Staff support. 
The veterans and military families advisory committee shall annually elect its chair from among the appointed members and, subject to the provisions of law, may create and fill such other offices as it deems necessary. The city council shall provide such staff assistance as the council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2432, § 2, 2-21-2017)  
16.09.050 - Bylaws and operating procedures. 
The veterans and military families advisory committee may adopt bylaws and operating procedures from time to time, provided that if any provision of such bylaws or operating procedures conflicts with this Chapter 16.09, this chapter shall prevail. The bylaws shall contain provisions relating to attendance of committee members. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2432, § 2, 2-21-2017)  
16.09.060 - Meetings—Functions and authority. 
A.  The veterans and military families advisory committee shall hold at least one regular meeting each quarter, and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which record shall be a public record unless the city attorney determines otherwise. Any regular meeting may be dispensed with by a majority vote of the committee. Special meetings as are necessary may be called by the chair or a majority of the members of the committee after at least twenty-four hours' written notice has been posted and served upon the members of the committee. All meetings shall be conducted in compliance with the Ralph M. Brown Act (the "Open Meeting Law", California Government Code Section 54950 et seq.). 
B.  The committee shall investigate, consider, and act upon all matters referred to it by appropriate public officials or agencies or private citizens concerning members of the military, military veterans, and their families residing in the city; and conduct such investigations and prepare such reports as it is directed so to do by the city council; conduct investigations and prepare such reports as it deems appropriate upon request of responsible private citizens or organizations. 
C.  A quorum to conduct business consists of a majority of the members of the committee. 
D.  A majority of a quorum is necessary to act upon a matter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2432, § 2, 2-21-2017)  
16.09.070 - Residency requirement—Compensation. 
The members of the veterans and military families advisory committee may be residents or non-residents of the city and need not be electors of the city. Committee members shall serve without compensation, except that the city council may from time to time pay such expenses of committee members that are incurred during the conduct of committee business as the council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2432, § 2, 2-21-2017)  
Chapter 16.10 - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND COMMITTEES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-2432, § 1, adopted Feb. 21, 2017, enacted a new Ch. 16.09 and renumbered the former Ch. 16.09, §§ 16.09.010—16.09.030 pertaining to provisions applicable to all boards, commissions, and committees, as 16.10, §§ 16.10.010—16.10.030. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes. 
 
16.10.010 - Alternate members. 
In addition to regular appointments, the city council may appoint an alternate member or members to any board, commission or committee. An applicant for appointment as an alternate member shall be subject to the same application and interview procedures as are applicants for regular appointments. Alternate members so appointed shall attend each meeting of the board, commission or committee to which they are appointed, but shall participate in a meeting only in the event of the absence of the regular member. At such time as a vacancy occurs on a board, commission or committee, an alternate member is automatically eligible for appointment as a regular member, provided the alternate member is in good standing (e.g., good attendance record). 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013; Ord. No. 2017-2432, § 1, 2-21-2017)  
16.10.020 - Annual report to city council. 
The chair of each board, commission and committee shall appear before the city council on an annual basis and present a brief report on the activities and accomplishments of the board, commission or committee that they chair during the previous year. Such report shall also include a presentation of the record of attendance of the members of the board, commission or committee that is the subject of the report. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013; Ord. No. 2017-2432, § 1, 2-21-2017)  
16.10.030 - Term expiration dates. 
For all appointments made to boards, commissions and committees subsequent to the effective date of this chapter, the term of each appointment shall expire on March 31 or September 30, unless otherwise determined by the city council at the time of appointment. 
(Ord. No. 2013-2381, § 1, 2-5-2013; Ord. No. 2017-2432, § 1, 2-21-2017)  
Title 17 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Chapters: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
 Prior ordinance history: Ords. 803, 904, 966, 993, 1252, 1427, 1506, 1620, 1621, 1629, 1667, 1759, 1779, 1831, 1885 and 1929. 
 
Chapter 17.01 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.01.010 - Citation and authority. 
This title is adopted to supplement the Subdivision Map Act (Title 7; Division 2, California Government Code) and may be cited as the Subdivision Ordinance of the city of National City. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.01.020 - Purpose. 
A.  It is purpose of this title to regulate and control the division of land in the city and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. The regulations address the design, improvement, and survey data of subdivisions; the form and content of all required maps provided by the Subdivision Map Act; and the procedures to be followed in securing the approval of the city regarding the maps. The regulations contained in this title are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  Any reference herein to the Subdivision Map Act, or a specific section thereof, shall refer to the most currently amended edition. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.01.030 - Conformance with general plan, specific plans and other regulations. 
No land shall be divided and developed for any purpose which is not in conformity with this title, the Subdivision Map Act, the general plan, any specific plan, or regulatory ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.01.040 - Modification of provisions or requirements. 
Whenever, in the opinion of the city council, and upon recommendation of the planning commission, the land involved in any subdivision is of a size or shape, or is subject to title limitations of record, or is affected by special circumstances or conditions, or is to be devoted to a use that is impossible or impracticable in the particular case for the subdivider to conform fully to the regulations of this chapter, the city council may make modifications as, in its opinion, are reasonably necessary or expedient and in conformity with the Subdivision Map Act. In the case of subdivisions of four or less parcels, this determination may be made by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.01.050 - Fees and deposits. 
A.  All persons submitting applications for the approval of maps, or for other approvals as required by this chapter, shall pay all fees and/or deposits as provided by this chapter and by the city council's resolution or resolutions establishing applicable fees and deposits. Said resolution or resolutions are incorporated by this reference. 
B.  A nonrefundable fee in such amount as the city council shall from time to time establish by resolution shall be paid to the finance officer at the time of filing of a tentative map. 
C.  Any subdivider or developer submitting a tentative map, final map, parcel map, public improvement plans and/or private grading plans to the city engineer for approval shall, upon submittal of the map and/or plans, become liable to the city for the actual cost to the city of checking the map and/or plans and inspecting the improvements, including necessary laboratory tests. The cost to the city shall be determined by calculating the actual labor charges plus applicable fringe benefits, maintenance and operation and internal service charges for personal services of city employees, and for out-of-pocket expenses for work not performed by city employees. The city engineer shall take no action upon any map, public improvement and/or private grading plans until a sum equal to three percent of the city engineer's estimate of the cost of improvements and/or grading is deposited in the city finance department. The sum shall be in the nature of a deposit only and as an advance against the obligation of the developer to pay the city as provided herein. Should the city's costs exceed the sum so deposited, the balance due the city shall be paid prior to the final acceptance of the map, public improvements and/or private grading by the city engineer. Should the sum so deposited exceed the city's costs, the excess shall be refunded to the developer. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
Chapter 17.02 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.02.010 - General. 
Words used herein that are defined in the Subdivision Map Act but not specifically defined in this chapter shall have the same meaning as is given to them in the Subdivision Map Act. Whenever the following words are used in this title, they will have the meaning written in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.02.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Certificate of compliance" means a document describing a unit of real property and stating that the division thereof complies with applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. 
B.  "Development services group" consists of the departments of building and safety, engineering, fire and planning. 
C.  "Division of land" refers to any parcel or contiguous parcels of land, improved or unimproved, which are divided for the purpose of transfer of title, sale, lease, or financing, whether immediate or future, into two or more parcels. "Division of land" includes a condominium project as defined in Section 1350 of the Civil Code; or a community apartment project as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code; or a stock cooperative as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code. 
D.  "Filing" means the submittal of all such documents, statements, maps, plans, or other data deemed necessary by the city for the application for the tentative map, review of the final maps or plans, or the appeal process. Acceptance of a tentative map shall not be complete until all required documents deemed necessary have been received by the city. 
E.  "Final map" means a map showing a subdivision of five or more parcels for which a tentative and final map are required by the Subdivision Map Act and this title, prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title and designed to be filed for recordation in the office of the county recorder. 
F.  "Lot" or "parcel" means a unit or portion of land separate from other units or portions by description, as on a final map or parcel map, or by such other map approved by the county or by the city under the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and of city ordinances in effect at the time of such approval, for the purpose of transfer of title, sale, lease, or financing. 
G.  "Merger" means the joining of two or more contiguous parcels of land under one ownership into one parcel. 
H.  "Owner" means the individual, firm, partnership, or corporation having controlling interest in land sought to be divided, or an agent thereof, duly authorized to commence proceedings. 
I.  "Parcel map" means a map showing a subdivision of four or less parcels as required by the Subdivision Map Act and this title, prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title and designed to be filed for recordation in the office of the county recorder. 
J.  "Subdivider" means an individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership, corporation, trust, or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under this title to effect a division of land hereunder for himself or for another. Employees and consultants of such individuals or legal entities, acting in such capacity, are not subdividers. 
K.  "Subdivision" means the same as "division of land," as defined above. 
L.  "Tentative map" means a map made for the purpose of showing the design and improvements of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around it. A tentative map shall be prepared in connection with a parcel map pursuant to the provisions of this title regarding subdivisions of four or less parcels. A tentative map shall also be prepared in conjunction with a final map pursuant to the provisions of this title for subdivisions of five or more parcels. 
M.  "Vesting tentative map" means a tentative map which satisfies the requirements of Chapter 17.06 of this title. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
Chapter 17.03 - REQUIRED MAPS 
Sections: 
 
17.03.010 - General. 
The necessity for tentative and final subdivision and parcel maps shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.03.020 - Subdivision maps—Five or more parcels. 
A.  A tentative and final subdivision map shall be required for all divisions of land when the director of planning determines that such land may be developed into five or more parcels, five or more condominiums, a community apartment project containing five or more parcels, or a stock cooperative containing five or more dwelling units, except where: 
1.  The land before division contains less than five acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway, and no dedications or improvements are required; or 
2.  Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of twenty acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or highway; or 
3.  The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development and which has approval as to street alignments and widths; or 
4.  Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less than forty acres or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section. 
B.  If any of the above conditions are met, a parcel map shall be required as described in Section 17.03.030. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.03.030 - Parcel maps—Division of land— Four or less parcels. 
A tentative and final parcel map shall be required for all divisions of land as described in subdivisions (1) through (4) of Section 17.03.020(A) and for all divisions of land which create four or less parcels and for which a final subdivision map is not required by the Subdivision Map Act, except where: 
A.  The Subdivision Map Act does not require a parcel map; or 
B.  The parcel map is waived pursuant to Section 17.03.040; or 
C.  An adjustment plat is proposed to adjust the boundaries between two or more adjacent parcels (see Chapter 17.11 of this title). 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.03.040 - Waiver of parcel map procedures. 
A.  Under certain circumstances, as described in this section, the requirement that a parcel map be prepared may be waived by the planning commission, if requested by the subdivider, for the following: 
1.  The property is a division of real property interests therein created by probate, eminent domain procedures, partition, or other civil judgments or decrees; or, 
2.  The property to be divided is a result of conveyance of land, or interest therein, to or from a public agency for a public purpose, such as school sites, public building sites, or rights-of-way for streets, sewers, utilities, drainage, etc; or, 
3.  Any other division of real property which would otherwise require a parcel map. 
B.  Certificate of Compliance Required. In any case where waiver of a parcel map is granted, the planning commission, shall require the director of planning to file a certificate of compliance, as defined in Chapter 17.02, with the county recorder's office. The certificate shall include a statement from the county tax collector that all taxes due have been paid or that a tax bond or other adequate form of security assuring payments of all taxes which are a lien but not yet payable has been filed with the county. 
C.  Information Required. A tentative parcel map with a written waiver request shall contain sufficient information to enable the planning commission to make required findings consistent with the intent of this title. The request must be filed with the director of planning prior to consideration of any waiver request. 
D.  Required Finding. For approval of the waiver request, it shall be found that the proposed division of land shall comply with the requirements as to area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, appropriate improved public roads, environmental protection and other requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
Chapter 17.04 - TENTATIVE MAPS—PROCEDURES 
Sections: 
 
17.04.010 - Form, content, and accompanying material. 
A.  Each tentative subdivision map or tentative parcel map shall show and contain the following information: 
1.  The name or title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded; 
2.  Space for the tentative map number (to be assigned by the director of planning); 
3.  Name, address, telephone number and signature of subdivider, owner or owners, and California registered civil engineer or California licensed surveyor, including registration or license number; 
4.  Sufficient legal description of the land as to define the boundaries of the proposed subdivision, and assessor's book, page and parcel number; 
5.  Date, north arrow and scale. Maps shall be drawn to clearly show all information to a scale wherein one inch represents not more than one hundred feet; 
6.  A vicinity map showing roads, adjoining subdivisions, towns, creeks, railroads, and other data sufficient to locate the proposed subdivision and show its relation to the community; 
7.  Name and number of any adjacent subdivisions and parcel maps shall be identified. When possible, the lot pattern of the adjacent subdivisions shall be shown where it is contiguous to the tentative map; 
8.  The locations, names, existing widths, approximate grades and radii of all highways, streets, alleys or ways within one hundred feet of the exterior boundary of the proposed subdivision; 
9.  The widths, approximate grades and curve radii of all new highways, streets, alleys or ways within the proposed subdivision with street names designated by letter (A, B, C, etc.); 
10.  The widths and approximate locations of all existing or proposed easements, including rights-of-way, whether public or private, recorded or unrecorded, within the subdivision or on adjacent parcels; 
11.  All buildings and traveled ways within the proposed subdivision or within one hundred feet of the exterior boundaries thereof. Buildings and trees shall be identified and located approximately on the map and indicated whether to be removed or remain. Existing use of land adjacent to the subdivision shall be identified; 
12.  The proposed lot layout, approximate dimensions of each lot, minimum area of each lot in square feet, approximate area of each lot and building site and the approximate finish grade of the building site pads; 
13.  All lots shall be numbered in consecutive order. Each separate tentative map should start with lot No. 1; 
14.  Statements of the total gross and net acreage as defined in the land use code, Title 18 of the municipal code, minimum lot sizes, and the total number of lots proposed; 
15.  Lines of inundation of all one-hundred-year floodplains. 
Locations of all areas subject to stormwater overflow and the locations, widths and directions of flow of all water courses; 
16.  Adequate topographic information with contour intervals of not more than two feet if the general slope of the land is less than ten percent and five feet for all other areas within the proposed subdivision and one hundred feet beyond the subdivision boundaries, with the tentative map design superimposed. A note shall indicate the source of the data used. If deemed appropriate, the director of planning may require different contour intervals; 
17.  The improvements the subdivider proposes to construct and install, including typical cross-sections of street and drainage improvements; 
18.  Existing and proposed zoning for the subject property and existing zoning on the adjacent properties; 
19.  Land use designation of the subject and adjacent property as shown on the city's general plan or applicable specific plan; 
20.  The location of existing fire hydrants, water mains, culverts, drainpipes, sewers, wells, or underground structures, including underground tanks, within two hundred feet or portion of the subdivision noting thereon whether or not they are to be abandoned, removed, or remain in operation. If no fire hydrants are located within two hundred feet of the site, the location of the nearest fire hydrant shall be shown within three hundred feet of the subdivision; 
21.  The location of all streets, existing or contained on adjacent approved tentative maps, where such streets intersect the boundary of the subdivision or where such streets intersect another street that forms a boundary or subdivision; 
22.  A layout of adjoining unsubdivided property in sufficient detail to show the effect of proposed streets that may intersect such property; 
23.  The location of any previously filled areas within the subdivision; 
24.  Proposed direction of flow and grade of street drainage; 
25.  Statement of the present use and the proposed use or uses of the property; 
26.  The tentative map shall clearly indicate the proposed handling of stormwaters. In the event that such information cannot satisfactorily be shown on the tentative map, the map shall be accompanied by whatever supplemental maps or written reports are necessary; 
27.  Grading shall be shown on the tentative map for construction or installation of all improvements to serve the subdivision and feasible grading for the creation of building sites on each lot together with driveway access thereto; 
Both the proposed grades and the existing topographic contours must be shown on the map. If the subdivider does not intend to grade the building sites, a statement to that effect shall be placed on the tentative map. However, feasible grading for building sites shall be shown on the tentative map unless the director of planning determines this to be unnecessary; 
28.  If the tentative map is for condominiums, a statement shall be added, as follows: "This is a map of a residential/commercial/industrial condominium project as defined in Section 1350 of the state of California Civil Code."; 
29.  The subdivider shall specify any deviation from city standards and the authority for such deviation; 
30.  The tentative map shall clearly show the method of sewage disposal. In the event this information cannot satisfactorily be shown on the tentative map, the map shall be accompanied by whatever supplemental maps or written reports are necessary to show the proposal. Any existing subsurface septic systems shall be shown on the map with a note whether such septic system will remain; 
31.  The director of planning may waive any of the foregoing tentative map requirements whenever the division of land is such as not to necessitate compliance with these requirements or when other circumstances justify such waiver. 
32.  If the tentative map is for a condominium conversion, the applicant shall provide evidence that applicable requirements of the state Subdivision Map Act (Government Code Section 66427.1) have been satisfied. The director of planning may require additional information as needed to support required findings pursuant to Title 18 as well as this title. 
B.  The following supplemental drawings, statements, and data shall accompany the tentative map: 
1.  If the subdivider plans to develop the site in phases, the proposed sequence of construction shall be provided; 
2.  A statement consenting to the submission of the tentative map by the party holding a proprietary interest in the parcel or parcels comprising the division of land; 
3.  A preliminary title report; 
4.  Three copies of a geologic and/or soils report, unless waived in writing by the city engineer; 
5.  A flood hazard report, prepared by a California registered civil engineer, if required by the city engineer; 
6.  An application for initial study, required by the California Environmental Quality Act, unless the director of planning determines that previously completed environmental review adequately addresses the subdivision; 
7.  Any other data or reports as deemed necessary by the director of the planning or the city engineer; 
8.  The director of planning may waive any of the foregoing when such is not necessitated by the nature of the division of land. 
C.  All tentative maps shall further conform to any rules and regulations for submittal of tentative maps as specified by the director of planning. 
(Ord. 2216 § 4, 2003; Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.04.020 - Submittal and fees. 
The tentative map, along with the information required for processing, shall be filed with the department of planning. The subdivider shall file with the department the number of copies determined necessary by the planning director, including reduced copies for a report format. Filing fees shall be those prescribed by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.04.030 - Reports and recommendations. 
The planning department shall distribute copies of the tentative map and, where appropriate, required written statements to each member of the development services group, other relevant city departments and other agencies as necessary, requesting their comments. The director of planning shall incorporate the comments from the various officials and agencies into the staff report for the project. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.04.040 - Planning commission action. 
The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the tentative map. Notice of the hearing shall be given as required by the California Government Code, and ten days' mailed notice of the hearing shall be given to the subdivider and to all property owners within three hundred feet of said subdivision. 
A.  Tentative Subdivision Map—Five or More Parcels. After such hearing, the planning commission shall recommend that the city council approve, conditionally approve, or deny the tentative subdivision map. A tie vote on a motion to recommend approval or denial shall be considered a recommendation for denial. The planning commission shall make findings required by the California Government Code for approval or denial of a tentative map. The planning commission shall adopt its recommendation to the city council, by resolution, within fifty days after the director of planning has determined all necessary information for the tentative map to be filed, unless the time is extended by the planning commission with the consent of the subdivider. The planning director shall notify the city clerk of the planning commission action and the need to schedule a city council hearing. 
B.  Tentative Parcel Maps—Four or Fewer Parcels. The planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the tentative parcel map within fifty days after all necessary information is determined to be filed, unless the time is extended with consent of the subdivider. A tie vote shall be considered an action of denial. The planning commission shall make finding required by the Government Code for approval or denial of a tentative map. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.04.050 - City council action. 
A.  Tentative Subdivision Maps. The city clerk shall schedule a public hearing to be held no later than thirty days after the next regularly scheduled city council meeting which follows the date of adoption of the planning commission resolution. The council shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the tentative map within such thirty-day period, unless the time period is extended with the consent of the subdivider. The city clerk may schedule the hearing at a later time with the written consent of the subdivider. 
B.  Tentative Parcel Map Appeals. The subdivider or any interested person adversely affected by any planning commission action with respect to the tentative map may, within ten days after the decision, file an appeal in writing with the city clerk. The appeal shall be accompanied by a processing fee as prescribed by resolution of the city council. The city council shall consider the appeal at a public hearing within thirty days after the date of filing of the appeal, unless the appellant consents to a continuance. The council may sustain, modify, reject, or overrule any recommendations or rulings of the planning commission and may make any findings which are consistent with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.04.060 - Time limits. 
A.  For Acting on Tentative Maps. The time limits for acting and reporting on tentative maps may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the director of planning prior to the scheduling of a public hearing. In the event the director determines a tentative map application is subject to the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), it shall not be accepted as complete until such time as all environmental documentation required under CEQA is provided. A waiver of applicable time limits may also be required to permit concurrent processing of related project approvals. 
B.  For Providing Required Information. Information required by the director of planning shall be submitted within four months after an application was received, in the event that the director determined that an application for tentative map or tentative parcel map was incomplete. Otherwise, the application shall be determined to be withdrawn. The director of planning may, however, approve a request for additional time to submit required information. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.04.070 - Expirations. 
Approved or conditionally approved tentative subdivision maps and tentative parcel maps shall expire in twenty-four months from its approval by either the planning commission or city council, whichever occurs last, unless an extension is approved as provided by the following: 
A.  One or more additional time extensions not to exceed a total of thirty-six months may be granted; 
B.  A subdivider may request an extension by application to the planning department. The application shall be filed within ninety days prior to the expiration date of the tentative map. Requests for all extensions shall be accompanied by a processing fee as prescribed by resolution of the city council; 
C.  Requests for extension may be approved, conditionally approved, or denied. The decision regarding requests for extension of tentative subdivision maps for five parcels or more shall be made by the city council. 
The decision regarding requests for tentative subdivision maps for four parcels or less shall be made by the planning commission. The subdivider may appeal the decision of the planning commission to the city council. The appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within fifteen days after the action of the planning commission and shall be accompanied by a processing fee as prescribed by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.04.080 - Amendments to approved or conditionally approved tentative maps. 
A.  Minor Amendments. Minor amendments to the approved or conditionally approved tentative map may be approved by the director of planning upon request of the subdivider or on the department's own initiative, provided: 
1.  No lots, units, or building sites or structures are added; 
2.  Changes are consistent with the intent and spirit of the original tentative map approval; 
3.  There are no resulting violations of this title or the Subdivision Map Act. 
An amendment to a map shall be indicated on the approved or conditionally approved tentative map and certified by the director of planning. 
B.  Amendment to Conditions of Approval. Amendments to the tentative map conditions of approval shall be presented to the planning commission for its approval. They shall also be presented to the city council for approval, where the resolution of approval for the tentative map was adopted by the city council. Processing shall be in accordance with the provisions for processing a tentative map as set forth in this chapter. Any approved amendment shall not alter the expiration date of the tentative map. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
Chapter 17.05 - FINAL MAPS—PROCEDURES 
Sections: 
 
17.05.010 - General. 
Following the approval by the city council of a tentative subdivision map, or approval by the planning commission in the case of a tentative parcel map, the subdivider may cause a final subdivision or parcel map to be prepared by a California registered civil engineer with registration number 33965 or lower, or by a California licensed land surveyor, in accordance with a completed survey of the subdivision and in full compliance with the Subdivision Map Act and this title. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.05.020 - Form, content, and accompanying material. 
A.  Each final subdivision or parcel map shall be prepared in accordance with the following: 
1.  It shall be legibly drawn, printed, or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester base film. Certificates, affidavits, and acknowledgments may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on polyester base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility. 
2.  The size of each sheet shall be eighteen inches by twenty-six inches. 
3.  A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch. 
4.  The scale of the map shall be large enough to show all details clearly and not less than one hundred feet to the inch. 
5.  Each sheet shall be numbered, the relation of one sheet to another clearly shown, and the number of sheets used shall be set forth on each sheet. 
6.  The final subdivision or parcel map number and name, scale, north point, and sheet number shall be shown on each sheet of the map. 
7.  The exterior boundary line of the land included within the subdivision shall be indicated by a distinctive symbol. The map shall show the definite location of the subdivision, particularly its relation to surrounding surveys. 
8.  The title sheet of each final subdivision or parcel map shall contain a title satisfactory to the city engineer consisting of the number, name or other designation of the subdivision together with the words: "In the City of National City" or "Partly within the City of National City and partly in another City or the County." Below the title shall be a subtitle consisting of a general description of all property being subdivided, by reference to subdivisions or to section surveys. The referenced subdivision shall be spelled out and worded identically with original records, with complete references to proper recording information or map numbers. The title sheet shall also show the basis of bearings, the number of lots, the area of each parcel, the acreage of the subdivision, a soils report note, and monument notes. Maps filed for the purpose of reverting subdivided land to acreage shall be conspicuously marked: "The purpose of this map is reversion to acreage." Maps filed for the purpose of a condominium shall be conspicuously marked "For Condominium Purposes." 
9.  Each parcel shall be numbered in consecutive order. 
10.  The names of all streets, alleys or highways within or adjoining the subdivision shall be shown. 
11.  Building setback lines shall be shown which have been approved specifically for the subdivision and which differ from standards established in the land use code for the zone in which the subdivision is located. 
12.  Sufficient linear, angular, and radial data shall be shown to determine the bearings and lengths of monument lines, street centerlines, and boundary lines of the subdivision and of the boundary lines of every lot and parcel which is a part thereof. Length, radius, and total central angle or radial bearings on all curves shall be shown. 
13.  The location and description of all existing and proposed monuments shall be shown. 
14.  Whenever the city engineer has established the centerline of a street or alley, such data shall be considered in making the surveys and in preparing the final subdivision or parcel map. All monuments found shall be indicated and proper references made to field books or maps of public record relating to the monuments. If the points were reset by ties, that fact shall be stated. 
15.  The adjoining corners of all abutting subdivisions shall be identified by subdivision number, or by name when not identified by subdivision number, and by reference to the book and page of the final map showing such subdivision. If no subdivision is adjacent, then by the name of the owner and reference to the recorded deed by book and page number for the last recorded owner. 
16.  The final subdivision or parcel map shall show city boundaries crossing or adjoining the subdivision. The boundaries shall be clearly designated and clearly related to the subdivision boundary. 
17.  The final subdivision or parcel map shall show the centerline data and width and side lines of all easements to which the lots are subject. Easements shall be clearly labeled and identified with respect to the use for which intended and if already of record, proper reference to the records shall be shown. Public easements shall be dedicated and so indicated in the certificate of dedication. At the time the subdivider presents the map, there shall be presented certificates executed respectively by the various public utility companies authorized to serve in the area of the subdivision, certifying that the satisfactory provisions have been executed and delivered to the certifying companies for recording. Easements for public utility companies shall be designated on the final subdivision or parcel map as "Easements for Public Utilities" and shall be reserved for the use and benefit of, and the conveyance to the several public utility companies which are authorized to serve in the subdivision. 
B.  The following certificates and acknowledgments must appear on the title sheet of the final subdivision or parcel map: 
1.  Owner's certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having record title interest thereof in the completed subdivision with exceptions as provided by the Subdivision Map Act, including dedications and offers of dedication, if any, which shall, by their terms, not be revocable without city consent in the event the final subdivision or parcel map is approved; 
2.  Engineer's or surveyor's certificate; 
3.  City engineer's certificate of approval; 
4.  City clerk's certificate of approval by city council and acceptance of offer of dedication; 
5.  Mayor's certificate of approval by the city council; 
6.  Such other affidavits, certificates, acknowledgments, endorsements, and notarial seals as required. 
C.  The following statements, documents, and other data shall be filed with the final subdivision or parcel map. 
1.  A guarantee of title certifying that the signatures of all persons whose consent is necessary to pass a clear title to the land being subdivided, and all public easements, including all public streets, being offered for dedication, and all acknowledgments thereto, appear and are correctly shown on the property certificates, and are properly shown on the map, both as to consents for the making thereof and affidavits of dedication where necessary; 
2.  The plans, profiles, cross-sections, specifications, and applicable permits to the satisfaction of the city engineer for the construction and installation of all required improvements; 
3.  The declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions containing the provisions described in Section 1353 of the state Civil Code, and all other governing documents for the subdivision as are appropriate pursuant to Section 1363 of the Civil Code, for a common interest development within the meaning of Sections 1350 et seq. of the Civil Code, and all protective covenants, conditions, restrictions, or affirmative obligations in the form in which the same are to be recorded for any subdivision, as approved by the city attorney. In the case of private maintenance agreements this shall allow the city the authority but not the obligation to assume maintenance of the property and assess the full cost including overhead costs therefor as a lien against the property if said property is not adequately maintained per the agreement. The declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions shall include a determination that the funds provided by the maintenance provisions will be sufficient to cover all contemplated costs; 
4.  A filing fee as prescribed by resolution of the city council; 
5.  Deeds for easements of rights-of-way or other dedications which have not been dedicated on the final subdivision or parcel map. Written evidence acceptable to the city attorney in the form of rights-of-entry or permanent easements across private property outside of the subdivision, permitting or granting access to perform necessary construction work and permitting maintenance of the facility; 
6.  A certificate from the county tax collector stating that all taxes due have been paid or that a tax bond or other adequate form of security assuring payments of all taxes which are a lien but not yet payable has been filed with the county; 
7.  All other data required by law or by the conditions of approval of the tentative subdivision or parcel map, including plans, reports, agreements, permits, fees, security or other requirements; 
8.  If, as a condition of approval of the tentative parcel map, the subdivider has been required to construct or install certain improvements which have not been completed at the time of approval of the parcel map, a certificate indicating the improvement requirements shall be affixed to the map. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.05.030 - Submittal. 
For purposes of filing a final subdivision or parcel map, the subdivider shall submit five, or more, if required by the city engineer, blue line prints of the map to the city engineer for reviewing. The city engineer will review the map and one blue line print will be returned to the subdivider or his engineer showing modifications thereon, if any. The remaining prints will be retained for departmental purposes. The city engineer will request additional blue line prints for each additional review submittal. When the map is found to be complete, an original tracing (tracing cloth or polyester base film) with blue line copies will be requested by the city engineer. Upon receipt of all required certificates and submittals, the city engineer shall sign the appropriate certificates. The city engineer shall transmit final parcel maps with offers of dedication and all final subdivision maps to the city council for approval. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.05.040 - Approval. 
A.  City Engineer. The city engineer shall have final approval of parcel maps with no offers of dedication. The city engineer shall approve the parcel map if it is in compliance with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this title, and the tentative parcel map and all conditions thereof. The city engineer shall deny the parcel map if it is not in compliance. 
B.  City Council. After receipt of said map, the city council shall act upon the final subdivision or parcel map within the time and in the manner prescribed by the Subdivision Map Act. The city council shall also approve, conditionally approve, subject to public improvements, or disapprove, any offer of dedication pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act. The city council shall approve the final map or parcel map if the city has approved a tentative map for the proposed subdivision and if the city council finds that the final map or parcel map is in compliance with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this title, and the tentative map and all conditions thereof. It shall deny the final map if it is not in compliance. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.05.050 - Recordation. 
The city clerk shall transmit the approved parcel map or final map to the county recorder, subject to the provisions of Section 66464 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
Chapter 17.06 - VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS 
Sections: 
 
17.06.010 - Authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, Chapter 4.5, commencing with Section 66498.1, of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the state. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.06.020 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish procedures necessary for the implementation of the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. Except as otherwise set forth in the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this title shall apply. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.06.030 - Filing and processing. 
A.  Whenever a tentative map or a tentative parcel map is filed for a residential or nonresidential development, the subdivider may file a vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  At the time a vesting tentative map is filed it shall have printed conspicuously on its face "Vesting Tentative Map." If the map is a vesting tentative parcel map the words "Vesting Tentative Parcel Map" shall appear conspicuously on its face. 
C.  In addition to the other information required by this title to be shown on or provided with a tentative map or tentative parcel map, a vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map shall show or be accompanied by the following information in a form satisfactory to the director of planning: 
1.  The height, bulk and location of proposed buildings; 
2.  Plans and specifications for all public facilities including but not limited to on-site and off-site sewer, water, drainage, roads, and other improvements. The subdivider shall submit detailed geological, drainage, flood control, soils, traffic, acoustical, market feasibility, fiscal impact or other reports deemed necessary by the city engineer or director of planning to permit a complete review of the design and improvements for the subdivision; 
3.  Detailed final grading plans showing existing and proposed finished grades at two-foot intervals; 
4.  Information on the uses to which the buildings will be put and general architectural renderings of the buildings; 
5.  Detailed landscape plans. 
D.  All vesting tentative maps, regardless of the number of lots, shall be considered by the city council after a report and recommendation by the planning commission. 
E.  All vesting tentative parcel maps shall be referred to the planning commission for consideration. The decision of the planning commission concerning a tentative parcel map shall be final except as otherwise provided by this title regarding appeals and city council review. 
F.  The time for filing a final map for a vesting tentative map shall not be extended. Failure to file a final map within the time period established at the time of tentative map approval shall eliminate all proceedings, and no final map or parcel map for all of any part of the property included within the vesting tentative map shall be filed without first processing a new tentative map pursuant to this title. 
G.  The time for filing a parcel map for a vesting tentative parcel map shall not be extended. Failure to file a parcel map within the time period established at the time of tentative map approval shall eliminate all proceedings, and no final map or parcel map for all or any part of the property included within the vesting tentative map shall be filed without first processing a new tentative parcel map pursuant to this title. 
H.  A vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map shall not be approved or conditionally approved unless the city council or planning commission, whichever is the final decision-making body, finds on the basis of the studies and reports submitted by the subdivider that all public facilities necessary to serve the subdivision or mitigate any impacts created by the subdivision will be available for the entire time that the vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map is valid plus any time during which the rights conferred by Section 17.06.040 exists. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.06.040 - Rights conferred. 
A.  Approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map shall confer a right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards described in Section 66474.2 of the Government Code. However, if Section 66474.2 is repealed the approval or conditional approval shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map was approved or conditionally approved. Any disputes whether a development substantially complies with the approved or conditionally approved map, or with the ordinances, policies or standards described in this subsection, shall be resolved by the city council. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, the permit or entitlement for development may be conditionally approved or denied if at the time of the issuance of the permit approval or entitlement it is determined by the issuing authority or the city council on appeal: 
1.  A failure to condition or deny the permit or entitlement would place the residents of the subdivision or of the immediate community or both in a condition dangerous to their health or safety or both; or 
2.  The condition or denial is required in order to comply with state or federal law. 
C.  The rights conferred by a vesting tentative map or the vesting tentative parcel map shall expire if: 
1.  A final map or parcel map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map or the vesting tentative parcel map; or 
2.  The applicant has requested and the city has approved a change in the type, density, bulk or design of the development unless an amendment to the vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map has been approved. 
D.  Upon the filing of a final map or parcel map for a vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map the rights conferred by subsection (A) of this section shall continue for one year. Where several final maps or parcel maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map this period shall begin for each phase when the final map or parcel map for that phase is recorded. 
E.  The time period set forth in subsection (D) of this section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds thirty days from the date a complete application is accepted. 
F.  A subdivider may file a request with the director of planning for a one-year extension of the rights conferred by subsection (D) of this section at any time before the time period set forth in subsection (D) of this section expires. An extension may be granted only if the council or planning commission, whichever was the approving body, finds that the map still complies with the requirements of this chapter. The planning commission or city council may approve, conditionally approve or deny an extension in its sole discretion. The planning commission's decision shall not be appealable. Where the city council is the approving body, it shall consider the recommendation of the planning commission. 
G.  If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time set forth in subsections (D) through (F) of this section the rights referred to therein shall continue until the expiration of that building permit or any extension of that permit. 
H.  Upon the expiration of the time limits specified in subsections (C), (D), (E), (F), or (G) of this section all rights conferred by this section shall cease and the project shall be considered as the same as any subdivision which was not processed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.06.050 - Consistency with zoning and general plan. 
No vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map shall be approved if the proposed map and the design or improvement of the proposed development are not consistent with the applicable general, specific or master plans or with the applicable provisions of Title 18. If development of the project for which a vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map requires any permits or approvals pursuant to Title 18 of this code (Zoning), those permits or approvals shall be processed concurrently with the vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map. A vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map shall not be approved if all other discretionary permits or approvals have not been approved either prior to or concurrently with approval of the map. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
Chapter 17.07 - DEDICATIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
17.07.010 - General requirements. 
The standards and requirements as specified in this title and as adopted by resolution or ordinance of the city council, shall apply to all final subdivision and parcel maps unless otherwise indicated by this title, or unless expressly waived by the city council. Additional requirements may be recommended to the city council by the director of planning or the city engineer as prescribed in Chapter 17.08. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.07.020 - Dedications. 
The subdivider shall offer to dedicate the following for public use: 
A.  All streets, highways, alleys, ways, easements, rights-of-way, and parcels of land shown on the final subdivision or parcel map and intended for public use by appropriate certificate on the title page. All irrevocable offers of dedication shall also be shown by appropriate certificate on the title page; 
B.  Vehicular access rights from any parcel to any highway or street when required by the conditions of approval of the tentative subdivision or parcel map. Such rights shall be offered for dedication by appropriate certificate on the title sheet, and a note stating: "Vehicular Access Rights Dedicated to the City of National City" shall be lettered along the highway or street adjacent to the parcels affected on the final map; 
C.  All streets, highways, alleys, ways, easements, rights-of-way, and other public improvements offered for dedication shall be designed, developed, and improved according to the standards of the city and to the satisfaction of the city engineer; 
D.  Any private utility easements required by the various utilities shall be shown on the final subdivision or parcel map and dedicated to the appropriate agency by separate document; 
E.  All drainage easements: 
1.  When storm drainage improvements are required on private property the subdivider shall offer to dedicate upon the final subdivision or parcel map thereon the necessary rights-of-way for such improvements plus access thereto, or 
2.  When the property being subdivided, or any portion thereof, is so situated as to be in the path of the natural drainage from adjoining property and no street, alley, or way within the subdivision is planned to provide for the drainage of such adjoining property, the subdivider shall offer to dedicate drainage and access easements adequate to provide in the future for the ultimate drainage of the adjoining property; 
F.  The city may require that areas of real property within the subdivision be dedicated or reserved for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries, or other public uses subject to the provisions of Section 66479 through Section 66432 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.07.030 - Improvements.  
17.07.031 - Improvements—Generally. 
The subdivider shall construct all required improvements, both on-site and off-site, in accordance with the standard engineering specifications and other approved standards as provided by this chapter and by the city council's resolution or resolutions establishing such standards. 
No final map shall be presented to the council for approval or parcel map approved by the city engineer until the subdivider either completes the required improvements, or enters into an agreement with the city to do the work. 
The agreement to complete the subdivision improvements shall be guaranteed by the posting of appropriate security. Plans, profiles and specifications of proposed improvements shall be submitted to the city engineer for review, accompanied by a checking fee as set by resolution of the city council. The improvement plans must be approved by the city engineer prior to the approval of the final subdivision or parcel map. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.07.032 - Required improvements. 
All improvements as may be required as conditions of approval of the tentative map or tentative parcel map, or by city ordinance or resolution, together with, but not limited to, the required improvements set forth below shall be required of all subdivisions. 
Requirements for construction of on-site and off-site improvements for subdivisions of four or fewer parcels shall be noted on the parcel map, or waiver of parcel map or the subdivision improvement agreement recorded prior to or concurrent with the parcel map. 
The minimum improvements required of the subdivider for final subdivision and parcel maps, are as follows: 
A.  Grading and improvement of public and private streets and alleys including surfacing, curbs, gutters, cross gutters, sidewalks, ornamental street lighting, street name signs and necessary barricades and safety devices: 
1.  Grading. All streets and alleys or other access ways shall be graded according to plans and profiles approved by the city engineer and city council. 
2.  Subgrading and Surfacing. All streets within the subdivision and the subdivider's half of all streets bounding the subdivision shall be constructed per city standards or per standards established by a soils report and determined acceptable by the city engineer. The soils report shall be prepared by a California registered civil engineer or jointly by a California registered civil engineer and a geologist if so required by the city engineer. 
B.  Sufficient storm drainage and flood control facilities to carry storm runoff both tributary to and originating within the subdivision. Such facilities may be located within or outside of the subdivision. 
1.  Flow of water in any natural waterways changed or otherwise modified by an improvement within or in connection with the new subdivision shall be provided for with culverts or channels designed in conformity with good engineering practice. Surface drainage accumulated in streets shall be discharged into natural waterways by means of structures or channels satisfactory to the city engineer. 
C.  A sanitary sewage system serving each lot or unit of the subdivision, subject to approval of the city engineer. 
D.  A water supply system providing an adequate supply of potable water to each lot and fire hydrants within the subdivision. The water supply system shall be of the size and design prescribed by the water district subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
E.  Fire hydrants and connections shall be of the type and at locations specified by the fire marshal. 
F.  Survey monuments. 
G.  Public utility distribution facilities, including gas, electric and telephone necessary to serve each lot in the subdivision. All new utility distribution facilities within the boundaries of the subdivision and within the half street abutting any new subdivision shall be placed underground. 
H.  The city may require that improvements installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision shall contain supplemental size, capacity or number for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, and that such improvements be dedicated to the public pursuant to Sections 66485 and 66486 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
I.  If the subdivider is required to construct off-site improvements on land in which neither the subdivider nor the city has sufficient title or interest to allow construction, the city shall, within one hundred twenty days of recording the final map, acquire by negotiation or commence condemnation of the land. If the city fails to meet the one hundred twenty day time limit, the condition for the construction shall be waived. Prior to approval of the final map, the city may require the subdivider to enter into an agreement to complete the off-site improvements at the time the city acquires title of an interest in the land. 
The subdivider shall pay the cost of acquiring off-site land or an interest in the land required to construct the off-site improvements. 
J.  The location of utilities serving the lot shall be marked and identified at the curb. 
(Ord. 2105, 1996; Ord. 2033 § 3, 1992: Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.07.040 - Design and improvement standards. 
Standards for design and improvements of subdivisions shall be in accordance with the applicable sections of the land use code, the general plan, any specific plans adopted by the city, the requirements established by the city engineer, and the following: 
A.  Relations to Adjoining Street Systems. 
1.  Unless otherwise recommended by the planning commission, new subdivisions shall make provisions for the continuation of the principal existing streets in adjoining or adjacent subdivisions insofar as they may be necessary for public requirements. 
2.  In general, streets shall extend to the boundary of the subdivision to provide the proper access to the adjoining property and provide for proper connection with the roadway systems for contiguous and adjacent land. 
B.  Blocks. 
1.  The length of blocks shall not exceed six hundred sixty feet. 
2.  The width of blocks shall generally be sufficient to allow two tiers of lots. 
C.  Lots. 
1.  All lots shall front on a public street, or on a private street if permitted pursuant to subsection (D) of this section. 
2.  The side line of lots shall be as nearly at right angles or radial to the street upon which the lots face as practicable. 
3.  The width and the minimum area of each residential lot shall be governed by Title 18 of this code (Zoning) 
4.  Lots must not be cut by a city boundary line. City boundary lines may be lot lines or centerlines of streets or alleys. 
D.  Private Streets, Alleys, or Ways. 
1.  Private streets, alleys, or ways shall be permitted only where an approved specific plan or planned unit development permit authorizes a private street and only when the welfare of the occupants of the subdivision will be better served and the public welfare will not be impaired. Such private street, alley, or way shall not be offered for dedication and shall be shown on the final subdivision or parcel map as a parcel and lettered alphabetically. All private streets, alleys, or ways shall be designed, developed, and improved to the planned unit development standards of the city, except as may be otherwise recommended by the city engineer. 
2.  All such access ways shall be governed by maintenance agreements. Said agreements shall be approved by the city and be made a part of the property deed. They shall conform to provisions of National City Municipal Code Section 17.05.020(C)(3) to grant the city the authority but not the obligation to assume maintenance and assess full costs. 
(Ord. 2033 § 4, 1992: Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.07.050 - Improvement plans. 
Improvement plans shall be prepared by a California registered civil engineer and shall be completed to the satisfaction of the city engineer prior to acceptance of the final subdivision or parcel map. All improvements shall conform to the standard specifications and drawings of the city. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.07.060 - Exceptions. 
A.  Exceptions may be granted to the requirements or standards imposed by these regulations where consistent with, or not specifically prohibited by, the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. The exceptions may be granted by the city council or by the planning commission for tentative parcel maps, subject to appeal. In granting such exceptions or modifications, the following finding shall be made: 
1.  The property to be divided is of such size and shape, or is affected by such topographic conditions that it is impossible or impracticable in the particular case to conform fully to the subdivision requirements; 
2.  The exception will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or be detrimental to the use of other properties in the vicinity; and 
3.  Granting of the exception is in accordance with the intent and purposes of this title, and is consistent with the general plan and with all applicable specific plans or other plans of the city. 
B.  The decision to grant an exception shall not be based on the consideration of cost to the subdivider of strict or literal compliance with the regulations. 
C.  In granting any exceptions, there shall be imposed such conditions as are necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare and assure compliance with the general plan, all applicable specific plans, and with the intent and purpose of this title. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
Chapter 17.08 - ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 
 
17.08.010 - Soils report. 
A.  A soils report, based upon adequate test borings, shall be required and submitted to the city engineer for every subdivision for which a final subdivision or parcel map is required. The soils report shall be prepared by a California registered civil engineer, or jointly by a California registered civil engineer and a geologist if so required by the city engineer. The soils report may be waived if the city engineer finds that sufficient knowledge exists as to the soils qualities of the subdivision. 
B.  In the event the soils report indicates the presence of expansive soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected would lead to structural defects, a soils investigation of each lot or parcel in the subdivision may be required and must be performed by a California registered civil engineer, who shall recommend the corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage. 
C.  The subdivision or any portion thereof where such problems exist may be approved if it is determined that the recommended corrective action is likely to prevent any structural damage and that the issuance of any building permit shall be conditioned to include this recommended corrective action prior to the construction of each building involved. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.08.020 - Monuments. 
At the time of making the survey for all final subdivision or parcel maps, a California registered civil engineer or California licensed surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with the standards of the Subdivision Map Act and requirements established by the city engineer, as follows: 
A.  Boundary Monuments. The exterior boundary of the subdivision shall be monumented with permanent monuments consisting of not smaller than two-inch galvanized iron pipes at least twenty-four inches long set at each corner, at intermediate points along the boundary not more than one thousand feet apart and at the beginning and end points of all curves; provided, if any existing record and identified monument meeting the foregoing requirements is found at any such corner or point, such monument may be used in lieu of a new monument. 
B.  Lot Corner Monuments. All lot corners, except when coincident with an exterior boundary corner, shall be monumented with permanent monuments of one of the following types: (i) three-fourths-inch diameter iron pipe at least eighteen inches long; (ii) one-half-inch diameter steel rod at least eighteen inches long; (iii) lead plug and copper identification disks set in concrete sidewalk or curbs. 
C.  Such additional monuments to mark the limiting lines of streets as the city engineer may require. 
D.  All other monuments set or proposed to be set shall be as indicated on the final map. 
E.  All monuments and their installation shall conform to the city standards. 
F.  Where the setting of monuments is deferred following filing of a final subdivision or parcel map, such monuments shall be set within thirty days after the completion of the required improvements. The engineer or surveyor who set the monuments shall notify the city engineer that all monuments have been exposed and are available for inspection. The monuments shall be inspected and found to be satisfactory by the city engineer before the improvements are accepted. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.08.030 - Standard of design. 
All standards of design for public improvements within the city shall be enacted by ordinance of the city council. The city engineer shall maintain a manual setting forth such standards. Said manual shall set forth the details of design and design criteria such that engineers providing services for subdivider may readily incorporate such standard by reference. Three copies of said manual shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 2033 § 5, 1992: Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.08.040 - Basis of bearings. 
Every subdivision or parcel map shall: 
A.  Use the California Coordinate System for its "basis of bearings" and express all measured and calculated bearing values in terms of the system. The angle of grid divergence from a true meridian (theta or mapping angle) and the north point of said map shall appear on each sheet thereof. Establishment of said basis of bearings may be by use of existing horizontal control stations or astronomic observations. 
B.  Show two measured ties from the boundary of the subject property to existing horizontal control station(s) having California coordinate values of third order accuracy or better, as published in the county of San Diego's horizontal control book. These tie lines to the existing control shall be shown in relation to the California Coordinate System (i.e., grid bearings and grid distances). All other distances shown on the map are to be shown as ground distances. A combined factor for conversion of grid-to-ground distances shall be shown on the map. 
If there are no acceptable horizontal control stations within one-half mile of the subject property, then the engineer or land surveyor may make a written request to the engineering department for additional control stations within the subject area. 
The city may provide a coordinated monument (using the North American datum of 1983) by tying either a section, quarter-section, or rancho or other appropriate land net corner or road centerline which is intervisable with an existing monument in the local control network. 
In the event the city is unable to provide an acceptable horizontal control station within one-half mile of the subject property within thirty days of written request, this requirement may be waived. 
None of the above will preclude a person, authorized to practice land surveying, from performing the necessary work to meet the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. 1988 § 1, 1990)  
17.08.050 - Condominium conversions—Notices. 
Any tentative or final parcel or subdivision map for a condominium conversion, as permitted pursuant to provisions of Title 18, shall comply with applicable requirements of the state Subdivision Map Act, in particular Government Code Section 66427.1. 
(Ord. 2216 § 5, 2003)  
Chapter 17.09 - BONDING AND IMPROVEMENT SECURITY 
Sections: 
 
17.09.010 - Improvement agreement. 
Prior to the approval of the final subdivision map or of the parcel map the subdivider shall execute and file an agreement with the city, which shall specify the period within which he shall complete all improvement work to the satisfaction of the city engineer, and providing that if he shall fail to complete such work within such period, the city may complete the work and recover the full cost and expense thereof from the subdivider. This agreement shall also provide for inspection of all improvements by the city engineer. A fee as set by resolution of the city council, must be paid by the subdivider for the cost of such inspection. The agreement shall be prepared to the satisfaction of the city engineer and approved as to form by the city attorney. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.09.020 - Subdivision improvement security. 
To guarantee the performance of any action or agreement with regard to the proposed subdivision, security shall be furnished as follows: 
A.  A faithful performance security for the purpose of subdivision improvement set at an amount determined by the city engineer equal to one hundred percent of the total estimated cost of the improvement or of the act to be performed, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the act or agreement; 
B.  A labor and materials security furnished as an additional amount determined by the city engineer equal to fifty percent of the total estimated cost of the improvements or of the performance of the required act to guarantee payment to the contractor, his subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials, or equipment to them for completion of the improvements or of the performance of the required act; 
C.  The monumentation agreements shall be accomplished by a faithful performance security in a sum equal to the cost of setting such monuments, guaranteeing the faithful performance of all such work of setting monuments and furnishing notes; 
D.  Any changes, alterations or additions to the improvement plans and specifications or to the improvements, not exceeding ten percent of the original estimated cost of the improvement, which are mutually agreed upon by the city and the subdivider, shall not require an increase in the amount of the improvement security given for faithful performance of the improvement. In the event such changes, alterations or additions exceed ten percent of the original security for faithful performance as required by subsection A of this section for one hundred percent of the total estimated cost of the improvement as changed, altered or amended, minus any completed partial release thereof as allowed by Section 17.09.030 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1988 § 2, 1990; Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.09.030 - Improvement security release. 
Ninety percent of the faithful performance subdivision improvement security shall be released upon completion and acceptance of the work required under the agreement for the guarantee and warranty of said work. The remaining ten percent of the faithful performance subdivision improvement security shall continue in effect for a period of one year following the completion and acceptance of said work. 
The procedure for release shall be a written communication from the city clerk to the subdivider and the maker of the bond or holder of the surety. The city clerk shall make such a release letter only upon the recommendation of the city engineer. Prior to making such a recommendation, the city engineer shall ensure that all actions or improvements affecting other departments or agencies have been properly completed to the satisfaction of such departments or agencies including, but not limited the director of planning, and agencies handling water, sewer, electricity, gas, and street lighting. 
The city engineer may release a portion of the security in conjunction with acceptance of the performance of this act or work as it progresses upon a written communication by the subdivider; provided, however, that no such release shall be for an amount less than twenty-five percent of the total improvement security given for faithful performance of the act or work, and that the security shall not be reduced to an amount less than fifty percent of the total improvement security given for faithful performance until final completion and acceptance of the act or work. In no event shall the city engineer authorize a release of the improvement security which would reduce such security to an amount below that required to guarantee the completion of the act or work and any other obligation imposed by the National City Municipal Code, or the Subdivision Map Act. 
Security given to secure payment to the contractor, his subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment shall, six months after the completion and acceptance of the act or work, be reduced to an amount equal to the amount of all claims therefor filed and of which notice has been given to the city council plus an amount reasonably determined by the city engineer to be required to assure the performance of any other obligation secured thereby. The balance of the security shall be released upon the settlement of all such claims and obligations for which the security was given. 
No security given for the guarantee or warranty of work shall be released until the expiration of the period thereof and until any claim filed during said period has been settled. 
In the event that the subdivider fails to perform any obligation hereunder, the subdivider authorizes the city to perform such obligations twenty days after mailing written notice of default to the subdivider and to the subdivider's surety, and agrees to pay the entire cost of such performance by the city. 
The sums provided by the improvement security may be used by the city for the completion of the public improvements within the subdivision. 
The city may take over the work and prosecute the same to completion, by contract or by any other method the city may deem advisable, at the expense of the subdivider, and the subdivider's surety shall be liable to the city for any excess cost or damages occasioned by the city thereby; and, in such event, the city, without liability for so doing, may take possession of, and utilize in completing the work, such materials, appliances, plant and other property belonging to the subdivider as may be on the site of the work and necessary therefor. 
In the event that the subdivider fails to perform any obligation hereunder, the subdivider agrees to pay costs and expenses incurred by the city in securing performance of such obligations, including costs of the suit and reasonable attorney's fees. 
The subdivider shall guarantee or warranty the work done for a period of one year after final acceptance of said work against any defective work or labor done or defective materials furnished. If within said period any structure or part of any structure furnished and/or installed or constructed, or caused to be installed or constructed by the subdivider, or any of the work done under this agreement, fails to fulfill any of the requirements of this agreement or the plans and specifications referred to herein, the subdivider shall without delay and without any cost to the city, repair or replace or reconstruct any defective or otherwise unsatisfactory part or parts of the work or structure. Should the subdivider fail to act promptly or in accordance with this requirement, the subdivider hereby authorizes city, at the city's option, to perform the work twenty days after mailing written notice of default to the subdivider and agrees to pay the cost of such work by the city. Should the urgent need of the case require repairs or replacements to be made before the subdivider can be notified, the city may, at its option, make the necessary work and the subdivider shall pay to the city the cost of such repairs. 
(Ord. 1988 § 3, 1990: Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.09.040 - Forms of security. 
The form of security shall be one or a combination of the following at the option and subject to approval of the city: 
A.  A bond or bonds furnished by a surety company authorized to write the same in the state, subject to the approval and acceptance by the city attorney and the city council; 
B.  Cash or acceptable equivalent may be deposited in lieu of any faithful performance bond required by this section, where the subdivider may deposit with the city a sum of money equal to the required amount of such bond or security for the faithful performance thereof. No separate labor and material bond shall be required when cash surety is used; however, an amount equal to the required labor and material bond will not be released until six months following completion and acceptance of the improvements and then such release will be less any unsettled claims; 
C.  Other forms of security will be permitted when approved by the city attorney. These would include letters of credit, assignment bank or savings and loan pass book accounts, and completion of proceedings under one of the state assessment district acts. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
Chapter 17.10 - MERGER OF ACCOUNTS 
Sections: 
 
17.10.010 - Requirements for merger of contiguous parcels. 
Two or more contiguous parcels or units of land held by the same owner shall be merged if one of the parcels or units of land does not conform to the minimum parcel or lot size required by Title 18 of this code, and if the following circumstances exist: 
A.  One of the parcels or units of land is not developed by any structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with one or more accessory structures, or is developed with a single structure that is also partially sited on the contiguous parcel with which it would be merged. 
Merger shall occur only to the extent necessary to establish lots conforming to the current standards for minimum parcel area and dimensions and after a public hearing has been held thereon pursuant to Section 17.10.050. 
B.  One or more of the following conditions affects any of the parcels: 
1.  Comprises less than five thousand square feet in area at the time of the determination of merger; 
2.  Was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation; 
3.  Does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply; 
4.  Does not meet slope stability standards; 
5.  Has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability; 
6.  Its development would create health or safety hazards; 
7.  Is inconsistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards. 
C.  For purposes of determining whether contiguous parcels are held by the same owner, ownership shall be determined as of the date that the notice of intention to determine status is recorded pursuant to this chapter. 
D.  Subsection (B) of this section shall not apply if any of the conditions stated in Section 66451.11(A), (B), (C), or (D) of the Subdivision Map Act exist. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.10.020 - Treatment of lots after merger. 
After merger has occurred under this chapter, such parcels or units of land shall be treated as a single parcel under the provisions of this code. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.10.030 - Contiguity. 
Property shall be considered as contiguous parcels or units of land if they are adjoining, even if they are separated by roads, streets, alleys, railroad rights-of-way, or other features deemed to be similar by the director of planning. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.10.040 - Notice of intention to determine status for merger of parcels. 
A notice of intention to determine status for merger of parcels shall be provided by the director of planning prior to recordation of a notice of merger in the following manner: 
A.  The notice shall be mailed, by certified mail, to the current record owner of the affected parcels. 
B.  The notice shall be filed for record with the county recorder on the date that it is mailed to the property owner. 
C.  The notice shall state the following: 
1.  That the affected parcels may be merged pursuant to the requirements of this chapter; 
2.  That a written request for a hearing before the planning commission may be submitted to the planning department within thirty days from the date the notice was recorded to present evidence that the property does not meet the criteria for merger. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.10.050 - Planning commission hearing. 
A hearing, if requested, shall be scheduled by the director of planning, and shall be subject to the following requirements: 
A.  Notice of hearing shall be mailed to the owner, by certified mail, indicating the time, date and place of the hearing. 
B.  The hearing shall be conducted within sixty days following the receipt of the owner's request, or may be postponed or continued by mutual consent of the planning director, or planning commission, and the owner. 
C.  At the hearing, the owner shall be given the opportunity to present any evidence that the affected property does not meet the requirements for merger. 
D.  At the conclusion of the hearing, the planning commission shall determine that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged and shall notify the owner of the determination. The planning department shall mail a notice of the determination to the owner following the hearing. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.10.060 - Alternative for determination of merger. 
The planning commission may determine that the parcels are not to be merged whether or not the affected property satisfies the requirements for merger in Section 17.10.010. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.10.070 - Recordation of notice of merger. 
A.  Subsequent to Hearing. If the planning commission makes a determination that the parcels are to be merged, a notice of merger shall be filed for record with the county recorder by the director of planning within thirty days of the conclusion of the hearing, unless the decision has been appealed pursuant to Section 17.10.080. The notice of merger shall specify the name of the record owner and a description of the property. If the planning commission makes a determination that the parcels shall not be merged, a release of the notice of intention to determine status shall be filed for record with the county recorder by the director of planning and a clearance letter shall be mailed to the owner by the director of planning. 
B.  Determination When No Hearing is Requested. If the owner does not file a request for a hearing within thirty days after the recording of the notice of intention to determine status, the director of planning may, at any time thereafter, make a determination that the parcels are or are not to be merged. If they are to be merged, a notice of merger shall be filed for record with the county recorder by the director of planning within ninety days after the mailing of the notice of intention to determine status pursuant to Section 17.10.040. If the parcels are not be merged, a release of the notice of intention to determine status shall be filed for record with the county recorder by the director of planning. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.10.080 - Appeals. 
The determination of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council in accordance with Section 17.04.050(B). The city council shall hear the appeal within sixty days from the day of appeal. The hearing shall be held in accordance with Section 17.10.050. If, after the hearing, the city council grants the appeal and determines that the affected property has not been merged pursuant to this chapter, the director of planning shall file for record with the county recorder a release of the notice of intention to determine status and mail a clearance letter to the owner. If the city council denies the appeal, a notice of merger shall be filed for record with the county recorder by the planning director within thirty days after the hearing. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.10.090 - Request to merge by property owner. 
If the merger of contiguous parcels or units is initiated by the record owner, but is consistent with city requirements, the owner may waive in writing the right to a hearing before the planning commission and to all notices required by this chapter. Upon receipt of such waiver, the department shall simultaneously file for record with the county recorder a notice of intention to determine status, the waiver of right of hearing and notice, and a notice of merger. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.10.100 - Unmerged parcels (Sections 66451.30 et seq.). 
Any parcel for which a notice of merger had not been recorded on or before January 1, 1984, shall be unmerged if on that date. 
A.  The parcel meets each of the following criteria: 
1.  Contains at least five thousand square feet in area, 
2.  Was created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation, 
3.  Meets current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply, 
4.  Meets slope density standards, 
5.  Has legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability, 
6.  Its unmerger and development would create no health or safety hazards, 
7.  The unmerged parcel would be consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards; 
B.  None of the conditions stated in Section 66451.30(b)(l), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of the Subdivision Map Act exist. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.10.110 - Request for determination of unmerger by owner. 
Upon written application made by the owner to the director of planning, the planning commission shall make a determination as to whether any parcels have merged or are to be merged or have not merged. 
If the planning commission determines that the parcels meet the requirements for unmerger in Section 17.10.100, a notice of status shall be issued to the owner and filed for record with the county recorder by the director of planning, which shall identify each parcel and declare that they are unmerged pursuant to this chapter. 
If the planning commission determines that the parcels have merged, a notice of merger specifying the record owner and description of the parcel shall be issued to the owner and filed for record with the county recorder by the director of planning, unless appealed to the city council. The appeal must be filed, in writing, with the city clerk, within ten days of the determination by the planning commission. If the city council denies the appeal, the planning director shall issue to the owner and file for record with the county clerk said notice of merger. If the city council grants the appeal, a notice of status shall be issued to the owner and filed for record with the county recorder by the director of planning. The notice shall identify each parcel and declare that they are unmerged pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.10.120 - Fees for mergers and unmergers. 
A fee and/or deposit for processing mergers and unmergers at the request of an owner shall be charged to the owner, in accordance with Section 17.01.050. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
Chapter 17.11 - ADJUSTMENT PLATS 
Sections: 
 
17.11.010 - Submittal. 
Any person desiring to adjust the boundaries between two or more existing parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally existing is not thereby created, shall file an application for an adjustment plat with the city engineer. The city engineer shall refer a copy of the proposed adjustment plat to the director of planning and may refer copies of such plat to other departments and public agencies for review and comment thereon. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.11.020 - Adjustment plats. 
A.  Specifications. Adjustment plats shall be filed with the city engineer in accordance with the following specifications: 
1.  The plat shall be drawn on a form provided by the city engineer. 
2.  The plat shall be drawn legibly to an engineer's scale (e.g., one inch equals one hundred feet). It shall be done with drawing ink only. 
3.  All parcels proposed to be adjusted shall be shown, including all contiguous property within the same ownership which is not a separate legal lot. 
4.  Each plat shall show not more than a total of four parcels. Additional applications and appropriate fees must be submitted if more than four parcels are involved. 
5.  The adjustment plat shall be prepared by a California registered civil engineer or California licensed land surveyor. 
B.  Required Information. Each adjustment plat shall contain the following information: 
1.  North point and scale of plat; 
2.  Name, address and telephone number of applicant, i.e., the person seeking approval of the adjustment plat; 
3.  Name, address, telephone number and signature of owner or owners, properly notarized on a separate sheet; 
4.  Name, address, telephone number of the engineer or surveyor who prepared the plat and his registration or license number; 
5.  The location, width and names, if any, of all existing streets and the location, width and purpose of all easements which lie within the exterior boundaries of the land containing the parcels whose boundaries are subject to the proposed adjustment; 
6.  The names of the owners be labeled within or adjacent to the parcels involved; 
7.  The existing boundary proposed to be relocated shall be shown as a dashed line and labeled "Existing Boundary"; 
8.  The proposed boundary shall be shown as a solid line and labeled "Proposed Boundary"; 
9.  Sufficient legal description of the land to define the boundaries of the ownerships involved and the tax assessor's parcel or parcels; 
10.  A small scale vicinity map; 
11.  The net area of each proposed lot; 
12.  The dimensions of each boundary of each proposed lot; 
13.  The location of all existing buildings and structures and their uses, the minimum distance between each building or structure and the boundary of the proposed lot within which it is situated; 
14.  A statement of the existing zoning and the proposed use of each lot; 
15.  A lot book guarantee from a title company will be required for each parcel. 
C.  Additional Documents Required. 
1.  A title report for the affected property; 
2.  Each adjustment plat for more than one owner shall be accompanied by grant deeds executed and acknowledged by owners for the transfer of property affected by the boundary adjustment. These deeds will be recorded simultaneously with the plat by the city; 
3.  A record of survey is required in order to assure proper recording of new boundary monuments resulting from the adjustment plat. The requirement for record of survey may be waived by the city engineer; 
4.  Any other information that the city engineer may require; 
5.  Fees as established by resolution. 
(Ord. 1988 § 4, 1990; Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.11.030 - Approval. 
A.  After said application for approval of an adjustment plat has been accepted as complete by the city engineer, the city engineer and director of planning shall approve or conditionally approve such plat if the adjustment plat does not: 
1.  Create any new parcels; 
2.  Include any parcels created illegally; 
3.  Impair any existing access or create a need for new access to any adjacent parcels; 
4.  Impair any existing easements or create a need for any new easements serving adjacent parcels; 
5.  Require substantial alteration of any existing improvements or create a need for any new improvements; 
6.  Adjust the boundary between lots or parcels for which a covenant of improvement requirements has been recorded and all required improvements stated therein have not been completed unless the city engineer determines the proposed boundary adjustment will not significantly affect said covenant of improvement requirements; 
7.  Cause the revised parcels to violate provisions of the general plan, any specific plan, zoning ordinance or building code; 
8.  Impair the ability of each revised parcel to be served by a sewer or septic system as determined by the city engineer. 
B.  The city engineer and planning director may impose such conditions of approval to be satisfied prior to recordation of the adjustment plat as they find necessary to insure that the boundary adjustments involved are in full compliance with this title and chapter. 
C.  In any case, where an adjustment plat is approved, it shall be reflected in a deed, record of survey or certificate of compliance, which shall be recorded. 
(Ord. 1988 § 5, 1990; Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
Chapter 17.12 - ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
17.12.010 - General. 
It is unlawful for any person, principal, agent or otherwise to sell, lease, finance, or transfer title to any portion of any subdivision or parcel of land in the city, for which a final parcel map or a final subdivision map is required pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act or this title, unless a final parcel map, final subdivision map, or certificate of compliance in full compliance with the Subdivision Map Act and this title has been filed with the county recorder's office. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.12.020 - Notice of violations. 
Whenever the director of planning has knowledge that real property has been divided, or has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title enacted pursuant thereto applicable at the time such violation occurred, he shall mail, by certified mail, a notice of intention to record a notice of violation. Said notice of intention shall describe the property in detail, name the owners of said property, give a full explanation of the violation, and clearly state that an opportunity will be given to the owner to present evidence. The notice shall specify a time, date and place for a meeting at which time the owner may present evidence to the planning commission why the notice should not be recorded. The notice shall also contain a description of the violations and an explanation as to why the subject parcel is not lawful under Section 66412.6(a) or (b) of the Subdivision Map Act. The meeting shall take place no sooner than thirty days nor later than sixty days from the date of mailing. If after the owner has presented evidence, it is determined by the planning commission that there has been no violation, the director of planning shall mail a clearance letter to the current owner of record. If, however, after the owner has presented evidence, the determination is made that there has been a violation, or if within fifteen days of receipt of the notice, the owner of the real property fails to inform the director of planning of the owner's objection to recording of the notice of violation, the director of planning shall record a notice of violation with the county recorder. The notice of violation, when recorded, shall be deemed to be constructive notice of the violation to all successors in interest in such real property. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.12.030 - Development approvals. 
No agency or city department shall issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to develop any real property which has been divided or which has resulted from a division in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or the provisions of this title enacted pursuant thereto applicable at the time of such division unless a certificate of compliance is issued pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.12.040. The authority to deny such a permit or such approval shall apply whether the applicant was the owner of record of the property at the time of the violation, or whether the applicant is either the current owner of record or a vendee of the current owner of record pursuant to a contract of sale of the property with or without actual or constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of acquisition of interest in the property. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
17.12.040 - Certificate of compliance. 
A.  Any person owning real property may request the issuance of a certificate of compliance stating that such real property (or any division thereof) complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. Such request shall be filed with the director of planning and accompanied by a fee, as adopted by resolution of the city council, and such information as may be prescribed by the director of planning and planning commission. 
B.  The planning commission shall make a determination that such real property complies with the applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title or that such real property does not comply with said provisions. The director of planning shall so notify the owner thereof setting forth the particulars of such compliance or noncompliance. 
C.  If the subject real property is found to be in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act and this title enacted pursuant thereto, the director of planning shall cause a certificate of compliance relative to such property to be filed for record with the county recorder. However, if the subject real property is found not to be in compliance with said provisions, such conditions as would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the applicant acquired his interest in the property may be imposed by the planning commission as a condition to granting a certificate of compliance. Upon the determination by the planning commission of conditions necessary to fulfill compliance, the director of planning shall then cause a conditional certificate of compliance to be filed for record with the county recorder. Such certificate shall serve as notice that the implementation of such conditions shall be required prior to subsequent issuance of any permits or other grants of approval for development of the property. 
(Ord. 1964 § 1 (part), 1988)  
Title 18 - ZONING[1] 
Chapters: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-2372, adopted Feb. 7, 2012, repealed Title 18 and enacted a new title as set out herein. The former Title 18 pertained to similar subject matter. For a complete derivation, see the Disposition of Ordinances. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
Chapter 18.10 - UNDERSTANDING THE LAND USE CODE 
 
18.10.010 - Purpose. 
A.  Purposes of This Title. 
1.  Promote and protect the public health, safety, welfare and general prosperity of the city; 
2.  Implement the general plan; 
3.  Encourage the most desirable and appropriate use of land for open space, residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, and other purposes, including the most desirable mix and intensity of uses and density of population throughout the city; 
4.  Ensure the orderly and adequate provision of infrastructure, facilities, and services such as streets, sidewalks, water, sewer, schools, and other public improvements; 
5.  Encourage the most appropriate use and occupancy of buildings; 
6.  Promote good planning and design; 
7.  Provide standards that include: the use and intensity of use of structures and land for residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, or other purposes; population density; the location, height, bulk and size of buildings and other structures; yards, courts, and other private and public open spaces; parking and loading; signs; the division of land; and grading. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.10.020 - Applicability. 
A.  Limitations on Land Use. Except as otherwise provided: 
1.  No building or part thereof or other structure shall be erected, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land, building, structure or premises be used, designated or intended to be used for any purpose or in any manner other than those uses listed in this title as permitted in the zone in which such building, land, or premises is located. 
2.  No building or part thereof or structure shall be erected, nor shall any existing building be altered, enlarged or rebuilt or moved into any zone, nor shall any open space be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity with the standards and regulations of this title. 
B.  Application of Provisions. The provisions of this title shall apply to all structures or land owned, operated or controlled by any person, corporation, or governmental agency, unless specifically excepted by ordinance or by applicable state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.10.030 - Authority, relationship to the general plan, specific plans, and design guidelines. 
A.  Statutory Authority. This title is adopted pursuant to the provisions of the Planning Law, Title 7 of the Government Code of the state. 
B.  Relationship to the General Plan. The Land Use Code is the primary tool used to implement the goals and policies contained within the general plan. All matters governed by this title shall substantially conform to the purposes, intent or provisions of the general plan. Any recommendations for zone changes, if found to be not in conformance with the general plan and its phrasing, should not be permitted unless it is also found that the general plan is in error or in need of change. In this situation, the general plan must also be amended to maintain consistency between the general plan and zoning. 
C.  Relationship to Specific Plans. Specific plans are designed to meet the requirements of the State Government Code and National City's General Plan. All uses, buildings, or structures located within a specific plan area shall comply with the provisions of the applicable specific plan. Where such provisions conflict with zoning regulations, the requirements of the adopted specific plan shall take precedence over the Land Use Code. In instances where the specific plan is silent, the Land Use Code shall prevail. 
D.  Relationship to Design Guidelines. The city's design guidelines are intended to supplement the general design and development regulations located in Division 4 of this Land Use Code. Conformance to the design guidelines is strongly encouraged, but not mandatory. The design guidelines represent the city's preferences and provide examples of appropriate, quality design that positively contribute to the character of the community, but they are not intended to preclude alternatives or restrict imagination. In the event there is a conflict between Division 4 of this Land Use Code and the design guidelines, the regulations in Division 4 shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.10.040 - Responsibility for administration. 
This Land Use Code shall be administrated by: the city council, the planning commission, and the city manager or his/her designee in compliance with Title 18 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.10.050 - Interpretation of land use code provisions. 
A.  Purpose. This section provides rules for resolving questions about the meaning or applicability of any part of this title. The provisions of this section are intended to ensure the consistent interpretation and application of the requirements of this Land Use Code and the General Plan. 
B.  Rules of Interpretation. 
1.  Authority. The city manager or his/her designee shall have the responsibility and authority on a staff level to interpret the meaning and applicability of all provisions and requirements of this title. 
2.  Language. 
a.  Terminology. When used in this title, the words "shall," "will," "is to," and "are to" are always mandatory. "Should" is not mandatory but is strongly recommended; and "may" is permissive. The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the future tense includes the present. The singular number includes the plural number, and the plural the singular, unless the natural construction of the word indicates otherwise. The words "include," "includes," and "including" mean "including but not limited to …." 
b.  Number of Days. Whenever a number of days is specified in this title, or in any permit, condition of approval, or notice issued or given as provided in this title, the number of days shall be construed as calendar days, unless business days are specified. Time limits will extend to the following business day where the last of the specified number of days falls on a day that the city is not open for business, except as otherwise provided for by other state and federal laws, regulations, and agencies. 
c.  Number of Months. Whenever a time limit in this title is specified in months, the number of months shall be deemed to be consecutive months. 
3.  Calculations and Rounding. Where provisions of this Land Use Code require calculations to determine applicable requirements, any fractional/decimal results of the calculations shall be rounded as provided by this section. 
a.  Residential Density and Number of Lots/Parcels. For example, the RS-1 zoning district allows a minimum lot area of ten thousand square feet for new subdivisions. Therefore, a parcel of thirty-eight thousand square feet could be subdivided into a maximum of three parcels, if approved by the review authority (38,000/10,000 = 3.8, which would be rounded down to three). Refer to Section 18.10.060(C) for rules regarding fractions. 
4.  Conflicting Requirements. Any conflicts between requirements of this title, or between this title and other regulations, shall be resolved as follows. 
a.  Land Use Code Provisions. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this title, the most restrictive requirement shall control. 
b.  Development Agreements or Specific Plans. In the event of any conflict between the requirements of this title and standards adopted as part of any development agreement or specific plan, the requirements of the development agreement or specific plan shall control. 
c.  Other Regulations. In the event of any conflict between requirements of this Land Use Code and other regulations of the city, the most restrictive requirement shall control as determined by the city. 
d.  Private Agreements. It is not intended that the requirements of this Land Use Code shall interfere with, repeal, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement that existed when this Land Use Code became effective. This Land Use Code applies to all land uses and development regardless of whether it imposes a greater or lesser restriction on the development or use of structures or land than an applicable private agreement or restriction, without affecting the applicability of any agreement or restriction. The city shall not enforce any private covenant or agreement unless it is a party to the covenant or agreement. 
e.  General Plan. See Section 18.10.030(B). 
5.  Internal Cross-References. When a provision of this Land Use Code refers to a requirement elsewhere, the subject of the cross reference is assumed to be another chapter, section, or subsection of this title, or another provision within the same section or chapter, unless the title of another document is provided. 
6.  Zoning Map Boundaries. See Chapter 18.20 (Zoning Map). 
7.  Allowable Uses of Land. See Chapters 18.21 through 18.26 for allowable land uses by zoning district. 
C.  Procedures for Interpretations. 
1.  Whenever the requirements of this title are subject to interpretation generally, or as applied to a specific case, the city manager or his/her designee shall issue a determination, or refer the matter to the planning commission for interpretation. 
2.  Request for Interpretation. The request for an interpretation or determination shall be filed with the city and shall include all information required by the city. 
3.  Referral of Interpretation. The city manager or his/her designee has the option of forwarding any determination of the meaning or applicability of any provision of this title directly to the planning commission for consideration. 
4.  Findings, Basis for Interpretation. The issuance of an interpretation shall include findings stating the basis for the interpretation. The basis for an interpretation may include technological changes or new industry standards. The issuance of an interpretation shall also include a finding documenting the consistency of the interpretation with the General Plan, and any applicable specific plan. 
5.  Record of Interpretations. 
a.  Interpretations shall be written and quote the provisions of this title interpreted, and the applicability in the particular or general circumstances that caused the need for interpretations; and 
b.  This title shall be amended to reflect interpretations made as soon as is practical. Until an amendment can occur, the city manager or his/her designee shall maintain a complete record of all interpretations indexed by the number of the chapter or section that is the subject of the interpretation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.10.060 - Rules of measurement. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to explain how various measurements referenced in this title are to be calculated. 
B.  Applicant Responsibility. For all calculations, the applicant shall be responsible for supplying drawings illustrating the measurements that apply to a project. These drawings shall be drawn to scale and of sufficient detail to allow easy verification upon inspection by the city. 
C.  Fractions. When calculating a maximum requirement, round down to nearest whole number. When calculating a minimum requirement, round up to nearest whole number. 
D.  Measuring Distances. 
1.  Measurements are the Shortest Distance. When measuring a required distance, such as the minimum distance between a structure and a lot line, the measurement is made at the closest or shortest distance between the two objects. 
2.  Distances are Measured Horizontally. Distances are measured along a horizontal plane unless otherwise specified. 
3.  Measurements Involving a Structure. Measurements involving a structure are made to the closest wall of the structure, unless otherwise specified. 
4.  Measurements Between Uses. When measuring the distance between two different uses, the measurement is calculated from closest lot line to lot line. 
E.  Measuring Height. 
1.  General. Height shall be considered the vertical distance from the highest point of any structure to the ground level directly below, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
2.  Measuring Building Height on Sloped Lots. Height shall be measured from any point on top of the building to a line directly below which connects to opposite perimeter walls, or other perimeter support systems, at the lower of natural or finished grade. All parts of a building, except for allowed projections specifically listed in this Land Use Code, shall comply with maximum height limits. 
3.  Measuring the Height of Buildings Located Near Retaining Walls. If any portion of a building lies within the setback area of a lot and the base of the retaining wall is at a lower elevation than the building, the height of the building shall be calculated from the base of the retaining wall (at the lower of natural or finished grade) rather than from the base of the building wall. 
4.  Measuring the Height of Combined Fences and Retaining Walls. When a fence is constructed on top of or within one foot of the face of an above-ground retaining wall, and located in a required yard, the height of the fence shall be measured from the top of the fence to the midpoint height of the retaining wall. 
F.  Measuring Lot Width and Depth. 
1.  Lot Width. Minimum lot width shall be measured at the front setback line, or from the front property line is there is no required setback, as determined by the zoning of the parcel. 
2.  Lot Depth. Lot depth is measured along an imaginary straight line drawn from the midpoint of the front property line of the lot to the midpoint of the rear property line or to the most distant point on any other lot line where there is no rear lot line. 
G.  Determining Floor Area. Floor area is the horizontal area (expressed in square feet) of all floors included within a building or buildings, according to the following rules: 
1.  Included in Floor Area. Floor area is deemed to include: 
a.  The floor of atrium and lobby areas. 
b.  Enclosed and roofed storage and equipment spaces. 
c.  Enclosed and roofed halls, stairways, and elevator shafts. 
d.  Enclosed and roofed porches and balconies. 
e.  Portions of basements and attics that meet building code height requirements for living space. 
f.  The actual floor space of mezzanines, interior balconies, and lofts. 
2.  Excluded from Floor Area. Floor area does not include: 
a.  Unenclosed balconies, decks, porches, and stairs. 
b.  Substandard height portions of attics and basements. 
c.  The area within a building adjacent to, and in an imaginary horizontal plane with, interior balconies, mezzanines, or lofts. 
H.  Determining Floor Area Ratio. Floor area ratio (FAR) is the ratio of the floor area of all principal and accessory buildings on a lot to the lot area. To calculate FAR, floor area is divided by lot area, and typically expressed as a decimal. For example, if the floor area of all buildings on a lot totals twenty thousand square feet, and the lot area is ten thousand square feet, the FAR is expressed as 2.0. 
I.  Determining Lot Coverage. Lot coverage is the ratio of the footprint of all structures on a lot to the lot area, typically expressed as a percentage. The footprints of all principal and accessory structures, including garages, carports and roofed porches, shall be summed in order to calculate lot coverage. The following structures shall be excluded from the calculations: 
1.  Unenclosed and unroofed structures; porches, landings, balconies, and stairways less than three feet in height. 
2.  Unenclosed and unroofed decks less than eighteen inches in height. 
3.  Eaves and roof overhangs projecting up to four feet from a wall. 
4.  Trellises and similar structures that do not have solid roofs. 
5.  Swimming pools and hot tubs that are not enclosed in roofed structures. 
6.  Trash enclosures. 
7.  Solar collectors. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
Chapter 18.11 - NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES, AND PARCELS 
 
18.11.010 - Purpose. 
Within the zones established by this title, there exist uses, structures and lots which were lawful before the Land Use Code was adopted or amended, but which would be prohibited under the terms of this title or future amendment to this title. It is the intent of this title to permit these nonconforming uses to continue until they are terminated, but not to encourage their expansion. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building where a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of the Land Use Code, provided such permit construction is diligently carried to completion. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.11.020 - Continuance. 
Any lawful nonconforming use existing at the time of adoption of the Land Use Code may be continued, provided such use is continually maintained and occupied. A nonconforming use in either a conforming building or a nonconforming building, structure, or portion of either shall neither be extended to any portion of the building or structure not so used nor be enlarged or extended to any other portion of the lot not actually so occupied at the time said use became nonconforming, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.11.030 - Enlargements and alterations. 
A.  Changes to Nonconforming Uses. No existing building or premises designed, arranged, intended, or devoted to a use not permitted in the zone in which such building or premises is located shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered, except: 
1.  Work done in any period of twelve months on ordinary structural alterations or replacements of walls, fixtures or plumbing not exceeding twice the building's assessed value, according to the assessment thereof by the county assessor for the fiscal year in which such work is done, shall be permitted. 
2.  These provisions shall not prevent the expansion, increase in capacity, modernization or replacement of such public utility buildings, structures, equipment, and features as are used directly for the delivery of or distribution of the service; provided, however, that all setback requirements of the zone in which the site is located shall be maintained and there shall be no enlargement of the site. 
3.  A single-family detached dwelling may be reconstructed or remodeled in accordance with the standards of the existing structure, i.e., in the same building location on the lot, the same size of the existing structure, and the same height as the existing structure; however, different materials and architectural details may be used. 
4.  A nonconforming use located in the Westside Specific Plan area that substitutes another nonconforming use in compliance with Section 18.11.040 may expand, enlarge, reconstruct, or structurally alter the footprint of the existing building or structure for that substituted nonconforming use up to twenty percent within the existing parcel in which it is located, subject to first obtaining a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.11.040 - Substituion of nonconforming uses. 
A.  Conversion of Nonconforming Uses. A nonconforming use may not be converted to any use except to a specifically permitted use in the zone of the parcel on which it is located; except that conversion of a lawful nonconforming use to a nonconforming use found by the planning commission to be a lawful nonconforming use on another site within the same zone may be allowed where a conditional use permit therefore has been approved; provided, that this shall in no way extend the abatement provisions contained in this chapter. The exception stated in this paragraph of allowing a conversion of a lawful nonconforming use to another nonconforming use within the same zone does not apply to nonconforming uses located within the Westside Specific Plan area. 
B.  Nonconforming Uses Located Within the Westside Specific Plan Area. 
1.  A nonconforming use located on a parcel or parcels located within the Westside Specific Plan may not be converted to any use except to a specifically permitted use in the zone of the parcel or parcels on which it is located, except as follows: 
a.  A nonconforming use may be converted to any use which is specifically permitted in the allowable uses for any of the zones identified in Appendix A of the Westside Specific Plan. 
2.  A nonconforming use that converts to another nonconforming use from Appendix A may enlarge and alter their footprint to the extent allowed in Section 18.11.030. 
C.  Nonconforming Uses in the CA Zone. In the CA zone where there exists commercial retail shopping facilities which became nonconforming at the time of the adoption of the Land Use Code, such facilities may continue to lease commercial space to uses typical of such facilities but not otherwise permitted in the CA zone. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.11.050 - Partially destroyed structures. 
A.  Nonconforming Buildings or Structures that Become Damaged. A nonconforming building or structure which is damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, or natural disaster may be restored and the occupancy or use of such structure or part thereof existing at the time of such partial destruction may be continued or resumed provided: 
1.  Such restoration results in an equal or lesser degree of nonconformity; 
2.  The total cost of such restoration for structures other than single-family detached dwellings does not exceed one-half the replacement cost of the structure at the time of such damage (the replacement cost will be calculated by the department of building and housing); 
3.  Such restoration is started within a period of one year and is carried out diligently to completion; 
4.  Such damage or destruction of structures is not intentionally caused by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.11.060 - Religious institutions. 
Religious Institutions of a permanent nature which became nonconforming at the time of adoption of the Land Use Code may be continued, reconstructed, structurally altered, extended or enlarged subject to plans approved by the planning commission for any reconstruction, alteration, extension or enlargement and provided such reconstruction, alteration, extension or enlargement conforms with all other provisions of this title; and provided, further, that said extension, reconstruction, alteration or enlargement shall not be extended to additional property beyond the parcel(s) upon which the nonconforming use exists. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.11.070 - Single-family dwellings. 
A.  Nonconforming Single-Family Dwellings. Single-family dwellings which became nonconforming uses at the time of adoption of the Land Use Code or of amendments to the code may be continued, reconstructed, structurally altered, extended or enlarged in conformance with the following: 
1.  Enlargement or extension of a single-family detached dwelling shall conform to the standards of the zone which applies to the property. If a proposed enlargement or extension, except in the coastal zone, results in more than two thousand five hundred square feet of floor area and/or more than four bedrooms, parking facilities shall be provided for the increase but not for any existing deficiency in such facilities. Parking facilities required as a result of this section may be provided in a garage, carport, or surface space. 
2.  No increase in parking over that previously provided shall be required for reconstruction of a nonconforming single-family residential use destroyed or partially destroyed by natural disaster, but may be permitted, in conformance to development standards of the zone which applies to the property. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.11.080 - Nonconforming parking facilities. 
A.  Use Made Nonconforming by Off-Street Parking Requirements. 
1.  Any use, excluding a single-family detached dwelling, which is nonconforming only because of changes made in the off-street parking requirements by the adoption of the Land Use Code, or any amendment thereto, may be expanded, increased or modified, or converted to a conforming use, and no addition to or change in the off-street parking facilities shall be required except as identified below. 
2.  If the existing off-street parking facilities are not sufficient to comply with the requirements of this title after such expansion, increase or modification, additional parking facilities shall be added. 
3.  The capacity of said facilities shall equal the difference between the off-street parking facilities this title would require for such use as expanded, increased or modified, and the off-street parking facilities as required for such use before said expansion, increase or modification. 
4.  This shall not apply to entertainment and public assembly type uses which shall provide the full amount of parking otherwise required. 
5.  Any additional off-street parking facilities provided under these conditions shall be developed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.45 (Off-Street Parking and Loading). 
6.  Any modification of off-street parking requirements permitted by this section shall not be construed to extend the termination date of the subject nonconforming use, as specified by this title. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.11.090 - Nonconforming signs. 
A.  Nonconforming Sign Regulations. 
1.  In cases where the area of signs existing as a lawful nonconforming use on a property exceeds the total allowable area for permitted signs, no additional signs shall be permitted on the property. If the size or configuration of a parcel or building is changed by the subdivision or splitting of the property or alterations to the building or parcel, property identification signs and outdoor advertising signs on the resulting properties shall be required to conform to the sign regulations applicable to the newly created parcel or parcels, at the time such change becomes effective. 
2.  In the event a use of any site or building is vacated, terminated or abandoned, for any reason, for a period of more than one ninety consecutive days, the owner or person in possession of the property shall be responsible for the removal of all signs on the property, building or wall, or for having the copy thereon painted out, immediately upon notice from the city. 
3.  Nonconforming signs shall be removed or made conforming when the business or property changes occupancy or ownership. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.11.100 - Termination. 
A.  Violation of Title. Any of the following violations of this title shall immediately terminate the right to operate a nonconforming use, except as otherwise provided in this title: 
1.  Changing a nonconforming use to a use not permitted in the zone; 
2.  Increasing or enlarging the area, space, or volume occupied by or devoted to such nonconforming use; 
3.  Addition to a nonconforming use of another use not permitted in the zone. 
B.  Discontinuance. A nonconforming use or structure shall become discontinued, except when extended as otherwise provided in this title, when it is: 
1.  Succeeded by a conforming use; 
2.  Discontinued and not re-established within a period of twelve or more consecutive calendar months; 
3.  Discontinued and not re-established within a period of eighteen or more nonconsecutive calendar months in a twenty-four month period. 
C.  Termination by Operation of Law. The following conditions will result in a termination of nonconforming signs. 
1.  Termination by Abandonment. Any nonconforming sign, the use of which is discontinued for a period of ninety days, regardless of any intent to resume or not to abandon such use, shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall not thereafter be re-established. Any period of such discontinuance caused by government actions, strikes, material shortages or forces of nature, and without any contributing fault by the nonconforming user, shall not be considered in calculating the length of discontinuance for purposes of this section. 
2.  Termination by Change of Business. Any nonconforming sign advertising or relating to a business on the premises on which it is located shall be terminated upon any change in the ownership or control of such business. 
3.  Termination by Damage or Destruction. Any nonconforming sign damaged or destroyed, by any means, to the extent of thirty-five percent of its replacement cost new shall not be restored but shall be terminated. 
4.  Termination by Going Out of Business/Closure of Business. No sign that is accessory to a principal nonconforming use or structure shall continue after such principal use or structure shall have ceased or terminated, unless it shall thereafter conform to all the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
5.  Termination Due to Lack of Repair. Failure to keep a nonconforming sign in good repair within one year after notification by the city shall constitute abandonment and subject to termination. 
D.  Affirmative Termination by Amortization. 
1.  The city council of the City of National City may order a nonconforming use to be terminated within a reasonable amount of time, upon recommendation of the planning commission. The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing after ten days' written notice to the nonconforming user. If the nonconforming user has not made a substantial investment in furtherance of the use, or if the investment can be substantially utilized or recovered through a currently permitted use, the order may require complete termination of the nonconforming use within a minimum of one year after the date of the order. If the nonconforming user has made a substantial investment in furtherance of the use, or if the investment cannot be substantially utilized or recovered through a currently permitted use, the order may require the complete termination of the nonconforming use within a longer reasonable amount of time. Nonconforming uses that are determined to be an imminent threat to the public health or safety may be terminated immediately, pursuant to Chapter 1.36 of this Municipal Code. In making its recommendation to terminate a nonconforming use and in recommending a reasonable amount of time in which to terminate, the planning commission shall consider: 
a.  The total cost of land and improvements; 
b.  The length of time the use has existed; 
c.  Adaptability of the land and improvements to a currently permitted use; 
d.  The cost of moving and reestablishing the use elsewhere; 
e.  Whether the use is significantly nonconforming; 
f.  Compatibility with the existing land use patterns and densities of the surrounding neighborhood; 
g.  The possible threat to public health, safety, or welfare; and 
h.  Any other relevant factors. 
The term "nonconforming use" when used in this section shall include nonconforming uses, nonconforming structures, and nonconforming lots, consistent with the intent of this title. 
This amortization section does not apply to any lawful nonconforming residential uses. 
Failure to comply with the city council's order to terminate a nonconforming use shall constitute a violation of this chapter and is a public nuisance subject to abatement in accordance with Chapter 1.36 of this Code. 
2.  That a notice of exemption shall be filed indicating that this amendment to the Municipal Code is exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act, because it can be said with certainty that there is no possibility that the action will have a significant effect on the environment as it does not have a direct effect on any property or environmental consequence. 
E.  Unlawful Uses and Structures. Uses and structures that did not comply with the applicable provisions of this Land Use Code or prior planning and zoning regulations when established are violations of this code and are subject to the provisions of Title 1 of the Municipal Code (Administration and Enforcement). This section does not grant any right to continue occupancy of property containing an illegal use or structure. The activity shall not be allowed to continue unless/until permits or entitlements required by this Land Use Code and the Municipal Code are first obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.11.110 - Exemptions. 
A.  Historic Structures. Nonconforming structures of historical significance may be altered or enlarged with a building permit approval granted by the city manager or his/her designee, without conforming to current setback provisions; provided the historic structure: 
1.  Has been certified to be an historic resource by the city, county, or state, or in the National Register of Historic Places; or 
2.  Is to be altered or enlarged as an authentic replica of the original structure. 
B.  Single-family Dwellings. Single-family dwellings are exempt from the provisions of Section 18.11.100 as follows: 
1.  Height. An existing single-family dwelling that is nonconforming only because it exceeds the height limit of the applicable zone, shall not be required to comply with the provisions of this title. 
2.  Setbacks. Where a single-family dwelling or a detached accessory structure, is nonconforming only by reason of substandard setbacks, the provisions of this title shall not apply; provided that any structural alteration of a nonconforming structure shall not increase the degree of nonconformity, and any enlargements shall comply with the setback requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
3.  Parking. A single-family dwelling that is nonconforming with respect to the parking requirements of this Land Use Code is exempt from requirements of this title that would otherwise require compliance with the parking requirements of this Land Use Code. 
C.  Destroyed Nonconforming Dwelling Units. 
1.  Where the city manager or his/her designee determines that a nonconforming single- or multi-family dwelling unit has been involuntarily damaged or destroyed by accident (e.g., fire, explosion, etc.) or natural disaster (e.g., earthquake, etc.), the unit may be reconstructed or replaced with a new structure using the same development standards applied to the damaged or destroyed structure (e.g., building footprint, building height, density standards, number of dwelling units, setbacks, and floor area); provided: 
a.  The applicant provides documentation, satisfactory to the review authority, supporting the claim that the damage or destruction occurred involuntarily; 
b.  No expansion of the gross floor area or number of dwelling units occurs; 
c.  The replacement structure: 
i.  Is in compliance with the current building code; and 
ii.  Would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or materially injurious to the properties or improvements in the immediate vicinity of the replacement structure; 
d.  A building permit is issued no later than twelve months after the date of destruction, and construction is diligently pursued to completion. 
2.  If the preceding requirements are not met, the replacement structure shall comply with all of the regulations of the applicable zoning district in effect on the date of application for the required building permit. 
D.  Seismic Retrofitting. Alterations, reconstruction, or repairs otherwise required by law (e.g., city adopted building, electrical, plumbing codes) shall be allowed. Reconstruction required to reinforce unreinforced masonry structures or to comply with building code requirements shall be allowed without cost limitations; provided, the retrofitting and code compliance are limited exclusively to compliance with earthquake safety standards and other applicable building code requirements. 
E.  Nonconforming Upon Annexation. Nonconforming uses or structures, or both, which are lawfully existing at the time the property on which they are located is annexed to the city, and which do not conform to the regulations of the subject zoning district following annexation, shall be deemed legal nonconforming uses or structures, or both, and shall, upon annexation, be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
F.  Nonconforming Due to a Lack of a conditional use permit. 
1.  Conformity of Uses Requiring Conditional Use Permits. A use that becomes nonconforming only because it is a use that would be required by this Land Use Code to have conditional use permit approval shall be deemed conforming, but only to the extent that it previously existed prior to adoption of the Land Use Code (e.g., maintain the same site area boundaries, hours of operation, etc.). 
2.  Previous Conditional Use Permits in Effect. A use that was authorized by a conditional use permit prior to adoption of this Land Use Code, but is identified in this Land Use Code as a use that is not allowed in its current location, may continue, but only in compliance with the original conditional use permit. 
G.  Previous Permits. A use or structure which does not conform to the current regulations of the subject zoning district, but for which a building permit, or a permit or entitlement approved in compliance with this Land Use Code, was issued and work substantially completed before the applicability of this Land Use Code, may be completed; provided, the work is diligently pursued to completion. Upon completion these uses or structures, or parts thereof, shall be deemed to be legal nonconforming and shall thereafter be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
H.  Public Acquisition. Nonconforming due to public acquisition. Whenever any structure or parcel is rendered nonconforming within the meaning of this chapter by reason of a reduction in a required parcel area, reduction of off-street parking facilities, or setbacks occurring solely by reason of dedication to, or purchase by, the city for any public purpose, or eminent domain proceedings, which result in the acquisition by the city or any agency authorized for the eminent domain proceedings of a portion of the property, the structure or parcel shall not be deemed nonconforming within the meaning of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
Chapter 18.12 - PERMITS AND APPLICATIONS 
 
18.12.010 - Permit application and review. 
An application for a permit or other land use matter shall be filed with the planning division in accordance with the following provisions: 
A.  Authority to File an Application. The following persons are deemed to have the authority to file an application: 
1.  The record owner of the real property that is the subject of the permit or other matter; 
2.  The property owner's authorized agent; or 
3.  Any person who can demonstrate a legal right, interest, or entitlement to use the real property subject to the application; 
4.  The application of a redeveloper who is seeking to redevelop the property involved, and who is a party to an existing disposition and development agreement with the community development commission. 
B.  Applications—Acceptability of Signatures. If signatures of persons other than the owners of the property making the application are required or offered in support of, or in opposition to, an application, they may be received as evidence of notice having been served upon them of the pending application, or as evidence of their opinion on the pending issue, but they shall in no case infringe upon the free exercise of the powers vested in the city as represented by the planning commission and the city council. 
C.  Application Form and Submittal Items. The city manager or his/her designee shall prescribe the form in which applications are made for administrative or discretionary approvals and maintain a list specifying the materials and information to be submitted with each application for a permit or other matter filed in accordance with the Land Use Code. The list may be revised as needed to comply with revisions to local, state, or federal law, regulation, or policy. 
D.  Submittal Requirements. The application shall be made on a form provided by the city manager or his/her designee and shall be accompanied by the materials, information, fees, and deposits that are required on the date the application is filed, unless otherwise specified by the Land Use Code or state law. 
E.  Evaluation. The application shall be deemed complete when the department processing the application has determined that the application includes all of the information, materials, fees, and deposits required. The city may, in the course of processing the application, request that the applicant clarify, simplify, or provide in alternate format or medium, the information required for the application. 
F.  Filing Fee. All filing fees required to be paid upon the filing of any application shall be set forth from time to time by city council resolution. 
G.  Applications—Filing. Applications filed pursuant to this title shall be numbered consecutively in the order of their filing, and shall become a part of the permanent official records, and there shall be attached thereto and permanently filed copies of all notices and actions, with certificates and affidavits of applicable posting, mailing or publication. 
H.  Applications—Withdrawal. Any applicant may withdraw an application at any time, provided the withdrawal is in writing and notification of public hearing has not been mailed. Any public hearing for which notification has been given shall be convened, at which time withdrawal of the application may be acknowledged and filed. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.12.020 - Decision processes for planning applications. 
Applications for permits or other matters identified in this Land Use Code shall be acted upon in accordance with one of the decision processes depicted in Table 18.12.020 (Decision Processes for Planning Applications). Table 18.12.020 is provided for convenience of reference only and does not define, describe, or limit the scope, meaning, or intent of any provision of the Land Use Code. This table describes the city's processes only and does not describe other decision processes that may be required by other agencies, such as the state coastal commission. Subdivision procedures are identified in Title 17. 
TABLE 18.12.020 
Decision Process for Planning Applications 
Application Type 	Role of Review Authority 
	Planning Division 	Planning 
Commission 	City Council 
Ministerial Applications 
Interpretations 
(See Section 18.10.050 (C)) 	Decision 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Minor site plan review 	Decision 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Minor use permit 	Decision 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Home occupation permit 	Decision 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Sign permit 	Decision 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Discretionary Applications 
Conditional use permit 	Recommend 	Decision 	Appeal 
Variance 	Recommend 	Decision 	Appeal 
Planned development permit 	Recommend 	Decision 	Appeal 
General plan amendment 	Recommend 	Recommend 	Decision 
Zoning ordinance amendment 	Recommend 	Recommend 	Decision 
Zoning map amendment 	Recommend 	Recommend 	Decision 
 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.12.030 - Ministerial decision process. 
A.  Purpose. Ministerial review is conducted at the staff level and is intended to ensure compliance with the regulations established in the Land Use Code. 
B.  Decision. An application for an administrative permit may be approved, conditionally approved, or denied by a staff person designated by the city manager without a public hearing. 
C.  Notice of Application. A notice of application is only required for minor use permits pursuant to Section 18.12.080. 
D.  Notice of Decision. 
1.  The designated staff person shall mail notice of the decision to: 
a.  The applicant. 
b.  Any person who requested notice of the approval or denial of the application from the staff person. 
2.  Such notice shall contain a brief statement of the reason or reasons for the approval or disapproval. 
E.  Appeal to the Planning Commission. The decision of the designated staff person is final and conclusive unless, within thirty days after mailing the notice of decision, the applicant or other interested party files a written letter of appeal with the planning division in accordance with Section 18.12.060(B). 
F.  Appeal to the City Council. The decision of the planning commission shall become effective and final thirty days following such action unless, within such period of time the applicant or other interested party files a written letter of appeal with the planning division in accordance with Section 18.12.060(C). 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.12.040 - Discretionary decision process. 
A.  Purpose. A discretionary permit is a permit or permit modification granted following determinations that require the exercise of judgment and deliberation, as opposed to merely determining that the permit request complies with a set of standards. 
B.  Decision. As identified in Table 18.12.101, depending on the permit type, the decision to approve or deny a discretionary permit or action is either made by planning commission or the city council. 
C.  Environmental Review. All discretionary decisions by the planning commission and city council require findings prescribed in the California Environmental Quality Act and ordinances adopted pursuant thereto, in addition to all other requirements. 
D.  Planning Commission Decision. 
1.  When a discretionary application is to be decided by the planning commission pursuant to Section 18.12.020, a hearing shall be held in accordance with Section 18.12.050. 
2.  Waiver of Appeal Period. Before the close of the public hearing, an applicant may request that the appeal period be waived in accordance with Section 18.12.060(D). Notwithstanding any action of the planning commission to grant a waiver of appeal, the city council may set the matter for a hearing. 
3.  If the appeal period is not waived, the decision of the planning commission shall become effective and final thirty days following such action, unless, within such period of time the applicant or other interested party files a written letter of appeal with the planning division requesting an appeal before the city council. 
4.  Within such thirty days, a copy of the planning commission resolution granting or denying such application shall be transmitted to the city council unless an appeal is filed. If no appeal is filed, the city council may set the matter for a public hearing. 
E.  City Council Decision. 
1.  When a discretionary action is to be decided by the city council pursuant to Section 18.12.020, a hearing before the planning commission shall occur first in accordance with Section 18.12.050. 
2.  Once the planning commission has made a recommendation on the action, a hearing shall be scheduled before the city council pursuant to Section 18.12.050. 
3.  The city council's decision is final and effective upon the rendering of the decision. 
F.  Expiration. 
1.  If a discretionary permit is not exercised within the time permitted by this chapter, such permit shall be deemed null and void. The exercise of such rights shall be commenced within the time permitted by the resolution granting such permit. If no time is specified, then for all purposes such time for the exercise of right shall be deemed to be a period of one year from and after the adoption of the resolution granting such permit. 
2.  The granting body, upon good cause shown by the applicant, may extend the time permitted by this chapter for the exercise of such rights, for a period of not to exceed one year. 
3.  An additional extension of time may be granted by the granting body where the applicant, after a public hearing, which shall be noticed as provided in Section 18.12.050 (Noticing and Public Hearings), shows, to the reasonable satisfaction of such body, that the exercise of such rights was prevented by causes outside of the applicant's control. Such time extensions shall be for reasonable periods of time, not exceeding one year for each such extension. 
4.  Requests for extensions of time within which to exercise the rights under a discretionary permit shall be made prior to the expiration date thereof. Such requests shall be in writing and, where the planning commission is the granting body, shall be filed with the secretary of the commission. Where the city council is the granting body, such written requests shall be filed with the planning division. Upon the filing of such a written request, the time for the exercise of rights under the permit shall be deemed automatically extended until the granting body determines whether or not the request is to be granted, but in no event shall such automatic extension be for a period longer than thirty days, except as hereinafter provided. 
5.  Where the granting body is the city council, if no action is taken upon such request within a period of thirty days after the filing thereof, the same shall be deemed denied. 
6.  Where the granting body is the planning commission, and the commission either denies the request or fails, within a period of thirty days, to take action thereon, the same shall be deemed denied, unless within ten days after such request has been denied by the commission, or within ten days after the expiration of the thirty-day period, an appeal is filed, in writing, with the planning division. 
7.  Where an appeal is taken from the commission's action or inaction, the expiration date for the permit shall be automatically extended for a period of thirty days after the filing of such written appeal with the planning division. If the Council fails to act upon the request within said thirty-day period, the same shall be deemed denied. 
G.  Violations. The following shall be considered violations of Title 18: 
1.  Commencement or continuation of an activity which requires approval of a discretionary permit pursuant to this title, not including lawful nonconforming uses, established prior to enactment of regulations that require a discretionary permit for the activity. 
2.  Any violation of a condition of approval of a discretionary permit. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.12.050 - Noticing and public hearings. 
A.  Public Hearing Defined. A public hearing is a noticed public session to receive original evidence or testimony on applications regulated by this title. These are held by the planning commission and city council. 
B.  Scheduling. For all proposals to be heard by the planning commission, the city manager or his/her designee shall set the date for public hearing and give the required notice. For all appeals of planning commission decisions and all other matters requiring public hearings by the city council, the city clerk shall set dates for public hearings and give required notices. The date of the hearings shall be not less than ten days nor more than forty-five days from the time of the filing of such verified application or the adoption of a resolution or the making of a motion to set the public hearing. 
C.  Notice—Generally. Notice of time and place of public hearings shall be given in the following manner: 
1.  A notice of any public hearing upon a proposed amendment to this title, or to the zoning map, shall be given by at least one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than ten days before the date of the public hearing. 
2.  Notice of public hearing to consider a variance, conditional use permit, planned development permit, or reclassification of any property shall be given by mailing a written notice not less than ten days prior to the date of such hearing to the applicant, and to owners of property within a radius of three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property to be changed, using for this purpose the name and address of such owners and properties, as shown on the latest adopted San Diego County tax roll, and other persons on request. 
3.  In the event that the number of owners to whom notice may be sent pursuant to this section is greater than one thousand, notice may be given at least ten days prior to the hearing by either of the following procedures: 
a.  By placing a display advertisement of at least one-fourth page in a newspaper having general circulation within the area affected by the proposed ordinance or amendment; or 
b.  By placing an insert with any generalized mailing sent by the city to property owners in the area affected by the proposed ordinance or amendment, such as billings for city services. 
D.  Notice—Additional Requirement for Conditional Use Permits for the Sale of Alcoholic Beverages. In addition to notice required pursuant to this section, written notice for a public hearing on a conditional use permit for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be provided as specified in Section 18.30.050 of this title. 
E.  Notice—Required Wording. Such public notice of hearings on zone reclassifications, amendments, variances, planned development permits, or conditional use permits shall consist of the words "Notice of Proposed Change of Zone Boundaries or Classification" or "Notice of Proposed Variance," "Notice of Proposed Planned Development Permit," or "Notice of Proposed conditional use permit," as the case may be, setting forth the description of the property under consideration, the nature of the proposed change or use, and the time and place at which the public hearing, or hearings, on the matter will be held. 
F.  Hearing Rules. The planning commission may establish rules governing the conduct of its proceedings. 
G.  Continuation of Hearing. If, for any reason, testimony on any case set for public hearing cannot be completed on the date set for such hearing, the person presiding at such public hearing may, before adjournment or recess thereof, publicly announce the time and place at which the hearing will be continued, and no further notice is required. 
H.  Testimony. A summary of all pertinent testimony offered at public hearings held in connection with an application filed pursuant to this title and the names of persons testifying shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent files of the case. 
I.  Planning Commission Recommendation. 
1.  For applications requiring a final decision by the city council, the planning commission shall first hold a public hearing on the matter. For such hearing, the commission shall recommend to the city council approval or denial of the request, including the reasons for the recommendation. 
2.  Upon receipt of the recommendation from the planning commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing. 
3.  The city council may approve, modify, or disapprove of the recommendation of the planning commission; provided that any modification of the proposed amendment by the city council not previously considered by the planning commission during its hearing shall first be referred to the planning commission for report and recommendation, but the planning commission shall not be required to hold a public hearing thereon. Failure of the planning commission to report within forty days after the reference shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed modification. 
J.  Hearing Body Decision. The hearing body responsible for making a final determination on a matter pursuant to Section 18.12.020, be it the planning commission or city council, shall announce its findings by formal resolution, and said resolution shall recite, among other things, the facts and reasons which, in the opinion of the hearing body, make the granting or denial of the permit or action necessary to carry out the provisions and general purpose of this title, and shall order that the permit or other action be granted, denied, or modified subject to such conditions or limitations that it may impose. 
K.  Notice of Decision. Not later than seven days following the adoption of a resolution ordering that a permit or other action be granted or denied, a copy of said resolution shall be mailed to the applicant and to any other parties requesting notice of the action. The resolution shall also be filed with the city clerk. 
L.  Effective Date of Decision. 
1.  The decision of the planning commission shall become effective and final thirty days following the adoption of the resolution, unless, within such period of time, the applicant or other interested party files a written letter of appeal. Within such thirty days, the planning commission resolution shall be transmitted to the city council who may set the matter for a public hearing. 
2.  If the appeal period is waived in accordance with Section 18.12.060(D), then the decision of the planning commission shall become effective and final immediately upon adoption of the resolution. 
3.  The decision of the city council shall become effective and final immediately upon adoption of the resolution. 
M.  Refiling Procedure. Where an application has been denied by a hearing body and that action has become final, no new application for substantially the same request shall be accepted for a period of one year after the effective date of the denial, unless that hearing body specifies in its decision that the denial is without prejudice. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.12.060 - Appeals. 
A.  Effect of Filing. The filing of a notice of appeal pursuant to this section stays all proceedings until a decision on the appeal is rendered. 
B.  Appeal of Staff Decisions. 
1.  Whenever a permit or other action has been denied at a staff level, an aggrieved person may file a written appeal with the planning division within thirty days after the mailing of a notice of decision. 
2.  The planning division, upon receipt of an appeal, shall set the matter for a hearing before the planning commission as soon as is practical in accordance with the public hearing procedures outlined in Section 18.12.050. The appealing party shall be given at least ten days notice of the time and place of such hearing. 
3.  At the time set for such hearing, the planning commission shall give the appealing party a reasonable opportunity to be heard on the matter, and may require reports from any city department. After the hearing, the planning commission shall affirm, disaffirm, or modify the decision appealed. 
4.  A nonrefundable fee in such amount as the city council shall from time to time establish shall be paid at the time of filing the appeal. 
C.  Appeal of Planning Commission Decisions. 
1.  Whenever a permit or other action has been denied by the planning commission, an aggrieved person may file a written appeal with the planning division within 30 days after the public hearing in which such decision was rendered. 
2.  The planning division shall notify the city clerk of the appeal and the city clerk shall notice and schedule a public hearing before the city council in accordance with Section 18.12.050. The appealing party shall be given at least ten days notice of the time and place of such hearing. 
3.  At the time set for such hearing, the city council shall give the appealing party a reasonable opportunity to be heard on the matter, and may require reports from any city department. After the hearing, the city council shall affirm, disaffirm, or modify the decision appealed. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
4.  A nonrefundable fee in such amount as the city council shall from time to time establish shall be paid at the time of filing the appeal. 
D.  Waiver of Appeal Period. For permits and actions to be decided by the planning commission, before the close of the public hearing, an applicant may request that the appeal period be waived. The planning commission shall grant the request only after determining for the record that there are no interested persons who object to the waiver and that the applicant has waived all rights to appeal. If the appeal period is waived, the planning commission's decision becomes effective immediately upon adoption of the resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.12.070 - Site plan review. 
A.  Purpose. Site plan review is a ministerial action established to ensure compliance with the Land Use Code and to attach conditions as necessary to ensure such compliance. 
B.  Applicability and Requirements. Prior to or concurrently with the submission of building plans for plan check or application for issuance of a building permit for any building to be erected in any zone wherein site plan review is required by this title, accurately dimensioned architectural drawings and plot plans for all proposed construction shall be submitted to the planning division for approval. The site plan or plot plan shall contain any specific information required by the city manager or his/her designee necessary to determine compliance with the Land Use Code. A nonrefundable fee in such amount as the city council shall from time to time establish by resolution shall be paid to the finance officer at the time of filing. 
C.  Plan Review. 
1.  The planning division shall review all plans submitted and shall endorse its approval on a copy thereof, if it determines that the plan shows: 
a.  Compliance with this title and all other applicable city ordinances; 
b.  Desirable site layout and design; 
c.  Utility of open areas; 
d.  Adequate landscaping; 
e.  Compatibility with neighboring property; 
f.  Compliance with the General Plan or an adopted specific plan; 
g.  Incorporation of any mitigation measures stipulated in a certified environmental impact report or negative declaration for the project, if applicable. 
2.  If the department determines that the plans thus submitted do not conform or adequately provide for one or more of such provisions, it shall endorse its disapproval thereof, together with a statement of the provisions of this chapter with which such plans do not conform. 
3.  When referred to the engineering department, fire department, building department, or other city agency by the planning division, such departments shall evaluate such plans as to compliance with all applicable city ordinances and standards and may require additional plans to be submitted and approved prior to final approval of such plans. The conditions of approval of development plans by the planning division may include the recommendations of other city department heads required to be made by the terms of this chapter. 
D.  Issuance of Permit. No building permit, certificate of occupancy, or any other permit listed shall be issued until the approvals required by this section have been obtained. 
E.  Preliminary Site Plan Review. 
1.  Site plans may be submitted for preliminary review prior to submission of building plans for plan check, or application for issuance of a building permit for any building to be erected in any zone wherein site plan review is required by title. 
2.  A fee in such amount as the city council shall from time to time establish by resolution shall be paid to the finance officer at the time of submittal, which amount will be deducted from the building permit fee paid at the time building permits are issued. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.12.080 - Minor use permits. 
A.  Purpose. Minor use permits provide a ministerial process for reviewing land use activities that are allowed in the applicable zoning district, but require administrative review in order to evaluate the compatibility of the proposed use with surrounding uses and the suitability of the use to the site. 
B.  Applicability. A minor use permit is required to authorize proposed land uses identified by Division 2 (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) as being allowable in the applicable zoning district subject to the approval of a minor use permit. 
C.  Notice of Application. 
1.  The designated staff person shall mail notice of the application no later than ten days after an application has been deemed complete to: 
a.  The applicant. 
b.  The owners of any real property, as shown on the latest equalized property tax assessment roll of the San Diego County Assessor, located within three hundred feet of the boundary of the property that is the subject of the application. 
D.  Contents of the Notice of Application. 
1.  The notice of application shall include the following information: 
a.  A general description of the proposed project, including, when applicable, the type of permit requested, project name, square footage of proposed construction, and number of residential units proposed. 
b.  The location and size of the property that is the subject of the application. 
c.  The name, telephone number, and city address of the designated staff person to contact for additional information. 
d.  An explanation that a minor use permit is an administrative process whereby the decision to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the proposed development will be made by the planning division without a public hearing. 
e.  An explanation of the process to appeal the decision. 
E.  Requests for Notice of Decision. Persons who wish to receive notice of the approval or denial of the application may request this information from the staff person. The request must be received no later than ten business days after the date on which the notice of application is mailed. 
F.  Application Requirements. An application for a minor use permit shall contain any specific information required by the city manager or his/her designee necessary to determine compliance with the Land Use Code. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the findings required by this section. A nonrefundable fee in such amount as the city council shall from time to time establish by resolution shall be paid to the finance officer at the time of filing. 
G.  Findings and Decision. The planning division may approve or deny an application for a minor use permit. The designated staff person shall record the decision and the findings on which the decision is based. The planning division may approve a minor use permit only after first finding all of the following: 
1.  The proposed use is allowed within the applicable zoning district and complies with all other applicable provisions of this Land Use Code; 
2.  The proposed use is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan; 
3.  The design, location, size, and operating characteristics of the proposed activity would be compatible with the existing and future land uses in the vicinity; 
4.  The site is physically suitable for the type, density, and intensity of use being proposed, including access, utilities, and the absence of physical constraints; and 
5.  Granting the permit would not constitute a nuisance or be injurious or detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience, or welfare, or materially injurious to persons, property, or improvements in the vicinity and zoning district in which the property is located. 
H.  Issuance of Permit and Duration. 
1.  Upon the approval of an application, the planning division shall authorize the issuance of a minor use permit, with or without conditions, and one copy of which shall be forwarded to: 
a.  The applicant; 
b.  The building official; 
c.  Any other department or agency the planning division considers affected by the issuance of the permit; and 
d.  The division files for permanent retention. 
2.  Minor use permits shall be in effect for the duration of the use, or for a time period specified in the conditions of approval, or until the time a revocation of the permit is effectuated on the basis of non-compliance with the terms of the permit. 
I.  Conditions of Approval. In approving a minor use permit, the planning division may impose any conditions deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval would comply with the findings required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.12.090 - Home occupation permits. 
A.  Purpose. A home occupation permit is a ministerial process to ensure that an occupation conducted within a dwelling is compatible with the character of the area in which the dwelling is located and that it is clearly a secondary use to the primary residential use of the dwelling. 
B.  Applicability. Home occupations are permitted in residential zones as identified in Section 18.21.020 provided that they first receive a home occupation permit. 
C.  Application Requirements. 
1.  An application for a home occupation permit shall contain any specific information required by the city manager or his/her designee necessary to determine compliance with the Land Use Code. 
2.  It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the findings required by this section. 
3.  Any applicant for a home occupation permit who is not the legal owner of the subject real property shall provide a written statement from the legal owner consenting to the application. 
4.  A nonrefundable fee in such amount as the city council shall from time to time establish by resolution shall be paid to the finance officer at the time of filing. 
D.  Findings and Decision. 
1.  The planning division may approve or deny an application for a home occupation permit. The designated staff person shall record the decision and the findings on which the decision is based. The planning division may approve a home occupation permit only after first finding all of the following: 
a.  There is no display of merchandise; 
b.  No stock in trade nor commodity is sold upon the premises; 
c.  The home occupation shall not result in the reduction of required off-street parking; 
d.  Home occupations, except for urban agricultural uses permitted by Section 18.30.240 (Urban Agriculture), shall be conducted within an enclosed structure on the premises; 
e.  No person other than the resident is engaged in the home occupation on the premises; 
f.  The resident shall not rent space to others in association with a home occupation; 
g.  All sales of products and the performance of all service or work that requires the presence of a partner, employee, or customer shall take place off the premises; 
h.  No mechanical equipment is used except that which is normally necessary for housekeeping purposes; 
i.  No signs or advertising for the home occupation is placed on the premises and other advertising does not identify the address of the premises; 
j.  Materials or products associated with the home occupation are stored in an enclosed structure on the premises and shall not exceed one thousand cubic feet for the entire premises or any more restrictive limitations by the building or housing division or county health department. 
k.  Only one vehicle for business-related purposes is permitted on the premises or on any adjacent residentially zoned area. This vehicle may not exceed a one ton carrying capacity and may not be a tow truck. 
l.  The home occupation shall be consistent with permitted residential uses, shall not create any conditions that amount to a public nuisance, and shall not be detrimental to the neighborhood by causing increased noise, traffic, lighting, odor, or by violating any applicable laws or ordinances; 
m.  A business license is procured. 
2.  Additional stipulations can be placed on the permit by the city manager or his/her designee. 
E.  Issuance of Permit and Duration. 
1.  Upon the approval of an application, the planning division shall authorize the issuance of a home occupation permit and one copy of which shall be forwarded to: 
a.  The applicant; 
b.  Any other department or agency the planning division considers affected by the issuance of the permit; and 
c.  The division files for permanent retention. 
2.  The occupation shall be limited to those activities specifically described on the permit, and subject to the conditions described in this section or as stipulated on the permit; 
3.  A home occupation permit shall be in effect for the duration of the home occupation unless a revocation of the permit is effectuated. 
4.  If it is determined or found by the city manager or his/her designee that the home occupation authorized causes a disturbance or nuisance to the abutting neighborhood, it shall be reviewed by the planning commission and may be declared null and void, and any business license issued shall be subject to cancellation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.12.100 - Sign permit. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of a ministerial sign permit is to ensure conformance with the sign and outdoor advertising display regulations in Division 4 and any applicable master sign program or specific plan. 
B.  Applicability. A sign permit is required for the installation or alteration of any sign, except those specifically exempt by this section. 
C.  Exemptions from a Sign Permit. 
1.  The following signs may be installed without a sign permit, provided that they meet the requirements listed below: 
a.  Changing the copy of a sign or maintenance of a sign that does not involve structural or electrical changes; 
b.  Interior signs; except for theater lobby signs; 
c.  Public utility and safety signs that are required by law; 
d.  Signs that are required by law, other than public utility and safety signs, provided that they do not exceed the minimum dimensions required by the law; 
e.  Signs required by the fire department to designate fire lanes; 
f.  Temporary real estate signs that are not illuminated. Only one such sign is permitted to face on each street adjacent to the property. Such signs may be single- or double-faced and are limited in size to four square feet or less on property in residential zones, and ten square feet or less on property in commercial zones; 
g.  Nameplate identification signs and combination name plates and address signs with letters that do not exceed three inches in height, are not illuminated, and do not exceed four square feet in area; 
h.  Construction site signs that are not illuminated; 
i.  Window signs; 
j.  Tablets, memorials, and cornerstones that are built into the walls of a building, and provide information such as the name of the building and the date of construction; 
k.  Incidental residential signs that provide warnings such as "no parking," "watch dogs," "private property," and "security service" that are not illuminated, do not exceed one square foot in area each, and do not project over a public right-of-way. No more than three of these signs shall be allowed per premises; 
l.  Bulletin boards, provided they do not exceed sixteen square feet in area, do not project over a public right of way, and are not illuminated; 
m.  Temporary on-site banners, streamers, and pennants. 
D.  Application Requirements. Applications for sign permits shall contain any specific information required by the city manager or his/her designee necessary to determine compliance with the Land Use Code. A nonrefundable fee in such amount as the city council shall from time to time establish by resolution shall be paid to the finance officer at the time of filing. 
E.  Building Division Review. If placement of a sign requires a building permit, the building division will review the plans for compliance with California Building Code requirements. 
F.  Decision and Findings. 
1.  The planning division may approve or deny an application for a sign permit. The designated staff person shall record the decision and the findings on which the decision is based. The sign permit may be approved once the following findings are made: 
a.  The proposed sign is architecturally and aesthetically compatible with the major structures on the subject site and adjacent sites and is compatible with the character of the neighborhood and general environment; 
b.  Granting the application is in conformance with the goals, policies, and objectives of the General Plan and the purpose and intent of any applicable specific plan, and the purposes of this Land Use Code and would not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on other properties in the vicinity and the same zoning district; and 
c.  Granting the application would not be detrimental or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity of the subject site, or to the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
G.  Issuance of Permit and Duration. 
1.  The sign permit may be issued after all approvals have been obtained and all required fees have been paid. 
2.  If the work authorized under a sign permit has not been completed within six months after date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void. 
3.  Before the expiration date of a sign permit, a permittee may submit a written application for an extension of time. The city manager or his/her designee may extend a sign permit for a period not exceeding six months if the city manager or his/her designee determines that, based on evidence provided by the permittee, circumstances beyond the control of the permittee prevented completion of the work. 
4.  A sign permit may not be extended more than two times. 
5.  Upon successful completion and inspection of the work authorized under a sign permit, the sign permit shall be in effect for the duration of the use for which the sign is intended, or for a time period specified in the permit, or until the time a revocation of the permit is effectuated based on non-compliance with the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.12.110 - Conditional use permits. 
A.  Purpose. The granting of a conditional use permit is a discretionary action that authorizes permitted uses subject to specific conditions because of the unusual characteristic or need to give special consideration to the proper location of said uses in relation to adjacent uses, the development of the community, and to the various elements of the General Plan. It is the purpose of this chapter to set forth the findings necessary for such discretionary action. 
B.  Applicability. A conditional use permit is required to authorize proposed land uses identified by Division 2 (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) as being allowable in the applicable zoning district subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. 
C.  Application Requirements. An application for a conditional use permit shall contain any specific information required by the city manager or his/her designee necessary to determine compliance with the Land Use Code. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the findings required by this section. A nonrefundable fee in such amount as the city council shall from time to time establish by resolution shall be paid to the finance officer at the time of filing. 
D.  Conditional Use Permits Defined. "Conditional use permits," as the term is used in this section, shall be the same as those conditional use permits described in Section 65901 of the Government Code. 
E.  Findings and Decision. 
1.  The planning commission may approve or deny a conditional use permit through a public hearing process. Before any conditional use permit is granted, the applicant shall show the existence of the following facts: 
a.  The proposed use is allowable within the applicable zoning district pursuant to a conditional use permit and complies with all other applicable provisions of the Land Use Code; and 
b.  The proposed use is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan; and 
c.  The design, location, size, and operating characteristics of the proposed activity would be compatible with the existing and future land uses in the vicinity; and 
d.  The site is physically suitable for the type, density, and intensity of use being proposed, including access, utilities, and the absence of physical constraints. 
e.  Granting the permit would not constitute a nuisance or be injurious or detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience, or welfare, or materially injurious to persons, property, or improvements in the vicinity and zone in which the property is located; and 
f.  The proposed project has been reviewed in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act. 
2.  The decision of the planning commission is appealable to the city council in accordance with Section 18.12.060. 
F.  Conditions. Conditions may be imposed upon the granting of any conditional use permit so as to render the proposed use as compatible as possible with other uses in the immediate surrounding area, and to accomplish the purpose of this chapter. 
G.  Acceptance of Conditions. Before any conditional use permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall become effective, the applicant shall file a written statement, in the form to be prescribed by the city attorney, with the planning division, acknowledging and accepting all of the conditions, if any, imposed upon such conditional use permit. 
H.  Revocation. 
1.  Conditional use permits may be subject to revocation in the time and manner as set forth in this section. Whenever the city manager or his/her designee finds that any of the following facts exist, with reference to a conditional use permit, he/she may recommend to the planning commission or city council, whichever body granted the permit, that the conditional use permit be revoked: 
a.  That the conditional use permit was obtained by fraud; or 
i.  That the use authorized by such conditional use permit has ceased, or has been suspended, for any reason, for a period of six months or more; or 
ii.  That the conditional use permit is being exercised in a manner contrary to any law or conditions of approval imposed upon such conditional use permit; or 
iii.  That any use or uses pursuant to such conditional use permit is being, or has been, exercised in a manner detrimental to public peace, health, safety, or welfare, or in a manner to constitute a public nuisance. 
b.  Upon receipt of such recommendation, the granting body shall expeditiously set and conduct a public hearing upon such matter after having given notice in the manner set forth in Section 18.12.050. At the time and place of such hearing, the body conducting such hearing shall determine whether any one of the facts, set forth in Section 18.12.110(H)(1)a are present. If, as a result of the evidence produced at such hearing, the body conducting the hearing determines that any one of such facts are present, it shall revoke the conditional use permit. 
c.  If the revocation proceeding is conducted before the planning commission, the decision of the commission shall be subject to an appeal to the city council in the time and manner as set forth in Section 18.12.060. In the absence of such appeal from a commission decision, its decision shall be final and conclusive. The action of the city council, either upon an appeal or as a conducting body, shall be final and conclusive for all purposes. 
I.  Modification. Any condition imposed upon the granting of a conditional use permit may be modified or eliminated, or new conditions may be added; provided that the original granting body, the commission or the council, first conducts a public hearing thereon, in the same manner as required for the granting of the same. No such modification shall be made unless the commission or council finds that such modification is necessary to protect the public interest and/or adjacent or abutting properties; or, in case of deletion of an existing condition, that such action is necessary to permit reasonable operation and use under the conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.12.120 - Variances. 
A.  Purpose. Variances are discretionary actions meant to provide adjustments in the application of this title to avoid practical difficulties and unnecessary hardships with respect to a particular piece of property which is not enjoying the privileges commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same vicinity and zone. A practical difficulty or unnecessary physical hardship may result from the size, shape, or dimensions of a site, or because of the location of existing structures on the site, or from setbacks or building lines, or from geographic, topographic, or other physical conditions on the site or in the immediate vicinity. 
B.  Applicability. A variance may be considered for any applicant who is trying to establish a use that is expressly permitted in the zone that governs his/her property, but a hardship associated with the land deprives the property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity within the same zone and prevents the applicant from being able to fully comply with the development standards of this Land Use Code. 
C.  Application Requirements. An application for a variance shall contain any specific information required by the city manager or his/her designee necessary support of the findings required by this section. A nonrefundable fee in such amount as the city council shall from time to time establish by resolution shall be paid to the finance officer at the time of filing. 
D.  Development Standards. Except for the provision(s) of this title which are the subject of a zone variance approval, all other provisions of this title shall apply. 
E.  Findings and Decision. Before any zone variance is granted by the planning commission through a public hearing process, the applicant shall show compliance with the following: 
1.  Variances from the terms of this title shall be granted only when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of this title deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification. 
2.  Any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is situated. 
3.  A variance shall not be granted for a parcel of property which authorizes a use or activity which is not otherwise expressly authorized by the zone regulation governing the parcel of property. 
F.  Conditions of Approval. Conditions of approval may be attached to the granting of a variance to render such variance compatible with adjacent uses and properties and in accord with the general intent and purpose of this title, and to prevent the granting of a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations placed upon other properties and uses similarly situated. 
G.  Acceptance of Conditions. Before any zone variance granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall become effective, the applicant shall file a written statement, in the form to be prescribed by the city attorney, with the planning division, acknowledging and accepting all of the conditions, if any, imposed upon such zone variance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.12.130 - Planned development permits. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of these procedures is to: 
1.  Establish a review process for development that allows an applicant to request greater flexibility from the strict application of the regulations than would be allowed through a variance process; 
2.  Encourage imaginative and innovative planning to achieve a more preferable development than what would be achieved by strict conformance with the regulations; 
3.  Ensure, through the imposition of conditions of approval, a more efficient use of open space, separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, increased project amenities, compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, and conformance to the achievable capacity of community utilities and improvements. 
4.  Consider a planned development as a comprehensive unit rather than an aggregation of separate buildings on unrelated lots. 
B.  Applicability. A planned development shall consist of not less than two acres and the area must be under one ownership or the subject of an application filed jointly by all the owners of the property included. 
C.  Application Requirements. An application for a planned development permit shall contain any specific information required by the city manager or his/her designee necessary to support the findings required by this section. A nonrefundable fee in such amount as the city council shall from time to time establish by resolution shall be paid to the finance officer at the time of filing. 
D.  Dwelling Units. If a planned development contains residential units, the number of residential units shall not exceed the number otherwise allowed unless a density bonus is approved consistent with the provisions of Government Code Section 65915. In no case shall the right-of-way of any public or private street, sidewalk, public or semi-public parking area, or adjacent pedestrian walk be included in the allowable lot area per dwelling unit. Two or more dwelling units may be attached or combined into a single structure. 
E.  Special Lot Sizes, Setback, and Height Requirements. 
1.  Reductions in lot sizes may be approved, provided that acceptable land is designated as permanent open space and/or usable recreation space. The land area of each permanent open space area shall equal or exceed the total of all lot reductions. 
2.  Special setback and height requirements may be established for a planned development based on design and relation of buildings to each other and the surrounding areas. 
F.  Development Regulations. Reductions in lot sizes may be approved, provided that acceptable land is designated as permanent open space and/or usable recreation space. The land area of each permanent open space area shall equal or exceed the total of all lot reductions. 
G.  Findings and Decision. A planned development permit may be approved or conditionally approved by the planning commission through a public hearing process only if all of the following findings are made: 
1.  The proposed development is consistent with the General Plan; 
2.  The proposed development will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare; 
3.  The proposed development will comply with the regulations of the Land Use Code; 
4.  The proposed development, when considered as a whole, will be beneficial to the community; 
5.  Any proposed deviations pursuant to this section are appropriate for this location and will result in a more desirable project than would be achieved if designed in strict conformance with the development regulations of the applicable zone. 
6.  The proposed project has been reviewed in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act. 
H.  Conditions of Approval. Conditions of approval may be attached to the granting of a planned development permit to render such planned development compatible with adjacent uses and properties and in accord with the general intent and purpose of this title. 
I.  Acceptance of Conditions. Before any planned development permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall become effective, the applicant shall file a written statement, in the form to be prescribed by the city attorney, with the planning division, acknowledging and accepting all of the conditions, if any, imposed upon such zone variance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.12.140 - Zoning amendments. 
A.  Purpose. The zoning map or Land Use Code may be amended whenever public necessity, general welfare, convenience, or sound planning principles require. 
B.  Initiation. Zoning amendments may be initiated by: 
1.  The application of an owner or the agent of such owner seeking an amendment, supplement to, or change of the regulations prescribed for his property, or the reclassification of his property; 
2.  The application of an entity authorized to exercise the power of eminent domain over property subject to amendment; 
3.  The application of a redeveloper who is seeking to redevelop the property involved, and who is a party to an existing disposition and development agreement with the community development commission; 
4.  Minute action of the city council; 
5.  Minute action of the planning commission. 
C.  Application. Any person desiring to initiate a zoning change shall address his/her request on a form prescribed by the city manager or his/her designee. A nonrefundable fee in such amount as the city council shall from time to time establish by resolution shall be paid to the finance officer at the time of filing. 
D.  Decision. No decision on a zoning amendment shall be rendered by the planning commission or city council until they have, respectively, found that the amendment, if adopted, would be consistent with the General Plan and has been reviewed in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.12.150 - General plan and specific plan amendments. 
A.  Purpose. The General Plan Map, General Plan, and any specific plan may be amended whenever public necessity, general welfare, convenience, or sound planning principles require, in the manner prescribed in Sections 65350 through 65362, and 65450 through 65457 of the Government Code of the state. 
B.  Initiation. Amendments to the General Plan Map, General Plan, or any specific plan may be initiated by: 
1.  The application of an owner or the agent of such owner seeking an amendment, supplement to, or change of the regulations prescribed for his/her property, or the redesignation of his/her property. 
2.  The application of an entity authorized to exercise the power of eminent domain over property subject to amendment; 
3.  The application of a redeveloper who is seeking to redevelop the property involved, and who is a party to an existing disposition and development agreement with the community development commission; 
4.  Minute action of the city council; 
5.  Minute action of the planning commission. 
C.  Application. Any person desiring to initiate a change in the General Plan Map, General Plan, or any specific plan shall address his/her request on a form prescribed by the city manager or his/her designee. A nonrefundable fee in such amount as the city council shall from time to time establish by resolution shall be paid to the finance officer at the time of filing. 
D.  Decision. The planning commission shall recommend approval, approval with modifications, or denial of the application through a public hearing pursuant to Section 18.12.050. The city council, after receiving such recommendation, shall hold a public hearing pursuant to Section 18.12.050 and render a final decision. 
E.  Limitations on General Plan Amendments. General Plan amendments shall occur no more frequently than four times during any calendar year unless otherwise specified in Government Code Section 65358. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.12.160 - Historic properties. 
A.  Intent and Purpose. It is the intent and purpose of this section to protect, preserve and, where damaged, restore National City's historic resources by: 
1.  Establishing a procedure whereby properties of historical significance are identified and appropriate notice is provided in the event demolition, significant alteration, or conversion is proposed. 
2.  Protecting the educational, cultural, economic, and general welfare of the public, while employing regulations that are consistent with sound historical preservation principles and the rights of private property owners. 
B.  Designation of Historic Properties. 
1.  A list of historic properties shall be maintained and periodically updated. 
2.  Changes to the historic properties list may be initiated by resolution of the city council or on the verified application of the owner(s) of the property to be designated or their authorized agents. 
3.  Any application or resolution that proposes changes to the historic properties list shall be accompanied by an evaluation of the historic character of the property and shall be reviewed by the planning division. 
4.  The planning division, after reviewing such application for completeness, shall notify the historical society of the proposed changes to the historic properties list. Any comments or recommendations provided by the historical society must be received within twenty days of the notice of proposed changes. 
5.  Once the planning division has completed review of the application and considered any comments or recommendations from the historical society, it shall prepare a report and recommendation to the planning commission. 
6.  The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposal and shall provide a recommendation to the city council. 
7.  The city council shall hold a public hearing and may approve, modify and approve, or deny the proposed changes to the historic properties list. 
C.  Review of Ministerial Permits. 
1.  The building official or designee shall review each request for a non-discretionary building or demolition permit to determine if it involves any structure identified on the list of historic properties. If a property proposed for demolition or significant alteration or conversion is determined to be on the historic properties list, the building official or designee shall withhold issuance of the permit for a period of thirty days. 
2.  The building official shall immediately notify the planning division and the city council of the pending permit. 
3.  Within five days, the planning division shall provide notice to the historical society of the pending permit and may request comments and recommendations. Any comments or recommendations provided by the historical society must be received within twenty days of the notice of pending permit. 
4.  Once the planning division has reviewed the permit application and considered any comments or recommendations from the historical society, it shall provide a recommendation to the city council. The recommendation may include approval of the permit, no recommendation, recommendation that the permit be denied, or a request for additional time to evaluate the permit. 
5.  The city council, at its sole discretion, may approve the permit, deny the permit if a finding is made that such permit may result in an adverse effect on the public welfare, or withhold the issuance of the permit until such time as all alternative measures are thoroughly evaluated. 
D.  Review of Discretionary Permits. All discretionary permits involving a historic resource shall be reviewed in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
DIVISION 2. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND ALLOWABLE LAND USES  
Chapter 18.20 - ZONING MAP 
 
18.20.010 - Purpose. 
This section identifies the zones that apply to property within the city and adopts the city's zoning map. National City is organized into zones that implement the General Plan, which are identified on the zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.20.020 - Zones and zoning map. 
A.  Official Zoning Map. The official zoning map of the city is a zoning regulation within the context of and adopted pursuant to this title. 
B.  Zone Boundaries—Determination in Cases of Uncertainty. The location of zone boundaries may be determined by the rules for interpretation pursuant to this title. 
C.  Zone Boundary Changes—Procedure. Changes in the boundaries of the zones shall be made by ordinance adopting an amended official zoning map. 
D.  Pre-Zoning of Unincorporated Lands. 
1.  Areas outside of city limits, but within National City's sphere of influence are unincorporated lands and governed by the County of San Diego until such time as those areas are annexed into the city. These areas have been pre-zoned with city zones to identify the regulations that would apply once the land is annexed into the city. 
2.  Pre-zone changes may be initiated and heard, in the manner provided for zone changes in this title, prior to the effective date of annexation to be effective upon annexation. 
E.  Effect of Specific Plans. Lands within an adopted specific plan are governed by the zoning regulations of that specific plan. If the requirements of any specific plan are either more restrictive or less restrictive than the zoning regulations of this title, the requirements of the specific plan shall take precedence. If the specific plan is silent with regard to a development standard that is addressed within the provisions of this title, the provisions of this title shall apply. Specific plans referred to in this title shall be adopted in compliance with the procedural requirements of the California Government Code. 
F.  Zone Classifications Established. The following zone classifications are established and applied to the city as shown on the official zoning map. 
TABLE 18.20.020 
Zone Classifications 
Zone 
Classification 
Symbol 	Zone Classification 	General Plan Land Use Designation 
Residential 
RS-1 	Large Lot Residential 	Low Medium Density Residential 
RS-2 	Small Lot Residential 	Low Medium Density Residential 
RS-3 	Medium-Low Density Multi-Unit 
Residential 	Medium Density Residential 
RS-4 	Residential Single-Family 	Specific Plan (Westside) 
RM-1 	Medium Density Multi-Unit Residential 	Medium Density Residential 
RM-2 	High Density Multi-Unit Residential 	High Density Residential 
RM-3 	Very High Density Multi-Unit 
Residential 	High Density Residential 
Commercial 
CA 	Commercial Automotive 	Commercial Automotive 
CL 	Limited Commercial 	Specific Plan (Westside) 
CS 	Service Commercial 	Service Commercial 
Mixed-Use 
MCR-1 	Mixed Commercial-Residential 	Specific Plan (Westside) 
MCR-2 	Mixed Commercial-Residential 
(Smart Growth Area) 	Specific Plan (Westside) 
MXC-1 	Minor Mixed Use Corridor 	Minor Mixed Use 
MXC-2 	Major Mixed Use Corridor 	Major Mixed Use 
MXD-1 	Minor Mixed Use District 	Minor Mixed Use 
MXD-2 	Major Mixed Use District 	Major Mixed Use 
Industrial 
IL 	Light Industrial 	Industrial 
IM 	Medium Industrial 	Industrial 
IH 	Heavy Industrial 	Industrial 
Institutional 
I 	Institutional 	Institutional 
Open Space 
OS 	Open Space 	Open Space 
OSR 	Open Space Reserve 	
Military 
M 	Military 	Military 
San Diego Unified Port District 
UPD 	Port Master Plan 	San Diego Unified Port District 
Specific Plan 
SP 	Specific Plan 	Specific Plan 
 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.20.030 - Prohibited land uses. 
Land uses not specifically allowed in a zone are prohibited in that zone; in addition, the following are specifically prohibited. 
A.  In all zones, no structure of a temporary nature shall be used as a residence, neither temporarily nor permanently, including: 
1.  Boats (except in marinas). 
2.  Camper shells (except in recreational vehicle parks). 
3.  Mobilehomes (except in mobilehome parks). 
4.  Recreational vehicles (except in recreational vehicle parks). 
5.  Shacks. 
6.  Sheds. 
7.  Shipping containers. 
8.  Storage units. 
9.  Tarpaulins. 
10.  Tents (except in recreational vehicle parks). 
11.  Trailers (except in recreational vehicle parks). 
12.  Buildings or structures of a temporary nature. 
B.  In all zones, the following shall not be used for temporary or permanent sleeping areas: 
1.  Attics. 
2.  Basements. 
3.  Cellars. 
4.  Decks. 
5.  Game rooms. 
6.  Garages. 
7.  Nonresidential buildings. 
8.  Patios. 
9.  Porches. 
10.  Rooftops. 
C.  In all zones, outdoor storage is prohibited except as specifically allowed by the zone. 
D.  In all zones, outdoor storage or parking of the following is prohibited unless specifically allowed by the zone: 
1.  Boats within any required front, side, exterior, or street setback. 
2.  Camper shells within any required front, side, exterior, or street setback. 
3.  Mobile homes (except in mobile home parks). 
4.  Recreational vehicles within any required front, side, exterior, or street setback. 
5.  Trailers within any required front, side, exterior, or street setback. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
Chapter 18.21 - RESIDENTIAL ZONES 
 
18.21.010 - Purpose. 
This section lists the land uses allowed within the residential zones. The purposes of the individual residential zones and the manner in which they are applied are as follows: 
A.  Large Lot Residential (RS-1). The purpose of the RS-1 zone is to provide for areas of single-family detached residences on large lots (ten thousand square feet minimum and a density of up to five dwelling units per acre). 
B.  Small Lot Residential (RS-2). The purpose of the RS-2 zone is to provide for areas of single-family detached residences on small lots (five thousand square feet minimum and a density of six to nine dwelling units per acre). 
C.  Medium-Low Density Residential (RS-3). The purpose of the RS-3 zone is to provide for low-rise, medium-low density (10 to 15 units per acre) single-family attached and multiple family residential areas. The RS-3 zone is intended to retain characteristics found in the single-family zones, such as private yards and patios and privately maintained open space. 
D.  Residential Single-Family (RS-4). The purposes of the RS-4 zone are to provide for areas of single-family attached and detached homes on minimum lot sizes of two thousand five hundred square feet; and provide for small lot single-family development within the Westside Specific Plan area. The RS-4 zone permits one attached or detached single-family dwelling for each full two thousand five hundred square feet of lot area provided there is no more than one single-family residence for each two thousand five hundred square feet of lot area. It also allows for the continuation of the existing mixture of housing types and encourages infill with single-family zones on vacant properties and where existing parcels may be further subdivided as provided herein. 
E.  Medium Density Multi-Unit Residential (RM-1). The purpose of the RM-1 zone is to provide for low-rise, medium density (sixteen to twenty-three dwelling units per acre) multiple family residential areas. The RM-1 zone is a transitional zone between higher density residential uses and lesser intensity single-family areas. 
F.  High Density Multi-Unit Residential (RM-2). The purpose of the RM-2 zone is to provide for low- to mid-rise, high density (twenty-four to forty-eight dwelling units per acre) multiple family residential. 
G.  Very High Density Multi-Unit Residential (RM-3). The purpose of the RM-3 zone is to provide for mid- to high-rise, very high density (forty-nine to seventy-five dwelling units per acre) multiple family residential. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.21.020 - Allowed land uses and permit requirements. 
A.  Residential Land Uses. 
1.  Table 18.21.020 identifies the uses of land allowed in each residential zone. 
2.  Table 18.21.020 does not apply to the RS-4 zone. See Appendix A, Land Use Table, within the Westside Specific Plan for the list of permitted uses in the RS-4 zone. 
3.  Within the RS-4 zone, existing multi-family and duplexes may continue as a permitted use. Existing churches and religious services may continue as a permitted use whereas new churches and religious facilities and expansions to existing churches and religious facilities are permitted pursuant to approval of a conditional use permit. Parks and open space are permitted uses. 
TABLE 18.21.020 
Allowed Land Uses 
Residential Zones 
Land Use 	Permit Required By District 	Specific Use 
Regulations 
	RS-1 	RS-2 	RS-3 	RM-1 	RM-2 	RM-3 	
Accessory structure (incidental to primary use and not a second unit) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Animal husbandry 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Section 8.32 
Bed and breakfast inn (B&B) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	Section 18.30.290 
Family day care home, small 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Section 18.30.080 
Family day care home, large 	M 	M 	M 	M 	M 	M 	Section 18.30.080 
Convalescent services/hospice (in home care only) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Dormitory (Accessory to a school) 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	C 	
Dwelling unit, single detached 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Dwelling unit, single attached 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Dwelling unit, multiple 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Home occupation 
(accessory use) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Section 18.12.090 
Neighborhood corner store 	M 	M 	M 	M 	M 	M 	Section 18.30.260 
Open space reserves 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Parks, passive recreation 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Parks, active recreation 	C 	C 	C 	P 	P 	P 	
Plant nursery 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Public assembly 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Public safety facility 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Rectory (accessory to religious facility) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Renewable energy 
infrastructure (accessory) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Section 18.30.210/18.30.300; California Building Code 
Rooming or boarding house (accessory) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Second unit (accessory) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Transitional / supportive housing 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Utility facilities, minor 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Utility facilities, major 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Urban agriculture 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Section 18.30.240 
P Permitted 
C Conditional use permit 
M Minor use permit (ministerial) 
— Not permitted 
 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.21.030 - Accessory uses. 
A.  Home Occupations. A home occupation permit granted by the planning division pursuant to Section 18.12.090 (Home Occupation Permits) shall be required. The home occupation shall comply with the provisions included within the definition as provided in the glossary. 
B.  Roomers and Boarders. In a dwelling unit occupied as a private residence, one or two rooms may be rented and table board provided for a maximum of two paying guests in all residential zones. Renting to more than two paying guests in a private residence is considered a rooming or boarding house and is subject to approval of a conditional use permit. 
C.  Limitations on Accessory Uses and Structures. 
1.  Accessory uses and structures are prohibited without a permissible main building. 
2.  Each accessory structure is allowed no more than one half bath. 
D.  Recreational Facilities. Recreational facilities serving a multi-unit residential development may be permitted. Typical facilities include: 
1.  Swimming pools, gymnasiums/fitness centers, and hut tubs/spas; 
2.  Tennis, badminton, volleyball, croquet, and similar courts; 
3.  Playgrounds, sitting areas, and picnic/barbeque areas. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.21.040 - General development standards. 
Development standards for residential zones are set forth in Table 18.21.040. 
Table 18.21.040 
Development Standards
Residential Zones 
Development 	Requirement By Zoning District 
	RS-1 	RS-2 	RS-3 	RS-4 	RM-1 	RM-2 	RM-3 
Minimum setbacks, Primary structure 
Front 	20' 	20' 	15' 	10'/ 
15(a) 	15' 	10' 	10' 
Side—Interior 	5' 	5' 	5' 	3/0(b) 	5' 	5' 	5' 
Side—Exterior 	10' 	10' 	5' 	10'(a) 	5' 	5' 	10' 
Rear 	25' 	25' 	10' 	15' 	5' 	5' 	5' 
Minimum setbacks, Accessory structure 
Front 	20' 	20' 	15' 	10/ 
15'(c) 	15' 	10' 	10' 
Side—Interior 	5' 	5' 	5' 	3' 	5' 	5' 	5' 
Side—Corner 	5' 	5' 	5' 	10' 	5' 	5' 	5' 
Rear 	5' 	5' 	5' 	3' 	5' 	5' 	5' 
Detached building separation 	5' 	5' 	5' 	6' 	5' 	5' 	5' 
Number of detached buildings 	3 per full 5,000 ft 2 of lot area 	3 per full 5,000 ft 2 of lot area 	3 per full 5,000 ft 2 of lot area 	3 			
Minimum lot area 	10,000 
SF 	5,000 
SF 	5,000 
SF 	2,500 
SF 	5,000 
SF 	5,000 
SF 	5,000 
SF 
Minimum street frontage 
(Standard) 	60' 	50' 	50' 	25' 	50' 	50' 	50' 
Minimum street frontage 
(lots on the bulb of a cul-de-sac) 	36' 	36' 	36' 	15' 	36' 	36' 	36' 
Maximum density 	One du per lot 	One du per lot 	One du per 2,900 SF of lot area 	One du for each 2,500 SF of lot area 	One du per 1,900 SF of lot area 	One du per 900 SF of lot area 	One du per 580 SF of lot area 
Minimum usable open space 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	See Section 18.41.040 
Maximum lot coverage 	75% 	75% 	75% 	N/A 	75% 	75% 	75% 
Maximum height, 
primary structure 	35' 	35' 	35' 	35' 	45' 	65' 	95' 
Maximum stories, 
primary structure 	2 	2 	3 	3 	4 	6 	9 
Maximum height, accessory structure 	35' 	35' 	35' 	35' 	45' 	65' 	95' 
	Shall not exceed the number of stories or height of the primary structure. 		Shall not exceed the allowed maximum height of accessory structures in adjacent zone within 100-feet of the adjacent zone. 
Maximum area (total), accessory structures—Excluding up to 400 SF of covered parking 	10% of lot size (d) 	10% of lot size (d) 	10% of lot size (d) 	None 	None 	None 	None 
 
Notes: 
(a) Stoops and porches may extend into the front yard up to the front property line or in the case of a corner parcel, to the side property line. Garages shall maintain a fifteen-foot front yard setback. 
(b) A zero foot minimum side yard, for one side yard on the parcel, is permitted provided that there is a six-foot separation to the adjacent residential structure and that there is a minimum three-foot side yard setback on the opposite side. 
(c) Except for stoops and porches, accessory structures shall not be located in the front yard setback. Porches or stoops should be at least six feet deep. 
(d) No single accessory structure shall have a footprint greater than that of half of the primary structure. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012; Ord. No. 2017-2438, § 2, 10-3-2017)  
18.21.050 - Second units. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide regulations for the establishment of accessory dwelling units in the residential zones. Accessory dwelling units help advance the city's growth and planning policies by: 
1.  Accommodating new housing units while preserving the character of existing neighborhoods; 
2.  Allowing efficient use of the city's existing housing stock and infrastructure; 
3.  Providing housing options and choices that respond to varying income levels, changing household sizes and lifestyle needs; and, 
4.  Providing a means for residents—particularly seniors, single parents, younger singles and younger couples, and empty nesters—to remain in their homes and neighborhoods, and obtain and preserve income, security, companionship, and assistance. 
B.  Development Standards. 
1.  Shall be permitted on properties with only one single-family residence on the lot or constructed in conjunction with a single-family residence; 
2.  Shall not be allowed where the city manager or his/her designee determines that roadways, public utilities or services are inadequate; 
3.  Shall not be allowed on lots that exceed the allowed number of dwelling units; 
4.  The development standards for accessory structures shall apply to second units, except that the setback requirements for primary structures shall apply and the floor area shall not exceed the maximum area allowed for accessory structures, but in no case shall exceed one thousand two hundred square feet. 
C.  Architectural Compatibility. A second dwelling unit shall incorporate the same or substantially similar architectural features with respect to roof pitch, compatible building materials, colors, and design details of the primary dwelling unit. 
D.  Parking. One off-street parking space, in addition to that which is required by this code for the primary residence shall be provided. Parking spaces include garages, carports, or uncovered parking. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
Chapter 18.22 - COMMERCIAL ZONES 
 
18.22.010 - Purpose. 
A.  Purposes. The general purposes of commercial zones are to: 
1.  Provide areas in which business may be conducted, goods sold and distributed, public and private services rendered, and such other activities provided which are related to the function of commercial development; 
2.  Ensure compatibility of the various commercial areas with adjacent land uses; 
3.  Implement the General Plan by concentrating the locations of intensive commercial uses. 
B.  Commercial Automotive (CA). The purpose of the commercial automotive (CA) zone is to provide for automobile and truck sales and services and sales and services that support such uses. Uses may also include alternative fuel vehicle sales, services and related supplies, and rental car facilities. 
C.  Limited Commercial (CL). The purposes of the limited commercial (CL) zone are to: 
1.  Provide for small scale, limited convenience retail shopping facilities at the neighborhood level, typically including food and convenience stores, small retail and service shops, professional offices, and artisan activities such as studios, galleries, production space, and small performance venues. The sale of all merchandise shall be retail only. 
2.  Ensure that the character of the CL zone will be compatible with and will complement the surrounding residential area. 
D.  Service Commercial (CS). The purpose of the service commercial (CS) zone is to provide for intensive commercial activities; specialized service establishments; light manufacturing, wholesaling, and distribution uses that operate in a clean and quiet manner; and supporting and complimentary uses. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.22.020 - Allowed land uses and permit requirements. 
Table 18.22.020 identifies the uses of land allowed in each commercial zone. This table does not apply to the CL zone. For a list of allowable uses in the CL zone, please refer to Appendix A of the Westside Specific Plan. 
TABLE 18.22.020 
Allowed Land Uses 
Commercial Zones 
Land Use 	Zone 	Specific Use 
Regulations 
	CA 	CS 	
Auto towing dispatch (accessory to service station) 		P 	
Alcohol, sales for off-site consumption (accessory to retail sales) 		C 	Section 
18.30.050 
Alcohol, sales for on-site consumption (accessory to eating place) 		C 	Section 
18.30.050 
Car wash, automatic and full service 		P 	
Car wash, manual 		C 	
Civic, fraternal, community, and cultural facilities 		C 	
Commercial recreation, indoor 		C 	
Commercial recreation, outdoor 		C 	
Convenience store (accessory to service station) 		M 	Section 
18.30.190 
Eating place, dine-in (accessory) 		P 	
Eating place, dine-in 		P 	
Eating place, drive-thru/take-out 		C 	
Games of skill or amusement, maximum of four machines (accessory) 		P 	
Gasoline service station 		C 	Section 
18.30.190 
Goods and services, retail 		P 	
New automobile and truck sales, leasing, and rentals 	P 		
Offices 		P 	
Off-street parking and loading facilities (accessory) 		P 	
Open space reserves 		P 	
Parking garage 		P 	
Pawn shops 		C 	Section 
18.30.330 
Payday lenders 		C 	Section 
18.30.320 
Public assembly 		C 	
Public safety facilities 		P 	
Research and development 		P 	
Recycling facility, small (accessory) 		P 	Section 
18.30.170 
Recycling facility, mobile 		C 	Section 
18.30.170 
Renewable energy infrastructure (accessory) 		P 	Section 
18.30.210/ 
18.30.300; 
CBC 
Sale of vehicle parts and accessories when provided by new vehicle dealership on contiguous property 	P 		
Sale or rental of campers, camper trailers, vacation trailers, self-propelled mobile homes, boats, and other sporting and pleasure equipment which is substantial in size. This activity must be incidental to the principal activity of the automobile and/or truck dealership 	P 		
Service and repair of trucks and automobiles when provided by new vehicle dealer on contiguous property 	P 		
Storage building (accessory) 		P 	
Tattoo parlors and body piercing establishments 		C 	Section 
18.30.310 
Telecommunications facilities 		C 	Section 
18.30.220 
Used auto and truck sales when part of a new vehicle dealership and located on contiguous land 	P 		
Utility facilities, minor 		P 	
Utility facilities, major 		C 	
Vehicle body and paint shop 		C 	Section 
18.30.060 
Vehicle, outdoor storage (a) 		C 	Section 
18.30.160 
Vehicle parts and accessories sales 		P 	
Vehicle, repair or service (minimum 7,500 square foot lot) 		P 	
Vending machines (accessory) 		P 	Section 
18.30.150(E) 
Warehouse and distribution facility 		P 	
Wrecked vehicle storage, maximum 60 days (accessory) 		P 	
P Permitted 
C Conditional use permit 
M Minor use permit 
— Not permitted 
 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.22.030 - Accessory uses. 
A.  Commercial Uses in Hotels and Motels. Accessory uses and services incidental to the principal use may be permitted; and accessory businesses intended for the convenience or necessity of the guests of the principal use, including bars, cafes, restaurants, lunchrooms, coffee shops, gift shops, florists, barbershops, beauty shops, news and tobacco shops, travel and car rental agencies, business centers, valet service (agency for laundering, cleaning, and pressing of clothing), letting of space for professional offices, operated in conjunction with the uses permitted in this section and not as a separate enterprise, and located on the same premises may be permitted, provided there shall be no entrance to such accessory uses except from the lobby or the interior of a principal building or buildings or patio. 
B.  Storage Buildings and Garages. Storage buildings and garages incidental to principal uses on the same premises are permitted. 
C.  Sale of Gasoline. The sale of gasoline may be permitted as an accessory use in any zone where gasoline service stations are permitted, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit. 
D.  Auctions. Auctions, in conjunction with used furniture or antique sales, may be permitted subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit. 
E.  Games of Skill or Amusement. 
1.  In the commercial and mixed-use zones, games of skill or amusement, as an incidental or accessory use, shall be limited to four machines per establishment, two of which may be multiple-player machines. 
2.  Bowling alleys shall be limited to thirty games of skill or amusement as an incidental use. All such machines shall be located in the main concourse of the facility within the line-of-sight of a supervising adult employed by the business proprietor, whom shall be continuously present at all times that machines are being used. 
3.  The use of games of skill or amusement as an incidental or accessory use may be permitted within an existing establishment only if a conditional use permit is granted. 
4.  Limitations on location of games of skill and amusement. 
a.  No games of skill and amusement accessible for use by minors shall be maintained, operated, conducted or used, nor kept for such purposes, in or on the premises of any establishment whose primary business is the sale of alcoholic beverages. This shall not prohibit the operation of amusement machines in a bona fide establishment with an on-sale liquor license or restaurants which are not licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. 
b.  No games of skill and amusement shall be maintained, operated, conducted or uses, nor kept for such purposes, within any place which is closer than three hundred feet from any public or private school which conducts classes for any grades from kindergarten to twelfth grade. 
F.  Catering Services. Catering services for retail food preparation and party supplies may be permitted; provided said use is conducted in conjunction with a permitted restaurant, retail store, or commercial office; and further provided that the wholesaling or warehousing of merchandise does not occur in the operation of the catering business. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.22.040 - General development standards. 
Development standards for commercial zones are set forth in Table 18.22.040. Refer to the Westside Specific Plan for additional requirements in the CL zone. 
TABLE 18.22.040 
Development Standards 
Commercial Zones 
Development Standard 	Zone 
	CA 	CL 	CS 
Minimum lot area 	15,000 SF 	5,000 SF 	5,000 SF (b)(c) 
Minimum street frontage 	50' 	50' 	50' (d) 
Minimum setbacks 	
Front 	0' 	10' 	0' 
Side, interior 	0' 	0'/10'(e) 	0' 
Side, exterior 	0' 	10' 	0' 
Rear 	0' 	5' 	0' 
When adjacent to a residential zone 	>20 feet from 
adjacent zone 
boundary 	N/A 	20 feet from 
adjacent zone 
boundary 
Maximum height/stories 	50' and 3 stories 	50' and 3 stories 	50' and 3 stories 
When adjacent to residential zone 	Shall not exceed the allowed maximum height in the adjacent zone within 100-feet of the adjacent zone 	N/A 	Shall not exceed the allowed maximum height in the adjacent zone within 100-feet of the adjacent zone 
Maximum floor area ratio 	1.5 	0.6 	1.5 
Lot coverage 	80% 	N/A 	80% 
 
Notes: 
(b) Automobile service stations shall have a minimum lot area of fifteen thousand square feet. 
(c) Automobile and truck repair facilities shall have a minimum lot area of seven thousand five hundred square feet. 
(d) Automobile service stations shall have a minimum street frontage of one hundred feet. 
(e) Ten feet if adjacent to an existing single-family or multi-family development without commercial/office uses. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.22.050 - Uses to be conducted in enclosed buildings. 
All uses shall be conducted in enclosed buildings; provided, however, that businesses such as auto and truck dealers, landscape nurseries, gas stations, sidewalk cafes/outdoor dining, and similar uses that customarily include outdoor use, may be permitted outside of a completely enclosed building. This section shall not restrict incidental loading, parking, property maintenance, or special promotions as provided by this title. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
Chapter 18.23 - WESTSIDE MIXED-USE ZONES 
 
18.23.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the MCR-1 and MCR-2 zones is to provide an area within the Westside Specific Plan area for either commercial or multi-family residential development or a commercial and multi-family development constructed on a single parcel or as components of a single development on an assemblage of parcels. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.23.020 - Allowed land uses and permit requirements. 
The uses permitted in the MCR-1 and MCR-2 zones are listed in Appendix A of the Westside Specific Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.23.030 - General development standards. 
The development standards for the MCR-1 and MCR-2 zones are identified in Table 18.23.030. Refer to the Westside Specific Plan for additional requirements in the MCR-1 and MCR-2 zones. 
TABLE 18.23.030 
Development Standards 
MCR-1 AND MCR-2 Zones 
Development Standard 	Zone 
	MCR-1 	MCR-2 
Minimum setbacks 		
 Front 	10' 	10' 
 Side, interior 	0'/10'(a) 	0'/10'(a) 
 Side, exterior 	10' 	10' 
 Rear 	5' 	5' 
Minimum distance between buildings 	0'/10'(a) 	0'/10'(a) 
Minimum density 	24 du/acre 	24 du/acre 
Maximum density 	24 du/acre 	45/60 du/acre (b) 
Minimum dwelling unit size 	600 SF 	600 SF 
Maximum height/stories 	3 stories and 50' 	5 stories and 65' 
Common usable open space (c) 	300 SF/du 	300 SF/du 
Private usable open space (c) 	75 SF/du 	75 SF/du 
Maximum floor area ratio 	0.6 	0.6 
 
Notes: 
(a) Ten feet if adjacent to single-family or multi-family development without commercial/office uses 
(b) Maximum density if forty-five dwelling units per acre in the MCR-2 civic center drive district and sixty dwelling units per acre in the MCR-2 transit oriented development district. 
(c) Required for each unit over three units. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
Chapter 18.24 - MIXED-USE CORRIDOR AND DISTRICT ZONES 
 
18.24.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the mixed-use corridor and district zones is to create vibrant, mixed-use places that support a dynamic economy, affordable housing and environmental sustainability along major roadways. The mixed-use zones establish standards relating to building form and placement, building frontages, land use, parking, civic spaces, and streets. These standards are intended to create transit-oriented development with high quality architecture, pedestrian-oriented streets, a variety of housing options, accessible civic spaces, and a fine-grained mixture of land uses and activities. These standards differ from conventional zones by de-emphasizing land use regulations and instead focusing on physical form and building design. The mixed-use corridor and district zones implement policies relating to neighborhood design in the Land Use and Community Character Element of the National City General Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.24.020 - Mixed-use zones. 
A.  Mixed-Use Corridor, Minor (MXC-1). The MXC-1 zone supports the creation of mixed-use corridors at a scale compatible with adjacent single-family residential neighborhoods. Development in the zone is intended to create a pedestrian-oriented development that enhances the quality of life within the corridor and for adjacent residential neighborhoods. Buildings in the zone are built at or near front property lines to create a well-defined public realm. Parking areas are de-emphasized by being located adjacent to or behind buildings. Multi-family residential and mixed-use buildings provide a diversity of housing choices for existing and new residents. Commercial uses provide goods and services for residents and jobs for the community. 
B.  Mixed-Use Corridor, Major (MXC-2). The MXC-2 zone supports the creation of mixed-use corridors that function as important activity centers within the community. Development in the zone is intended to create vibrant places at an urban scale. Buildings in the zone are built to the property lines to create a clearly defined street edge with building frontages that are active and inviting for pedestrians. Residents in mixed-use buildings with housing above retail support commercial establishments within the corridor. High quality architectural design and a distinctive sense of place make the zone an attractive destination to work, shop, and play for residents and visitors. 
C.  Mixed-Use District, Minor (MXD-1). The MXD-1 zone supports the creation of mixed-use districts at a scale compatible with adjacent single-family residential neighborhoods. New development within the zone may be oriented towards an existing public street or a new street or civic space within the development site. A mixture of land uses within the zone will support a neighborhood feel and increase the ability for workers and residents to walk to destinations. New streets established in the zone support a pedestrian-oriented environment and accommodate all modes of transportation. New civic spaces required for large redevelopment projects create a lively focal point within the district that functions as a gathering place for residents and workers within the district. 
D.  Mixed-Use District, Major (MXD-2). The MXD-2 zone supports the creation of mixed-use districts that serve as primary activity centers within the city. These activity centers will function as twenty-four-hour neighborhoods for residents, workers, and visitors. Housing, employment, retail, and recreational uses located within close proximity to one another will reduce dependence on the automobile. Urban-scale development will contribute to a lively, dynamic, and unique sense of place. Streets established in the zone support a pedestrian-oriented environment and accommodate all modes of transportation. New civic spaces required for large redevelopment projects will reinforce the urban design character of the district and provide a gathering place for residents, workers, and visitors. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.24.030 - General provisions. 
The requirements of this chapter (Mixed-Use Corridor and District Zones) take precedence over the regulations found elsewhere in Title 18. In the event of a conflict between this chapter and another portion of the Land Use Code, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.24.040 - Building form and placement. 
A.  Purpose. This section establishes standards for building form and placement, including building height, bulk, mass, and parking placement within the mixed-use corridor and district zones. 
B.  Intent. The intent of these standards is to ensure excellence in site planning and building design in order to create a vibrant and well-defined public realm that is pedestrian-friendly and supportive of a sustainable way-of-life. The images below illustrate the intent of these standards. 
[C.]  Mixed-Use Transit Corridor, Minor (MXC-1). Development in the MXC-1 zone shall comply with the standards in Table 18.24.040A (MXC-1 Zone Building Form and Placement). 
TABLE 18.24.040A 
MXC-1 Zone Building Form and Placement 
Development Standard 	Minimum 	Maximum 
Street wall 	75% 	100% 
Building setbacks 		
 Street 	0' 	15' - 1st and 2nd story 
None - 3rd story 
 Other 	0' 	None 
 Other, adjacent to residential zone 	Same as adjacent 
residential zone 	None 
Building stepbacks 		
3rd story stepback from 2nd story street wall 	8' 	None 
3rd story stepback from 2nd story walls adjacent to RS zone 	15' 	None 
Building volume 		
Height 	None 	50' and 3 stories 
Height, adjacent to residential zone 	None 	Same as adjacent zone (within 50 feet) 
Floor area ratio, mixed-use (a) 	None 	2.0 
Floor area ratio, single-use 	None 	1.0 
Residential density (net rights-of-way) 	None 	48 du/acre 
Parking setback adjacent to street (b) 	40' 	None 
 
Notes: 
(a) Mixed use shall be defined as both vertical mixed use (e.g., residential or office above ground floor commercial) and horizontal mixed use (e.g., residential and commercial uses in separate buildings located on a single parcel or site). A mixed use development that is primarily residential shall contain a minimum of ten percent commercial floor area. A mixed use development that is primarily commercial shall contain a minimum twenty percent residential floor area. 
(b) Does not apply when parking is not visible from any point six feet above finish grade along property lines adjacent to public rights-of-way. 
Building Setback Standards in the MXC-1 Zone
 
Building Volume Standards in the MXC-1 Zone
 
Parking Setback Standards in the MXC-1 Zone
 
[D.]  Mixed-Use Corridor, Major (MXC-2) Standards. Development in the MXC-2 zone shall comply with the standards in Table 18.24.040B (MXC-2 Zone Building Form and Placement). 
TABLE 18.24.040B 
MXC-2 Zone Building Form and Placement 
Development Standard 	Minimum 	Maximum 
Street wall 	75% 	100% 
Building setbacks 		
 Street 	0' 	10' - 1st and 2nd story 
None - 3rd story 
 Other 	0' 	None 
 Other, adjacent to residential zone 	Same as adjacent 
residential zone 	None 
Building stepbacks 		
5th story stepback from 4th story street wall 	8' 	None 
3rd, 4th, and 5th story stepback from 2nd story walls adjacent to RS zone 	15' 	None 
Building volume 		
Height 	None 	65' and 5 stories 
Height, adjacent to residential zone 	None 	Same as adjacent zone (within 50 feet) 
Floor area ratio, mixed use (a) 	None 	3.5 
Floor area ratio, single use 	None 	2.5 
Residential density (net rights-of-way) 	None 	75 du/acre 
Parking setback adjacent to street (b) 	40' 	None 
 
Notes: 
(a) Mixed use shall be defined as both vertical mixed use (e.g., residential or office above ground floor commercial) and horizontal mixed use (e.g., residential and commercial uses in separate buildings located on a single parcel or site). A mixed use development that is primarily residential shall contain a minimum of ten percent commercial floor area. A mixed use development that is primarily commercial shall contain a minimum twenty percent residential floor area. 
(b) Does not apply when parking is not visible from any point six feet above finish grade along property lines adjacent to public rights-of-way. 
Building Setback Standards in the MXC-2 Zone
 
Building Volume Standards in the MXC-2 Zone
 
Parking Setback Standards in the MXC-2 Zone
 
[E.]  Mixed-Use District (MXD-1) Standards. Development in the MXD-1 zone shall comply with the standards in Table 18.24.040C (MXD-1 Zone Building Form and Placement). 
TABLE 18.24.040C 
MXD-1 Zone Building Form and Placement 
Development Standard 	Minimum 	Maximum 
Street wall 	75% 	100% 
Building setbacks 		
 Street 	0' 	15' - 1st and 2nd story 
None - 3rd story 
 Other 	0' 	None 
 Other, adjacent to residential zone 	Same as adjacent 
residential zone 	None 
Building stepbacks 		
3rd story stepback from 2nd story street wall 	8' 	None 
3rd story stepback from 2nd story walls adjacent to RS zone 	15' 	None 
Building volume 		
Height 	None 	50' and 3 stories 
Height, adjacent to a residential zone 	None 	Same as adjacent zone (within 50 feet) 
Floor area ratio, mixed use (a) 	None 	2.0 
Floor area ratio, single use 	None 	1.0 
Residential density 	None 	48 du/acre 
Parking setback adjacent to street (b) 	40' 	None 
 
Notes: 
(a) Mixed use shall be defined as both vertical mixed use (e.g., residential or office above ground floor commercial) and horizontal mixed use (e.g., residential and commercial uses in separate buildings located on a single parcel or site). A mixed use development that is primarily residential shall contain a minimum of ten percent commercial floor area. A mixed use development that is primarily commercial shall contain a minimum twenty percent residential floor area. 
(b) Does not apply when parking is not visible from any point six feet above finish grade along property lines adjacent to public rights-of-way. 
Building Setback Standards in the MXD-1 Zone
 
Building Volume Standards in the MXD-1 Zone
 
Parking Setback Standards in the MXD-1 Zone
 
[F.]  Mixed-Use District, Major (MXD-2) Standards. Development in the MXD-2 zone shall comply with the standards in Table 18.24.040D (MXD-2 Zone Building Form and Placement). 
TABLE 18.24.040D 
MXD-2 Zone Building Form and Placement 
Development Standard 	Minimum 	Maximum 
Street wall 	75% 	100% 
Building setbacks 		
 Street 	0' 	10' - 1st and 2nd story 
None - 3rd story 
 Other 	0' 	None 
 Other, adjacent to residential zone 	Same as adjacent 
residential zone 	None 
Building stepbacks 		
5th story stepback from 4th story street wall 	8' 	None 
3rd, 4th, and 5th story stepback from 2nd story walls adjacent to RS zone 	15' 	None 
Building volume 		
Height 	None 	65' and 5 stories 
Height, adjacent to residential zone 	None 	Same as adjacent zone (within 50 feet) 
Floor area ratio, mixed use (a) 	None 	3.5 
Floor area ratio, single use 	None 	2.5 
Residential density (net rights-of-way) 	None 	75 du/acre 
Parking setback adjacent to street (b) 	40' 	None 
 
Notes: 
(a) Mixed use shall be defined as both vertical mixed use (e.g., residential or office above ground floor commercial) and horizontal mixed use (e.g., residential and commercial uses in separate buildings located on a single parcel or site). A mixed use development that is primarily residential shall contain a minimum of ten percent commercial floor area. A mixed use development that is primarily commercial shall contain a minimum twenty percent residential floor area. 
(b) Does not apply when parking is not visible from any point six feet above finish grade along property lines adjacent to public rights-of-way. 
Building Setback Standards in the MXD-2 Zone
 
Building Volume Standards in the MXD-2 Zone
 
Parking Setback Standards in the MXD-2 Zone
 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.24.050 - Allowed land uses and permit requirements. 
A.  Purpose. This section identifies permitted uses within the mixed-use zones. 
B.  Permitted Land Uses. Land uses permitted in the mixed-use zones shall be as specified in Table 18.24.050 (Allowed Land Uses - Mixed-Use Zones). 
TABLE 18.24.050 
Allowed Land Uses 
Mixed-Use Zones 
Land Use 	Permit Required by Zone 	Specific Use 
Regulations 
	MXC-1 (a) 	MXC-2 	MXD-1 	MXD-2 	
Alcohol, sales for off-site consumption (accessory to retail sales) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	Section 
18.30.050 
Alcohol, sales for on-site consumption (accessory to eating places) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	Section 
18.30.050 
Animal boarding/kennel, small (setback 150 feet from single-family residential zones) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Adult day health care 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Bar/nightclub 	C 	C 	C 	C 	Section 
18.30.050 
Bed and breakfast inn (B&B) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Breweries, small 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Brewery tasting room 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Section 
18.30.050/ 
City Council Policy 707 
Car wash, automatic and full service 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Car wash, manual 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Civic, fraternal, community, and cultural facilities 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Commercial recreation, indoor 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Commercial recreation, outdoor 	M 	M 	M 	M 	
Convalescent / nursing home / hospice 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Child day care center 	M 	M 	M 	M 	Section 
18.30.070 
Family day care home, small (accessory) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Section 
18.30.080 
Family day care home, large (accessory) 	M 	M 	M 	M 	Section 
18.30.080 
Convenience store (accessory to gas service station) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Section 
18.30.190 
Dormitory (accessory to school) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Dwelling unit, single detached (b) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Dwelling unit, single attached (b) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Dwelling unit, multiple (b) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Eating places, dine in 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Eating places, drive-through/take-out 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Farmer's market 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Gasoline service station 	C 	C 	C 	C 	Section 
18.30.190 
Goods and services, retail 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Guidance/social assistance services 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Heliport/helistop (accessory) 	— 	— 	C 	C 	
Home occupation (accessory) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Hospital 	— 	— 	C 	C 	
Hotel, motel, and related 
services 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Section 
18.30.270 
Maintenance yards 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Medical offices/clinics and laboratories 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Offices 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Open space reserves 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Parking garage 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Parks (passive and active 
recreation) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Pawn shops 	C 	C 	C 	C 	Section 
18.30.330 
Payday lenders 	C 	C 	C 	C 	Section 
18.30.320 
Private/public educational 
institutions, schools 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Public assembly 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Public safety facilities 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Rectory (accessory to religious facility) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Recycling facility, 
small (accessory) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Section 
18.30.170 
Recycling facility, mobile 	C 	C 	C 	C 	Section 
18.30.170 
Renewable energy infrastructure (accessory) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Section 
18.30.210/18.30.300; 
California Building Code 
Sidewalk café (accessory) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Section 
18.30.200 
Storage building (accessory) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Tattoo parlors and body 
piercing establishments 	C 	C 	C 	C 	Section 
18.30.310 
Telecommunication facilities, commercial 	C 	C 	C 	C 	Section 
18.30.220 
Tobacco specialty businesses 	— 	— 	C 	C 	Section 
18.30.230 
Transitional/supportive 
housing (b) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Urban agriculture 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Section 
18.30.240 
Utility facilities, minor 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Utility facilities, major 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Vending machines (accessory) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Section 
18.30.150(E) 
Veterinary clinics/hospitals 	C 	C 	C 	C 	Section 
18.30.250 
Winery tasting room 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Section 
18.30.050/ 
City Council Policy 707 
P Permitted 
C Conditional use permit 
M Minor use permit (ministerial) 
— Not permitted 
 
Notes: 
(a) Visitor serving, tourist commercial, and recreational uses are prioritized in the coastal zone. 
(b) Residential uses are not permitted in the coastal zone west of I-5. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012; Ord. No. 2015-2407, § 2, 11-3-2015; Ord. No. 2017-2444, § 2, 12-19-2017; Ord. No. 2018-2448, § II, 7-17-2018; Ord. No. 2018-2451, § 2, 11-20-2018)  
18.24.060 - Accessory uses. 
A.  Commercial Uses in Hotels and Motels. Accessory uses and services incidental to the principal use may be permitted; and accessory businesses intended for the convenience or necessity of the guests of the principal use, including bars, cafes, restaurants, lunchrooms, coffee shops, gift shops, florists, barbershops, beauty shops, news and tobacco shops, travel and car rental agencies, business centers, valet service (agency for laundering, cleaning, and pressing of clothing), letting of space for professional offices, operated in conjunction with the uses permitted in this section and not as a separate enterprise, and located on the same premises may be permitted, provided there shall be no entrance to such accessory uses except from the lobby or the interior of a principal building or buildings or patio. 
B.  Storage Buildings and Garages. Storage buildings and garages incidental to principal uses on the same premises are permitted. 
C.  Recreational Facilities. Recreational facilities serving the customer or patron of a principal use may be permitted. Typical facilities include: 
1.  Swimming pools, gymnasiums/fitness centers, and hot tubs/spas; 
2.  Tennis, badminton, volleyball, croquet, and similar courts; 
3.  Playgrounds, sitting areas, and picnic/barbeque areas. 
D.  Sale of Gasoline. The sale of gasoline may be permitted as an accessory use in any zone where gasoline service stations are permitted, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit. 
E.  Auctions. Auctions, in conjunction with used furniture or antique sales, may be permitted subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit. 
F.  Games of Skill or Amusement. 
1.  In the commercial and mixed-use zones, games of skill or amusement, as an incidental or accessory use, shall be limited to four machines per establishment, two of which may be multiple-player machines. 
2.  Bowling alleys shall be limited to thirty games of skill or amusement as an incidental use. All such machines shall be located in the main concourse of the facility within the line-of-sight of a supervising adult employed by the business proprietor, whom shall be continuously present at all times that machines are being used. 
3.  The use of games of skill or amusement as an incidental or accessory use may be permitted within an existing establishment only if a conditional use permit is granted. 
4.  Limitations on location of games of skill and amusement. 
a.  No games of skill and amusement accessible for use by minors shall be maintained, operated, conducted or used, nor kept for such purposes, in or on the premises of any establishment whose primary business is the sale of alcoholic beverages. This shall not prohibit the operation of amusement machines in a bona fide establishment with an on-sale liquor license or restaurants which are not licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. 
b.  No games of skill and amusement shall be maintained, operated, conducted or uses, nor kept for such purposes, within any place which is closer than three hundred feet from any public or private school which conducts classes for any grades from kindergarten to twelfth grade. 
G.  Catering Services. Catering services for retail food preparation and party supplies may be permitted; provided said use is conducted in conjunction with a permitted restaurant, retail store, or commercial office; and further provided that the wholesaling or warehousing of merchandise does not occur in the operation of the catering business. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.24.070 - Building frontage standards. 
A.  Purpose. This section identifies permitted frontage types for each mixed-use zone and establishes design standards that apply to each frontage type. 
B.  Frontage Types Defined. Frontage types refer to the design and function of street-facing wall building façades. Frontage types define the way a structure engages the street and provides a transition between the public and private realm. 
C.  Permitted Frontage Types. 
1.  MXC-1 and MXC-2 Zones. Exterior building walls in the MXC-1 and MXC-2 zones facing a street shall feature a permitted frontage type as shown in Table 18.24.070 (Building Frontage Types). 
2.  MXD-1 and MXD-2 Zones. Exterior building walls in the MXD-1 and MXD-2 zones facing a collector or arterial street shall feature a permitted frontage type as shown in Table 18.24.070 (Building Frontage Types). Within the MXD-1 and MXD-2 zones, frontage type requirements do not apply to building walls facing other types of streets. 
TABLE 18.24.070 
Building Frontage Types in Mixed-Use Zones 
	Mixed-Use Zones 
	MXC-1 and MXD-1 	MXC-2 and MXD-2 
Porch 	P 	See Note (a) 
Stoop 	P 	See Note (a) 
Lightcourt 	P 	See Note (a) 
Dooryard 	P 	See Note (a) 
Forecourt 	P 	See Note (a) 
Shopfront 	P 	P 
Gallery 	- 	P 
Arcade 	- 	P 
Lobby 	- 	P 
 
Notes: 
(a) Permitted only for exterior building walls fronting one or more existing single-family home. 
D.  Residential Transitions. 
1.  Required Frontage Types. The portion of a building facing and located across a street from one or more detached single-family home shall feature either a porch or a stoop frontage type. 
2.  Distinct Volumes. Frontages as required by subsection (1) above shall read as a series of distinct volumes, each no greater than fifty feet in width. Variation in building color, breaks in the horizontal plane, architectural detailing, and other similar methods may be used to comply with this requirement. Unarticulated facades are not permitted. 
E.  Frontage Type Standards. Frontage types shall comply with the following standards. 
1.  Porch. 
a.  Porch Defined. A porch is a covered but unenclosed projection from the front wall of a structure generally surrounding the main entry to a dwelling unit. 
b.  Dimensions. A porch shall comply with the following dimension standards: 
i.  Depth: Eight feet minimum. 
ii.  Width: Twelve feet minimum. 
iii.  Height: Eight feet minimum from finished floor to ceiling. 
c.  Maximum Elevation. The elevation of a porch floor shall not exceed four feet from adjacent grade. 
d.  Maximum Fence Height. The height of a fence located at the front sidewalk shall not exceed forty-eight inches from adjacent grade. 
e.  Open Sides Required. Full or partial enclosure of porches greater than forty-two inches in height is prohibited. 
Porch and Fence Standards:
Section View

 
Porch and Fence Standards: Plan View
 
2.  Stoop. 
a.  Stoop Defined. A stoop is an uncovered unenclosed elevated platform projecting from the front wall of a structure providing access to the ground level of a building. 
b.  Dimensions. A stoop shall comply with the following dimension standards: 
i.  Depth: Six feet minimum. 
ii.  Width: Four feet minimum. 
c.  Maximum Elevation. The elevation of a stoop floor shall not exceed six feet from adjacent grade. 
d.  Maximum Fence, Handrail, or Wall Height. The height of a fence, handrail, or wall surrounding a stoop shall not exceed forty-two inches as measured from the stoop floor. 
e.  Open Sides Required. Full or partial enclosure of stoops greater than forty-two inches in height is prohibited. 
Stoop Standards: Section View
 
Stoop Standards: Plan View
 
3.  Lightcourt. 
a.  Lightcourt Defined. A lightcourt is a sunken front yard area that buffers residential uses from adjacent sidewalks. 
b.  Maximum Depth. The lower level of a building accessed by a lightcourt shall be no more than six feet below adjacent grade. 
c.  Maximum Stoop Elevation. The maximum elevation of the stoop portion of a lightcourt shall not exceed six feet from adjacent grade. 
Lightcourt Standards: Section View
 
Lightcourt Standards: Plan View
 
4.  Dooryard. 
a.  Dooryard Defined. A dooryard is a garden or terrace in the front yard area elevated from the adjacent sidewalk. 
b.  Maximum Garden or Terrace Elevation. The maximum elevation of an elevated garden or terrace shall be three feet from adjacent grade. 
c.  Open Sides Required. Full enclosure of an elevated garden or terrace is prohibited. 
Dooryard Standards: Section View
 
Dooryard Standards: Plan View
 
5.  Forecourt. 
a.  Forecourt Defined. A forecourt is an open area partially surrounded by building walls that opens to a public sidewalk. 
b.  Minimum Dimensions. The area of a forecourt surrounded by building walls shall comply with the following dimension standards: 
i.  Depth: Six feet minimum. 
ii.  Width: Twenty feet minimum, fifty feet maximum. 
c.  Maximum Elevation. The elevation of a forecourt floor shall not exceed six feet from adjacent grade. 
d.  Minimum Transparency. The minimum area of a forecourt's street-facing walls consisting of transparent windows shall be forty percent for residential uses and sixty percent for commercial uses. 
Forecourt Standards: Section View
 
Forecourt Standards: Plan View
 
6.  Shopfront. 
a.  Shopfront Defined. A shopfront is a building façade that consists primarily of transparent glass with access to a commercial space located at street level. 
b.  Minimum Transparency, Ground Floor. A minimum of sixty-five percent of the street-facing walls of a ground floor shopfront shall consist of transparent windows or doors with views into the building 
c.  Minimum Transparency, Upper Floors. A minimum of forty percent of the street-facing walls of upper floors shall consist of transparent windows or doors. 
d.  Ground Floor Doors. A minimum of eighty percent of the area of any door providing access to ground floor commercial uses shall consist of transparent glass. 
e.  Upper Floor Window Proportions. Façade openings and windows on upper stories shall be vertically proportioned, with a greater height than width. The height-width ratio of windows and openings shall be no less than 1.5:1. 
f.  Ground and Upper Floor Windows. The percentage of building façade consisting of windows shall be greater on the ground floor than on upper floors. 
g.  Awning and Canopy Dimensions. An awning or canopy attached to the exterior of a shopfront shall comply with the following dimension standards. 
i.  Maximum projection from building wall: Eight feet, or two-thirds of the sidewalk width, whichever is greater. 
ii.  Minimum eight feet clearance above sidewalk. 
h.  Awning and Canopy Location. Awnings and canopies may be permitted along storefronts and doors only. 
i.  Doors and Windows. Doors and windows shall not open or project into the public right-of-way. 
Shopfront Standards: Section View
 
Shopfront Standards: Plan View
 
7.  Gallery. 
a.  Gallery Defined. A gallery is a storefront with a covered walkway supported by columns or arches that may project over a sidewalk or walkway. 
b.  Minimum Transparency. A minimum of sixty percent of the primary frontage of a gallery shall consist of transparent windows or doors with views into the building. 
c.  Minimum Dimensions. A gallery shall comply with the following minimum dimension standards: 
i.  Minimum dimensions of twelve feet wide, six feet deep, and ten feet high. 
ii.  Maximum three feet distance between curb face and edge of gallery column or arch. 
d.  Doors and Windows. Doors and windows shall not open or project into the public right-of-way. 
Gallery Standards: Section View
 
Gallery Standards: Plan View
 
8.  Arcade. 
a.  Arcade Defined. An arcade is a shopfront with a habitable upper story that projects over a sidewalk supported by columns or arches. 
b.  Minimum Transparency, Ground Floor. A minimum of sixty percent of the street-facing ground floor frontage of an arcade shall consist of transparent windows or doors with views into the building. 
c.  Minimum Transparency, Upper Floors. A minimum of forty percent of the upper floors of the street-facing frontage of an arcade shall consist of transparent windows or doors. 
d.  Minimum Dimensions. An arcade shall comply with the following minimum dimension standards: 
i.  Minimum dimensions of twelve feet wide, ten feet deep, and ten feet high 
ii.  Maximum three feet distance between curb face and edge of arcade 
e.  Doors and Windows. Doors and windows shall not open or project into the public right-of-way 
Arcade Standards: Section View
 
Arcade Standards: Plan View
 
9.  Lobby. 
a.  Lobby Defined. A lobby is a building façade that includes transparent glass with access to a lobby space located at street level. 
b.  Minimum Transparency. The minimum area of a lobby's street-facing walls consisting of transparent windows shall be forty percent for residential uses and sixty percent for commercial uses. 
c.  Maximum Elevation. The elevation of a lobby floor shall not exceed three feet from adjacent grade. 
d.  Entrances. Entrance may be inset or flush with building façade 
e.  Doors and Windows. Doors and windows shall not open or project into the public right-of-way. 
Lobby Standards: Section View
 
Lobby Standards: Section View
 
F.  Commercial Service Location and Screening. 
1.  Service activities associated with commercial uses shall be setback a minimum of fifteen feet from any property line abutting a parcel occupied by a detached single-family home. 
2.  Outdoor storage, trash collection, and loading areas shall located and screened from view such that they are not visible from any parcel occupied by a detached single-family home. 
G.  Noise Generating Activities. Outdoor dining, amplified music, and other noise-generating activities as determined by the Director shall be setback a minimum of one hundred fifty feet from the property line of any parcel occupied by a detached single-family home. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.24.080 - Parking requirements. 
A.  Purpose. This section establishes parking standards that apply to the mixed-use zones. 
B.  Required On-Site Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 18.45. 
C.  Parking Structures. All multi-story parking structures shall be lined with commercial, retail or residential uses on the ground floor at street frontages, except for the pedestrian and vehicular entries into the parking structure. 
D.  Parking Buffers. 
1.  Surface parking lots abutting a public sidewalk or street shall provide a landscaped buffer a minimum of two feet in width and three feet in height along the perimeter of the parking lot abutting the sidewalk or street. 
2.  A landscaped buffer at least three feet in width and six feet in height shall be provided for any surface parking lot abutting a residential zone. 
Landscaped Parking Buffer Standards
 
E.  Parking Costs. 
1.  The payment of parking costs shall be separate from rent payments or purchase prices for all uses located within the mixed-use zones. 
2.  All places of employment within the mixed-use zone shall offer a parking cash-out program that allows employees to receive either owner-subsidized free parking or a cash payment equal to the value of the parking subsidy. 
F.  Alley Access. For new development on property adjacent to a rear alley, vehicle and service access to the property shall be provided only through the rear alley. 
G.  Driveways. 
1.  New driveways comply with the following standards. 
a.  Dimensions. Driveways shall comply with the dimension standards shown in Table 18.24.080B (Driveway Dimension Standards). 
b.  Number. No more than one driveway approach shall be provided for every fifty feet of street frontage. 
c.  Proximity. A new curb cut providing access to a driveway from a public street shall be separated a minimum distance of thirty-five feet from any other curb cut. 
d.  Parking. Parking spaces shall not be located along the sides of a driveway. 
TABLE 18.24.080B 
Driveway Dimension Standards 
Driveway Type 	Driveway Width 
	Minimum 	Maximum 
1-way 	8' 	12' 
2-way 	20' 	25' 
 
2.  The Community Development Director may approve exceptions to the driveway requirements in subsection (1) above in the case of shared or joint use of driveways and parking lots. 
 
Vehicle Access Standards
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.24.090 - Civic space standards. 
A.  Purpose. This section establishes requirements and standards for civic spaces in the MXD-1 and MXD-2 zones. Civic spaces are areas within neighborhoods where people can gather, interact and enjoy access to recreational and open space amenities. 
B.  Applicability. Any commercial or mixed-use redevelopment project on a site five acres or greater in the MXD-1 or MXD-2 zones shall include a publically accessible civic space consistent with the standards established in this section. 
C.  Types of Civic Spaces. Permitted types of civic spaces in the MXD-1 and MXD-2 zones are greens, squares, plazas, and playgrounds, as defined in subsection (E) (standards for specific types of civic spaces) below. 
D.  General Standards. The following standards apply to all civic spaces and new development adjacent to civic spaces. 
1.  The on-site parking of vehicles within a civic space is prohibited. 
2.  All areas with playground equipment shall be visible from the street edge. 
3.  All sides of a civic space shall front either a public street, the primary frontage of a building, or a natural physical barrier such as a hillside or creek. 
4.  All building walls fronting a civic space shall feature a frontage type permitted within the applicable zone as specified in Section 18.24.070 (Building Frontage Standards). 
5.  Quasi-public activities, such as outdoor seating serving a restaurant, are permitted to occupy no more than twenty-five percent of the area of a civic space. 
6.  Civic spaces shall be designed and located so as to be clearly visible from one or more public streets. 
7.  All civic spaces shall front onto a public street for a minimum distance of 50 feet. 
E.  Standards for Specific Types of Civic Spaces. Specific types of civic spaces within the MXD-1 and MXD-2 zones, when required by subsection (B) (applicability) above, shall comply with the following standards. 
1.  Green. A green shall comply with the following standards. 
a.  The size of all greens shall be a minimum of 0.5 acres and a maximum of five acres. 
b.  All greens shall front on a minimum of one public street. 
c.  Permitted improvements include playgrounds, ball parks, picnic shelters, benches, pergolas, bandstands and other similar improvements. 
d.  Landscape within parks shall feature lawns generally unobstructed with limited trees naturalistically arranged and a maximum fifty percent irrigated turf. 
e.  Hardscape within greens shall be limited to the minimum needed for circulation and amenities. 
f.  No more than ten percent of a green shall be covered with impervious surfaces. 
2.  Square. A square shall comply with the following standards. 
a.  The size of all squares shall be a minimum of 0.5 acres and a maximum of three acres. 
b.  All squares shall front on a minimum of three public streets. 
c.  Permitted improvements within squares include paths, benches, pergolas, public art, fountains, gazebos, bandstands, small structures such as kiosks and restrooms and other similar improvements. 
d.  Landscape within squares shall include lawns and trees formally arranged and a maximum ten percent irrigated turf. 
e.  Hardscape within squares shall feature pathways and amenities formally arranged around a central point of interest. No more than twenty-five percent of a green shall be covered with impervious surfaces. 
 
Green — Plan Illustration
 
Square — Plan Illustration
3.  Plaza. A plaza shall comply with the following standards. 
a.  The size of all squares shall be a minimum of 0.25 acres and a maximum of two acres. 
b.  All plazas shall front on a minimum of one public street. 
c.  Permitted improvements within plazas include paths, benches, planters, seatwalls, fountains, gazebos, pergolas, bandstands, small structures such as kiosks and restrooms, and other similar improvements. 
d.  Landscape within plazas shall be primarily pavement, trees formally arranged and a maximum ten percent irrigated turf. 
e.  Hardscape within plazas shall feature pavement with distinctive materials and pattern. No more than twenty-five percent of a plaza shall be covered with impervious surfaces. 
4.  Playground. A playground shall comply with the following standards. 
a.  The size of all playgrounds shall be a minimum of 0.1 acres and a maximum of one acre. 
b.  All playgrounds shall front a minimum of one public street. 
c.  Permitted improvements include paths, benches, shade structures, playground equipment, drinking fountains, restroom facilities, fences as required and other similar improvements. 
d.  Adventure play or creative playgrounds are permitted. 
e.  Landscape within playgrounds shall be accessible softscape, trees arranged for shading of play area and benches, and a maximum ten percent irrigated turf. 
f.  Hardscape within playground shall be the minimum needed for circulation and play opportunities. No more than twenty-five percent of a playground shall be covered with impervious surfaces. 
 
Plaza — Plan Illustration
 
Playground — Plan Illustration
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
Chapter 18.25 - INDUSTRIAL ZONES 
 
18.25.010 - Purpose. 
This section lists the land uses allowed within the industrial zones and provides basic standards for site layout and building use. The purposes of the individual industrial zoning districts and the manner in which they are applied are as follows: 
A.  Light Industrial (IL). The IL light industrial zone is intended to accommodate warehousing operations, storage, office, and research and development facilities and establishments engaged in the manufacturing, assembling, packaging, treatment and processing of products other than those that which may be obnoxious or offensive to adjacent residential and business districts due to reason of odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise, vibration or other nuisances. 
B.  Medium Industrial (IM). The IM medium industrial zone is designed to provide for the development of medium manufacturing and industrial uses that operate without excessive noise, dust, odor or other nuisances and yet may be objectionable to other non-industrial uses. 
C.  Heavy Industrial (IH). The IH heavy industrial zone is intended to provide for manufacturing facilities and industries that may be obnoxious by reason of emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise, vibration or similar causes and therefore require isolation from many other kinds of land uses. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.25.020 - Allowed land uses and permit requirements. 
Table 18.25.020 identifies the uses of land allowed in each industrial zone. 
TABLE 18.25.020 
Allowed Land Uses 
Industrial Zones 
Land Use 	Zone 	Specific Use Regulations 
	IL 	IM 	IH 	
Animal boarding/kennel, small 	C 	C 	C 	
Assembly and light manufacturing/processing 	P 	P 	P 	
Automotive impound and storage yards 	C 	C 	C 	Section 18.30.040 
Auto towing dispatch (accessory to service station) 	P 	P 	— 	
Breweries, small 	P 	P 	P 	
Breweries, large 	C 	C 	C 	
Brewery tasting room 	P 	P 	P 	Section 18.30.050/ 
City Council Policy 707 
Building supplies and equipment, sales and rental 	P 	P 	P 	
Cemetery/mausoleum/crematory 	— 	C 	C 	
Commercial recreation, indoor 	C 	— 	— 	
Eating places, dine-in (accessory) 	P 	P 	P 	
Emergency shelter 	P 	— 	— 	Section 18.30.110 
Gasoline service station 	C 	C 	— 	Section 18.30.190 
Goods and services, retail sales (accessory) 	P 	P 	P 	
Heavy manufacturing/processing 	— 	— 	C 	
Industrial equipment/machinery, sales and rentals 	P 	P 	P 	
Medium manufacturing/processing 	— 	P 	P 	
Offices (accessory) 	P 	P 	P 	
Offices 	P 	M 	M 	
Open space reserves 	P 	P 	P 	
Outdoor storage 	C 	C 	C 	Section 18.30.160 
Pawn shops 	C 	— 	— 	Section 18.30.330 
Payday lenders 	C 	— 	— 	Section 18.30.320 
Plant nursery 	P 	P 	C 	
Parking, structure/ fleet 	P 	P 	P 	
Personal storage facilities (mini-warehouses) 	P 	P 	— 	
Public assembly 	C 	— 	— 	
Public safety facilities 	P 	P 	P 	
Recycling facilities, small (accessory) 	P 	P 	— 	Section 18.30.170 
Recycling facilities, mobile 	C 	C 	— 	Section 18.30.170 
Renewable energy infrastructure (accessory) 	P 	P 	P 	Section 18.30.210/ 
18.30.300; 
California Building Code 
Renewable energy infrastructure 	P 	P 	P 	Section 18.30.210/ 
18.30.300; 
California Building Code 
Research and development 	P 	P 	P 	
Scrap metal processing 	— 	— 	C 	Section 18.30.180 
Sixty-day storage of wrecked vehicles 	P 	P 	P 	
Storage facility, self (mini-warehouses) 	P 	P 	P 	
Tattoo parlors and body piercing establishments 	C 	— 	— 	Section 18.30.310 
Telecommunication facilities, commercial 	C 	C 	C 	Section 18.30.220 
Trade schools 	P 	C 	C 	
Trucking and transportation terminal 	— 	C 	P 	
Urban agriculture 	C 	— 	— 	Section 18.30.240 
Utility facilities, minor 	P 	P 	P 	
Utility facilities, major 	P 	P 	P 	
Veterinary hospitals and clinics 	M 	M 	— 	Section 18.30.250 
Waterfront related industries 	P 	P 	P 	
Wholesaling, warehousing, and distribution 	P 	P 	P 	
Winery 	C 	C 	C 	
Winery tasting room 	P 	P 	P 	Section 
18.30.050/ 
City Council Policy 707 
P Permitted 
C Conditional use permit 
M Minor use permit (ministerial) 
— Not permitted 
 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012; Ord. No. 2017-2444, § 3, 12-19-2017; Ord. No. 2018-2448, § 3, 7-17-2018)  
18.25.030 - Accessory uses. 
Accessory uses and the conditions of their use are set out in subsections (A) through (C) below. 
A.  Storage Buildings and Garages. Storage buildings and garages incidental to principal uses on the same premises are permitted. 
B.  Sale of Gasoline. The sale of gasoline may be permitted as an accessory use in any zone where gasoline service stations are permitted, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit. 
C.  Auctions. Auctions, in conjunction with used furniture or antique sales, may be permitted subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.25.040 - General development standards. 
TABLE 18.25.040 
Development Standards 
Industrial Zones 
Development Standard 	Zone 
	IL 	IM 	IH 
Minimum lot area 	5,000 sq. ft. (a) 	5,000 sq. ft. (a) 	5,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum street frontage 	50' (b) 	50' (b) 	50' 
Minimum setbacks 	When adjacent to a residential zone, 20' from the adjacent zone boundary 
Street 	10' 	10' 	10' 
Other 	0' 	0' 	0' 
Maximum height 	35' and 3 stories 	60' and 4 stories 	60' and 4 stories 
	When adjacent to a residential zone, the maximum height shall not exceed the maximum height in the adjacent zone within one hundred feet of the adjacent zone boundary. 
	Architectural features and mechanical equipment may exceed the maximum height by an additional ten feet. 
Maximum floor area ratio 	2 	2 	2 
Maximum lot coverage 	60% 	80% 	80% 
 
Notes: 
(a) Automobile service stations shall have a minimum lot area of fifteen thousand square feet. 
(b) Automobile service stations shall have a minimum street frontage of one hundred feet. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.25.050 - Uses to be adequately housed in completely enclosed buildings. 
All uses in the industrial zones shall be housed in completely enclosed buildings; provided, however, that businesses such as lumber yards, building material yards, gas stations, recycling facilities, metal processing yards, vehicle storage, storage lots, and similar uses that customarily include outdoor use, may be permitted outside of a completely enclosed building when screened from public view. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
Chapter 18.26 - INSTITUTIONAL ZONE 
 
18.26.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the institutional (I) zone is to provide for a wide range of institutional and accessory uses including public, quasi-public, and private facilities that address health, safety, educational, cultural, and welfare needs of the community and neighborhoods. Allowed uses include educational facilities, government offices and courts, community centers, libraries, museums and cultural centers, hospitals and medical centers, retirement communities, public safety facilities (i.e., fire and police stations), neighborhood gardens and community farms, public utilities, and similar uses. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.26.020 - Allowed land uses and permit requirements. 
Table 18.26.020 identifies the uses of land allowed in the institutional zone. 
TABLE 18.26.020 
Allowed Land Uses 
Institutional Zone 
Land Use 	Permit 
Required 	Specific Use Regulations 
Animal husbandry 	P 	Section 8.32 
Caretaker's residence (accessory) 	M 	
Cemetery/mausoleum 	P 	
Child day care center 	P 	Section 18.30.070 
Civic, fraternal, community, and cultural facilities 	P 	
Commercial recreation, indoor (accessory) 	P 	
Convalescent/nursing home/hospice 	P 	
Detention facility 	C 	
Dormitory (accessory to school) 	C 	
Farmers' markets 	C 	
Fraternity or sorority house 	C 	
Government offices 	P 	
Guidance/social assistance services 	P 	
Heliport/helistop (accessory to hospital) 	C 	
Hospital 	P 	
Maintenance buildings/yards 	C 	
Medical offices/clinics and laboratories 	P 	
Military installations 	P 	
Open space reserves 	P 	
Parking, structure/fleet 	P 	
Parks (passive and active recreation) 	P 	
Private/public educational institutions, schools 	P 	
Public assembly 	C 	
Public safety facilities 	P 	
Public utilities, minor 	P 	
Public utilities, major 	C 	
Renewable energy infrastructure (accessory) 	P 	Section 18.30.210/18.30.300; California Building Code 
Storage yards and buildings (accessory) 	P 	Section 18.30.160 
Telecommunication facilities, commercial 	C 	Section 18.30.220 
Urban agriculture 	P 	Section 18.30.240 
P Permitted 
C Conditional use permit 
M Minor use permit (ministerial) 
— Not permitted 
 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.26.030 - General development standards. 
Design regulations for the institutional zone are set out in Division 4, unless specified in this chapter. 
TABLE 18.26.030 
Development Standards 
Institutional Zone 
Zone 	Front 
Yard 	Interior 
Side 
Yard 	Rear 
Yard 	Exterior 
Side 
Yard 	Rear 
Yard 
Abutting 
Alley or 
Public 
Park 	Mini- 
mum Lot 
Area 	Maxi- 
mum 
Building 
Height 	FAR 
I 	10' 	0' (a) 	0' (a) 	5' 	5' 	5,000 SF 	65' and 5 
stories 
(b) 	3.0 
 
Notes: 
(a) Or, when adjacent to a residential zone, the interior side or rear yard setback shall be the same as the interior side or rear year setback required in the residential zone. 
(b)  When adjacent to a residential zone, the maximum height shall not exceed the maximum height in the adjacent zone within one hundred feet of the adjacent zone boundary. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
Chapter 18.27 - OPEN SPACE ZONE 
 
18.27.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the open space (OS) zone is to provide for public and private improved and unimproved open space. Allowed land uses include urban agriculture and recreational areas such as parks, golf courses, athletic fields, playgrounds, community gardens and farms, recreational trails, nature and wildlife preserves, marshes and wetlands, water bodies, public utility areas, flood control channels, and other scenic and open space areas. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.27.020 - Allowed land uses and structures and permit requirements. 
Table 18.27.020 identifies the uses of land allowed in the open space zone. 
TABLE 18.27.020 
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements 
Open Space Zone 
Land Use 	Permit 
Required 	Specific Use Regulations 
Animal husbandry 	P 	Section 8.32 
Caretaker's residence (accessory) 	M 	
Cemetery/mausoleum 	P 	
Child day care center 	P 	Section 18.30.270 
Civic, fraternal, community, and cultural facilities 	P 	
Commercial recreation, indoor (accessory) 	P 	
Convalescent/nursing home/hospice 	P 	
Detention facility 	C 	
Dormitory (accessory to school) 	C 	
Farmers' markets 	C 	
Fraternity or sorority house 	C 	
Government offices 	P 	
Guidance/social assistance services 	P 	
Heliport/helistop (accessory to hospital) 	C 	
Hospital 	P 	
Maintenance buildings/yards 	C 	
Medical offices/clinics and laboratories 	P 	
Military installations 	P 	
Open space reserves 	P 	
Parking, structure/fleet 	P 	
Parks (passive and active recreation) 	P 	
Private/public educational institutions, schools 	P 	
Public assembly 	C 	
Public safety facilities 	P 	
Public utilities, minor 	P 	
Public utilities, major 	C 	
Renewable energy infrastructure (accessory) 	P 	Section 18.30.210/18.30.300; California Building Code 
Storage yards and buildings (accessory) 	P 	Section 18.30.160 
Telecommunication facilities, commercial 	C 	Section 18.30.220 
Urban agriculture 	P 	Section 18.30.240 
P Permitted 
C Conditional use permit 
M Minor use permit (ministerial) 
— Not permitted 
 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.27.030 - General development standards. 
The maximum FAR in the open space zone is 0.25 and the maximum height limit is thirty-five feet. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
Chapter 18.28 - OPEN SPACE RESERVE ZONE 
 
18.28.010 - Purpose. 
The intent of the open space reserve zone is to provide a use category to preserve and protect public and private open space lands, salt marsh and coastal wetlands, water areas, uninhabited agricultural lands, flood control channels, and other scenic or biological open space areas by restricting development in such areas. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.28.020 - Allowed land uses and permit requirements. 
Table 18.28.020 identifies the uses of land allowed in the open space reserve zone. 
TABLE 18.28.020 
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements 
Open Space Reserve Zone 
Land Use 	Permit 
Required 	Specific Use Regulations 
Aquaculture 	P 	
Wildlife reserves or sanctuaries 	P 	
Bay access 	P 	
Bikeways, paths, and trails 	P 	
Open space reserves (land and water) 	P 	
Public utilities, minor 	P 	
P Permitted 
 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
Chapter 18.29 - OVERLAY ZONES 
 
18.29.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of overlay zones is to provide supplemental regulations that have been tailored to specific geographic areas of the city. Overlay zones are applied in conjunction with a base zone and modify or add to the regulations of the base zone to address specific issues such as development within the coastal zone, special height restrictions, or supplemental processing requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.29.020 - Overlay zone designations. 
Overlay zones are designated on the zoning map as indicated below: 
A.  Coastal Zone (CZ). The coastal zone designates all properties located within the coastal zone subject to the development standards and specific requirements of the local coastal plan. 
B.  Height Restriction (H). The height limit restriction overlay zone places a restriction on allowable building height, lower than otherwise permitted by the City's development regulations. 
C.  Mobile Home Park (MHP). The mobile home park overlay zone identifies where mobile home parks are permitted in the city and establishes standards for the development of new mobile home parks and the preservation of existing mobile home parks. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.29.030 - Coastal zone (CZ). 
A.  Purpose. The intent and purpose of the coastal zone is to identify and give notice that properties within this zone are affected by the city's local coastal program. The purpose of the coastal overlay zone is to protect and enhance the quality of public access and coastal resources. 
B.  Applicability. When any property bears on the zoning map of the city, in addition to its zone designation, the symbol CZ, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. 
C.  Regulations. In addition to meeting the requirements of the underlying zone, any use on a property bearing the symbol CZ on the zoning map must in addition meet the provisions of the city's local coastal program. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.29.050 - Height limit restriction overlay zone (H). 
A.  Applicability. Whenever any property bears, on the zoning map of the city, in addition to its zone designation, the symbol "H" followed by a numerical figure, the provisions of this chapter shall apply insofar as height limitations for any buildings or structures located, or to be located, upon such property are concerned. 
B.  Formula. No building or structure shall be erected upon any property in any zone, which property bears on the zoning map the symbol "H" together with a numerical figure following, exceeding a building height, of a distance measured in feet, equal to the numerical figure following the symbol "H." 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.29.060 - Mobile home park overlay zone (MHP). 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the MHP overlay zone is to provide for appropriate locations for mobile home parks to be established, maintained, and protected. This overlay zone provides for a greater range and choice of housing types, recognizes the potential for higher standards offered by mobile home design and technology, and is intended to create attractive mobile home parks that will preserve and enhance the character of surrounding areas. This zone also sets forth procedures for the conversion of an existing mobile home park to another use and is intended to minimize the adverse impacts of displacing mobile home park tenants whenever an existing mobile home park or portion thereof is converted to another use. 
B.  Applicability. When any property bears on the zoning map of the city, in addition to its zone designation, the symbol MHP, the provisions of this section shall apply. 
C.  Permitted Uses. 
1.  New mobile home parks are subject to conditional use permit approval. 
2.  Accessory structures limited to awnings, cabanas, storage cabinets, renewable energy infrastructure, fences or windbreaks, carports, garages, and porches are permitted. 
3.  Accessory uses such as recreational facilities, parks and open space, playgrounds, clubhouses, laundries, community centers, and similar uses are permitted; provided, that such uses are designed for and limited to use by residents of the mobile home park and their guests and that such uses are not authorized on the individual mobile home lots within the mobile home park. 
4.  Minor utility facilities are permitted; major utility facilities require conditional use permit approval. 
5.  Home occupations are permitted subject to the approval of a home occupation permit pursuant to Section 18.12.090. 
6.  Small family day care homes are permitted subject to Section 18.30.080. 
7.  Large family day care homes are permitted subject to the approval of a minor use permit and provided they comply with Section 18.30.080. 
D.  Development Standards. 
1.  Mobile home parks shall comply with the maximum density of the applicable general plan designation and underlying zone and all other development standards of the underlying zone (unless otherwise constrained by Section 18000 et seq. of the Health and Safety Code) with the exception of the following: 
a.  The front yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty-five feet. 
b.  The interior side yard setback shall be a minimum of ten feet. 
2.  When located on a lot adjoining another residential use, mobile home parks shall be permanently screened from such adjoining property by a fence or wall and suitable landscaping, adjacent to or opposite the other residential use. 
E.  Discontinuance Procedures. 
1.  The application for discontinuance of a mobile home park shall be accompanied by: 
a.  A relocation plan to provide for the tenants who will be displaced by the discontinuance of the property as a mobile home park or the conversion of mobile home spaces to other uses. 
b.  A phasing plan indicating the timing and manner in which the existing mobile home units will be discontinued. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.29.070 - Floodway (-FW), floodway fringe (-FF-1), and floodway fringe-shallow flooding (-FF-2) zones. 
A.  Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
1.  Protect human life and health; 
2.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
3.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
4.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
5.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
6.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas; 
7.  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
8.  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
B.  Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions to: 
1.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
2.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
3.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
4.  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
5.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
C.  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
D.  Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another chapter, easement, covenant or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restriction shall prevail. 
E.  Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, or in this title, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
1.  "Accessory use" means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
2.  "Adversely affects" means, for purposes of this chapter, that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point. 
3.  "Alluvial fan" means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone- or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floor, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration. 
4.  "Apex" means the point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the slope. 
5.  "Appeal" means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
6.  "Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and, velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
7.  "Area of special flood hazard." See "special flood hazard area." 
8.  "Base flood" means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one hundred year flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter. 
9.  "Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade—i.e., below ground level—on all sides. 
10.  "Building." See "structure." 
11.  "Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
12.  "Encroachment" means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
13.  "Exception" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
14.  "Existing manufactured home/mobile home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes/mobile homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of this chapter. 
15.  "Expansion to an existing manufactured home/mobile home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes/mobile homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or pouring of concrete pads) 
16.  "Flood, flooding or floodwater" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters, and/or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
17.  "Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway. 
18.  "Flood hazard boundary map" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards. 
19.  "Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
20.  "Flood insurance study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
21.  "Floodplain or flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See "flooding." 
22.  "Floodplain administrator" means the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. This individual shall be the city engineer of the city. 
23.  "Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
24.  "Floodplain management regulations" means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other applications of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. The term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
25.  "Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
26.  "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as "regulatory floodway." 
27.  "Floodway encroachment lines" means the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state and local floodplain maps. 
28.  "Floodway fringe" means that area of the floodplain on either side of the "regulatory floodway" where encroachment may be permitted. 
29.  "Fraud and victimization," as related to subsection (Z) (conditions for exceptions) of this chapter, means that the exception granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the planning commission will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty to one hundred years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject, during all those years, to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
30.  "Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
31.  "Habitable floor" means any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof. A floor used only for storage purposes is not a "habitable floor." 
32.  "Hardship," as related to subsection (Z) (conditions for exceptions) of this chapter, means the unusual hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested exception. The planning commission requires that the exception be unusual and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting an exception, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
33.  "Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
34.  "Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
a.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
b.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
c.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of interior; or 
d.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior or directly by the secretary of the interior in states with approved programs. 
35.  "Levee" means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
36.  "Levee system" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
37.  "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area (see "Basement") is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this title. (Note: This definition allows attached garages to be built at grade. Below grade garages are not allowed as they are considered to be basements) 
38.  "Manufactured home" or "mobile home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include "recreational vehicles" or "travel trailers." 
39.  "Manufactured home/mobile home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent. 
40.  "Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
41.  "New construction" for floodplain management purposes means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management practices adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
42.  "New manufactured home/mobile home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home/mobile home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes/mobile homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
43.  "Obstruction" means and includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, or along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
44.  "One hundred year flood." See "base flood." 
45.  "Principal structure" means a structure used for the principal use of the property as distinguished from an accessory use. 
46.  "Public safety and nuisance," as related to subsection (Z) (conditions for exceptions) of this chapter, means that the granting of an exception must not result in anything which is injurious to the safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal or basin. 
47.  "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
a.  Built on a single chassis; 
b.  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
c.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
d.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
48.  "Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
49.  "Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
50.  "Sheet flow." See "area of shallow flooding." 
51.  "Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area having special flood or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on a FBHM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1—A30, AE, A99 and AH. 
52.  "Start of construction" means and includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (other than a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. For a structure (other than a mobile home) without a basement or poured footings, the "start of construction" includes the first permanent framing or assembly of the structure or any part thereof on its piling or foundation. For mobile homes not within a mobile home park or mobile home subdivisions, "start of construction" means the affixing of the mobile home to its permanent site. For mobile homes within mobile home parks or mobile home subdivisions, "start of construction" is the date on which the construction of facilities for servicing the site on which the mobile home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the construction of streets, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and installation of utilities) is completed. 
53.  "Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally aboveground. This includes a gas or liquid storage tank or manufactured/mobile home. 
54.  "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
55.  "Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual work performed. 
The term does not, however, include either: 
a.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct violations or to comply with state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by a local code conformance official and which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
b.  Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
56.  "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
57.  "Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
58.  "Watercourse" means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
F.  Lands to which Chapter Applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of National City. 
G.  Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of special flood hazard as shown on the special flood hazard map as floodway (FW), floodway fringe (FF-1), and floodway fringe-shallow flooding (FF-2) zones and conforming with the areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the flood insurance study (FIS) for National City dated August 4, 1988, and accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs), dated August 4, 1988, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the planning commission by the floodplain administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at the office of the floodplain administrator at 1243 National City Boulevard, National City, California, 91950. 
H.  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
I.  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
a.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
b.  Liberally construed in favor of the city; and 
c.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
J.  Severability. This chapter and the various parts thereof are declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
K.  Floodway Zone (FW) Established. There is established, on the special flood hazard map, a designated floodway zone. The FW zone shall be applied to those areas of special flood hazard designated as floodways on the "flood boundary and floodway map" of the flood insurance study. 
L.  Floodway Fringe Zone (FF-1) Established. There is established, on the special flood hazard map, a designated floodway fringe zone. The FF-1 zone shall be applied to those areas of special flood hazard designated as floodway fringe on the "flood boundary and floodway map" of the flood insurance study, but excluding areas of shallow flooding designated AO or AH on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
M.  Floodway Fringe—Shallow Flooding Zone (FF-2) Established. There is established, on the special flood hazard map, a designated floodway fringe-shallow flooding zone. The FF-2 zone shall be applied to those areas of special flood hazard designated as floodway fringe on the "flood boundary and floodway map" of the flood insurance study, and designated as areas of shallow flooding AO or AH on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
N.  Standards Applicable to All Areas of Special Flood Hazard. In all areas of special flood hazards including the FW, FF-1 and FF-2 zones, the following standards are required: 
1.  Anchoring. 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
b.  All manufactured/mobile homes shall meet the anchoring standards of subsection (Q). 
2.  Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed: 
a.  With materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
b.  Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
c.  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and if 
d.  Within zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
3.  Elevation and Floodproofing. (See subsection (E), definitions, for "new construction," "substantial damage" and "substantial improvement.") 
a.  Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement: 
i.  In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM by at least one foot, or elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified; 
ii.  In an A zone, elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation, as determined by the city; 
iii.  In all other zones, elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation. 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional civil engineer or surveyor to be properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
b.  Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated to conform with subsection (3)a of this section or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities: 
i.  Be completely floodproofed below the elevation recommended under subsection 3(a) of this section so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and 
ii.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
iii.  Be certified by a registered professional civil engineer that the standards of this subsection (3)b of this section are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
c.  All new construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basement) that are usable solely for parking vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must exceed the following minimum criteria: 
i.  Be certified by a registered professional civil engineer; or 
ii.  Be certified to comply with a local floodproofing standard approved by the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; or 
iii.  Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
d.  Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in subsection (3)c of this section and subsection (Q). 
4.  Storage of Material and Equipment. 
a.  The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. 
b.  Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning. 
O.  Standards for Utilities. 
1.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
a.  Infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; and 
b.  Discharge from the systems into floodwaters. 
2.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. 
P.  Standards for Subdivisions. 
1.  All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood. 
2.  All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the final first floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional civil engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator. 
3.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
4.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
5.  All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
Q.  Standards for Manufactured Homes/Mobile Homes. 
1.  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, within Zones A1—30, AH and AE on the flood insurance rate map, on sites located: 
a.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
b.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
c.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
d.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
2.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1—30, AH and AE on the flood insurance rate map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (A) of this section shall be elevated so that either: 
a.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation; or 
b.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six inches in height above grade and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
3.  All mobile homes/manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors. Specific requirements shall be that: 
a.  Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the mobile home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations, with mobile homes less than fifty feet long requiring only one additional tie per side; 
b.  Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points, with mobile homes less than fifty feet long requiring only four additional ties per side; 
c.  All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of four thousand eight hundred pounds; and 
d.  Any additions to the mobile home shall be similarly anchored. 
R.  Standards for Recreational Vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1—30, AH and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map will either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use—a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
3.  Meet the permit requirements of subsection (T) of this section and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in subsection (Q)(1)a. 
S.  Floodways (FW). Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection (G) are areas designated as floodways to which the following provisions apply: 
1.  Encroachments, including fill, new construction, manufactured homes, substantial improvements, and other development, shall be prohibited unless certification by a registered professional civil engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
2.  If subsection (S)(1) is satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvements, and other new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of subsections (N) through (S) and require approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Title 18 of the National City Municipal Code. 
T.  Establishment of Development Permit. A development permit shall be obtained concurrently with or before issuance of any building, grading, conditional use, planned development, or planned unit development permit, or site plan approval, and before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in subsection (G). Application for a development permit shall be on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
1.  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made; 
2.  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot, block, tract, house and street address; or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work; 
3.  Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended; 
4.  Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed construction; 
5.  Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority; 
6.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures in AO zone elevation of highest adjacent grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all structures; 
7.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will be floodproofed, if required in subsection (N)(3)c; 
8.  All appropriate certifications listed in subsection (V)(5) of this section; 
9.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
10.  Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the floodplain administrator, including but not limited to: 
a.  A typical valley cross-section showing the channel of the stream, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross-sectional areas to be corrupted by the proposed development and higher water information; 
b.  Locations and elevations of streets, water supply, sanitary facilities, photographs showing existing land uses and vegetation upstream and downstream, soil types and other pertinent information; 
c.  Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the stream; 
11.  Evidence of prior or concurrent approval of any conditional use permit which may be required by subsection (V) for alteration of watercourses. 
U.  Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The city engineer is appointed to administer, implement and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. 
V.  Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. The duties of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
1.  Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine that: 
a.  Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
b.  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; 
c.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and 
d.  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of the areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. 
2.  Review and Use of any Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data have not been provided in accordance with subsection (G), the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood and floodway elevation data available from a federal or state agency or other source, in order to administer subsections (N) through (S), inclusive. Any such information shall be submitted to the city for adoption. 
3.  Information to be Obtained and Maintained. 
a.  Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest habitable floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures; 
b.  For all new or substantially improved flood-proofed structures: 
i.  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level); and 
ii.  Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in subsection (3)a, b, and c of subsection (N), part (2) of subsection (P), and part (1) of subsection (S); 
c.  Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 
4.  Conditional Use Permit Required. In alteration or relocation of a watercourse, a conditional use permit shall be required by the planning commission. Such permit shall include the following conditions: 
a.  Notification of adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation; 
b.  Submission of evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; 
c.  Assurance that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained; 
d.  The new channel shall be completed before the old channel is abandoned. 
5.  Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following: 
a.  Certification required by subsection (N)(3)a (floor elevations); 
b.  Certification required by subsection (N)(3)b (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures); 
c.  Certification required by subsection (N)(3)c (wet floodproofing standard); 
d.  Certification of elevation required by subsection (P)(2) (subdivision standards); 
e.  Certification required by subsection (S)(1) (floodway encroachments). 
6.  Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in subsection (H). 
7.  Base flood elevation changes due to physical alterations: 
a.  Within 6 months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR). 
b.  All LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition. Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements are based on current data. 
8.  Changes in corporate boundaries: Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate limits. 
W.  Map Determination. The boundaries of the FW, FF-1 and FF-2 zones shall be determined by the scale contained on the special flood hazard map. Where interpretation is needed to the exact location of said boundaries (for example where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the planning commission shall make such determination in accordance with this title based upon: 
1.  The recommendation of the floodplain administrator; and 
2.  A review of the flood hazard boundary maps adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter; and 
3.  Technical evidence which may be presented by the applicant. 
The regulatory flood elevation for the point in question shall be the governing factor in locating the boundary on land. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in subsection (X). 
X.  Appeals. The planning commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. Appeals may be filed and shall be processed in the same manner as for site plan review as provided in this title. 
Y.  Exceptions. 
1.  Applications for exceptions from the terms of this chapter shall be submitted and processed in the same manner as conditional use permits, as provided in this title. 
2.  In passing upon such applications for exceptions, the planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter and the: 
a.  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
b.  Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
c.  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner and future property owners; 
d.  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
e.  Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location where applicable; 
f.  Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
g.  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
h.  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
i.  Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
j.  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and 
k.  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
3.  Any applicant to whom an exception is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that: 
a.  The issuance of an exception to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance; and 
b.  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. 
c.  A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the San Diego County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
4.  The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all exception actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such exceptions issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Z.  Conditions for Exceptions. 
1.  Generally, exceptions may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and other proposed development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items in subsections (N) through (U), inclusive, of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the exception increases. 
2.  Exceptions may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" (as defined in subsection (E) of this section) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the exception is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
3.  Exceptions shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
4.  Exceptions shall only be issued upon a determination that the exception is the "minimum necessary," considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of exceptions to an elevation requirement, this means the planning commission need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the planning commission believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of this chapter. 
5.  Exceptions shall only be issued upon: 
a.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the exception would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of an exception will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in subsection (E) of this chapter, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
6.  Exceptions may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of subsections (Z)(1) through (5) are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance. 
7.  Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (Y) and the purposes of this chapter, the planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of exceptions as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
AA.  Fees. 
1.  A nonrefundable fee as established in the fee schedule adopted by the city shall be paid to the city at the time of filing an application for a development permit pursuant to subsection (T). 
2.  A nonrefundable fee as established in the fee schedule adopted by the city shall be paid to the city at the time of filing an appeal pursuant to subsection (X). 
3.  A nonrefundable fee as established in the fee schedule adopted by the city shall be paid to the city at the time of filing for an exception pursuant to subsection (Y). 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
DIVISION 3. - SPECIFIC USES  
Chapter 18.30 - SPECIFIC USE REGULATIONS 
 
18.30.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter provides site planning, development, and/or operating standards for certain land uses that are allowed by Division 2 and for activities that require special standards to mitigate their potential adverse impacts. The standards for specific uses in this chapter supplement and are required in addition to those in Division 2 and Division 4. In the event of any conflict between the requirements of this chapter and those of Divisions 2 and 4, the requirements of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.020 - Applicability. 
The land uses covered by this chapter shall comply with the provisions of the sections applicable to the specific use, in addition to all other applicable provisions of this Land Use Code. The uses that are subject to the standards in this chapter shall be developed in compliance with the requirements of Division 2. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.030 - Adult-oriented businesses. 
A.  Purpose. 
1.  It is the purpose of this chapter to establish reasonable and uniform content-neutral regulations to decrease blight and crime by either dispersing adult-oriented businesses, or by shifting part of the burden of regulating such businesses to the private sector by placing them in locations which minimize the negative secondary effects of such businesses. 
2.  It is the intent of this chapter that these regulations be utilized to serve the substantial interest of the city in preventing problems of blight and deterioration which accompany and are brought about by adult-oriented businesses, which allowing reasonable alternative locations for those businesses. 
3.  In enacting this chapter, the city council is relying upon the experiences of the City of National City, and upon the experiences and studies of other municipalities concerning the deleterious effects of adult-oriented businesses, which this chapter is intended to curtail. 
B.  Definitions. It is the purpose of this section to provide clear and concise definitions of those words, terms, and phrases most commonly utilized in the regulations and provisions of this chapter in order to assist in the uniform interpretation of such regulations and provisions and to ensure uniformity in their application. 
It is intended that the following words, terms and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in the following subsections, unless from the context a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words, terms, or phrases. 
It is also intended that those definitions and interpretations set forth in Section 1.04.010 and the glossary shall be used for purposes of uniformity of interpretation and application of the regulations and provisions of this chapter but only where they do not conflict with any definitions or interpretation set forth in this chapter. 
1.  "Specified anatomical areas" means and includes any of the following: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae; or 
b.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
2.  "Specified sexual activities" means and includes any of the following: 
a.  The fondling or other touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast: 
b.  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; or 
c.  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
d.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in this subsection. 
3.  "Adult bookstore" is an establishment that devotes more than fifteen percent of the total floor area utilized for the display of books and periodicals to the display and sale of the following: 
a.  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides, tapes, records or other forms of visual or audio representations which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
b.  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
c.  An adult bookstore does not include an establishment that sells books or periodicals as an incidental or accessory part of its principal stock-in-trade and does not devote more than fifteen percent of the total floor area of the establishment to the sale of books and periodicals. 
4.  "Adult motion picture theater" is an establishment, with a capacity of fifty or more persons, where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons. 
5.  "Adult mini-motion picture theater" is an establishment, with a capacity of more than five but less than fifty persons, where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons. 
6.  "Adult motion picture arcade," to include without limitation a peep show, is any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. The image-producing device or peep show device shall also include any other device by or through which electronic, video, photographic, cinematic, digital, or computer-generated images depicting specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity defined by this section are or can be reflected or projected onto an external screen or be internally projected, generated or reflected onto a screen that is an integral part of the device itself. 
7.  "Adult drive-in theater" means an open lot or part thereof, with appurtenant facilities, devoted primarily to the presentation of motion pictures, films, theatrical productions and other forms of visual productions, for any form of consideration, to persons in motor vehicles or on outdoor seats, and presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons. 
8.  "Adult cabaret" is a night club, bar, restaurant, cabaret or similar establishment which may serve food or alcoholic or non-alcoholic beverages, or both, and which, for consideration, regularly features live performances or films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons or attendees. 
9.  "Adult motel" is a motel or similar establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
10.  "Adult theater" is a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment, either indoor or outdoor in nature which, for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or by exposure of specified sexual activities or by exposure of specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons. 
11.  "Adult model studio" is any establishment open to the public where, for any form of consideration, one or more persons display or expose any portion of specified anatomical areas to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, videoed or be similarly viewed or depicted by any person, other than the proprietor, who pays a consideration to either the proprietor, an employee of the proprietor or the model. This definition shall also include, without limitation, a "lingerie modeling establishment." 
a.  This definition shall not apply to any school of art which is operated by an individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation or institution which meets the requirements established in the Education Code of the State of California for the issuance or conferring of, and is in fact authorized thereunder to issue and confer a diploma. 
12.  "Sexual encounter establishment" is an establishment, other than a hotel, motel or similar establishment offering public accommodations, which, for any form of consideration, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort in connection with specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas. This definition does not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state of California engages in sexual therapy. 
13.  "Body painting studio" is an establishment or business which provides the service of applying paint or other substance whether transparent or nontransparent to or on the human body when such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of specified anatomical areas. 
14.  "General motion picture theater" is a building or part of a building intended to be used for the specific purposes of presenting entertainment as defined in this chapter, or displaying motion pictures, slides or closed circuit television pictures before an individual or assemblage of persons, whether such assemblage be of a public, restricted or private nature, except a home or private dwelling where no fee, by way of an admission charge, is charged; provided, however, that any such presentations are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas in that any such depiction or description is only incidental to the plot or story line. 
15.  "Legitimate or live theater" is a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment which, for any fee or consideration, regularly features live performances which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas in that any such depiction or description is only incidental to the primary purpose of the performance. 
16.  "General bookstore" is an establishment engaged in the buying, selling and/or trading of new and/or used books, manuscripts and periodicals of general interest. A general bookstore does not include an establishment that is encompassed by the definition of adult bookstore. 
17.  "School" is an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which offers instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code or which is maintained pursuant to standards set by the state board of education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school, senior high school or any special institution of learning under the jurisdiction of the state department of education, but it does not include a vocation or professional institution or an institution of higher education, including a community college. 
18.  "Establishing an adult-oriented business," as used in this chapter, means and includes any of the following: 
a.  The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business; 
b.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult-oriented business, to any of the adult-oriented businesses defined in this chapter; or 
c.  The addition of any of the adult-oriented businesses defined herein to any other existing adult-oriented business; or 
d.  The relocation of any such business. 
19.  "Transfer of ownership or control," as used in this chapter, means and includes any of the following: 
a.  The sale, lease, or sublease of an adult-oriented business; 
b.  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in such business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or 
c.  The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of such business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing such ownership or control. 
20.  "Sale and display of paraphernalia and literature commonly associated with the use of narcotics and controlled substances (headshops)" is an establishment or place where more than fifteen percent of the floor area in any room is used for the sale and display of such paraphernalia and literature, including but not limited to cocaine and sniffing kits, glass mirrors for cutting cocaine, snorting spoons and tubes, strainers to sift cocaine, water pipes (bongs), everyday items with special removable tops that have been converted to conceal narcotics and drugs, including simulated beer cans, oil cans and plastic photograph film vials, "roach clips" (for holding marijuana cigarettes), or books and magazines extolling the use of narcotics or controlled substances. Such a place is an adult-oriented business. This definition does not limit licensed pharmacies in selling and displaying paraphernalia that is medical equipment prescribed by licensed medical practitioners. 
21.  A "private viewing room" is an area separated from the sales or display area of the establishment by a curtain, wall, door, shade, or similar obstruction thus allowing the private viewing of video tapes, compact discs, digital video discs, movies, transparencies, films, or projectable motion pictures by customers at the establishments. 
22.  "Video cassette, compact disc, digital video disc sales, and rentals—adult" is the same as "adult bookstore." 
23.  "Video games—adult" are coin-operated electronic game machines having visual displays and animation that depict in any manner, any sort of activity characterized by exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities." 
24.  "Sexually oriented business" is any business in which: 
a.  Specified sexual activity occurs or specified anatomical areas are exposed, or both, by a patron, attendee, employee or independent contractor for any form of consideration paid or furnished to the owner, proprietor, an employee of the owner or proprietor, or to an independent contractor at the location or premises; or 
b.  Material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activity or specified anatomical areas, or both, is displayed, sold, or provided for consideration on a regular basis. 
25.  "Consideration," as used in this chapter, means a payment or transfer of money or other thing of value exceeding a total of one cent to an owner or proprietor, an employee of the owner or proprietor, or to a performer, independent contractor or entertainer at the establishment, without regard to: 
a.  Any donative intent of the payer, transferor, or donor; 
b.  The time of payment or transfer; or 
c.  Whether the payment or transfer was for admission to the establishment or for merchandise, food or beverage displayed or sold at or on behalf of that establishment. 
26.  "Lingerie modeling establishment" means an establishment where, for consideration and for viewing by a patron at that establishment, a person either: 
a.  Wears and displays undergarments, lingerie, underwear and similar articles of intimate apparel which cover those areas which constitute specified anatomical areas; or 
b.  Changes from one costume into another in the presence of a patron or patrons and thereby exposes one or more specified anatomical areas to that patron or patrons. This definition shall not, however, be construed so as to apply to a commercial retail or wholesale establishment that principally and customarily sells clothing and related wearing apparel and where specified anatomical areas are not exposed to customers during demonstration displays of merchandise for sale. 
C.  Prohibitions. 
1.  No person or entity shall own, establish, operate, control or enlarge or cause or permit the establishment, operation, enlargement or transfer of ownership or control, except pursuant to Section 18.30.030(F), of any of the following adult-oriented businesses if such adult-oriented business is or would be within one thousand five hundred feet of another adult-oriented business, within one thousand five hundred feet of any school or public park within the city, or within one thousand feet of any residentially zoned property in the city: 
a.  Adult bookstore; 
b.  Adult motion picture theater; 
c.  Adult mini-motion picture arcade (peep shows); 
d.  Adult arcade; 
e.  Adult drive-in theater; 
f.  Adult cabaret; 
g.  Adult motel; 
h.  Adult theater; 
i.  Adult model studio; 
j.  Body painting studio; 
k.  Any sexually oriented business; 
l.  Adult video games; 
m.  Adult video cassette sales and rentals; 
n.  Sexual encounter establishments; 
o.  Lingerie modeling establishment. 
2.  An establishment listed in this section shall not be established, operated, enlarged, or transferred unless the provisions of the zone in which the site or proposed site is located permit such a use. The conduct of such establishment and the use of premises shall otherwise comply with the Land Use Code and all other applicable regulations. 
3.  Nothing in this chapter prohibits the location of adult-oriented businesses within retail shopping centers in all commercial and major mixed-use zones wherein such activities will have their only frontage upon enclosed malls or malls isolated from their direct view from public streets, parks, schools, churches or residentially zoned property. 
4.  Sexual encounter establishments shall be permitted only upon the prior issuance of a conditional use permit. 
5.  The location of an adult-oriented business listed in subsection (C)(1) (with the exception of subsections (C)(1)k and (C)(1)o) within any new or existing retail center, as specified in subsection (C)(3), shall not require a conditional use permit. 
D.  Measure of Distance. The required minimum distance between any two adult-oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of each such business. The distance between any adult-oriented business and any public school, public parks or residential zoned land shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of the adult-oriented business to the closest property line of the public school, public park, or residential zone. 
E.  Development and Maintenance Standards. All adult-oriented businesses hereafter commenced shall, in addition to compliance with the Land Use Code, comply with these specific requirements: 
1.  Signs. Except for theater marquee signs, changeable copy signs, temporary signs and small permanent signs are not permitted. In addition to the requirements of Section 18.62.020 for permit approvals, all sign permits shall be subject to review and approval by the planning commission. 
2.  Exterior Painting. Buildings and structures shall not be painted or surfaced with garish colors or textures or any design that would simulate a sign or advertising message. 
3.  Advertisements, displays of merchandise, signs or any other exhibit depicting adult-oriented activities placed within the interior of buildings or premises shall be arranged or screened to prevent public viewing from outside such buildings or premises. 
4.  No outdoor loudspeakers or other outdoor sound equipment advertising or directing attention to an adult-oriented use is allowed. 
5.  Upon order of the city manager, graffiti appearing on any exterior surface of a building or premises, which graffiti is within public view, shall be removed, and that surface shall be restored within seventy-two hours of notification to the owner or person in charge of the premises. 
6.  All exterior windows that are visible to the public must be opaquely covered. 
F.  Exceptions. 
1.  Nothing in this section prohibits the transfer of principal ownership or control of adult-oriented uses permitted under Section 18.30.030(C)3 or 18.30.030(C)5. 
2.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all land within the city, including all redevelopment project areas now in existence or hereafter established. 
G.  Other Regulations, Permits, or Licenses. 
1.  Effect. The provisions of this chapter do not waive or modify any other provision of this code. Adult-oriented businesses shall comply with all applicable provisions of law and this code. 
2.  Reference. This list is not all-inclusive and is inserted here for reference only; other applicable regulations include, but are not limited to the following chapters. 
H.  Protection of Minors. Adult-oriented business shall not allow the admission of minors and shall otherwise comply with Chapter 10.62. An attendant shall be present at all times during hours of operation to deny admittance to minors. 
I.  Private Viewing Rooms. It is unlawful for any person or entity which is subject to the regulations of this chapter, and which sells or rents prerecorded video tapes, movies, transparencies, films, projectable motion pictures or equipment used for showing any or all of these items, to offer or allow the viewing of these materials in private viewing rooms, as defined in subsection (B)(22). 
J.  Constitutional Severability. The city council declares that the invalidity of any section or portion of this chapter shall not affect the validity of any other remaining section or portion; that the city council would have adopted each of those remaining portions notwithstanding any later declared invalid. If any portion determined to be invalid can be severed or be judicially interpreted in a way that could harmonize it with the remaining provisions, then it may either be severed or be judicially interpreted and, as interpreted, be applied so as to give full purpose, meaning, and effect to the remaining provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012; Ord. No. 2019-2455, § 6, 1-22-2019)  
18.30.040 - Automobile impound and storage yards. 
A.  Conditional Use Permit—Required. Any application for a permit to establish an automobile impound and storage yard shall be subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit. The permittee must be a successful bidder of a contract with the city to participate in the assignment of service calls on police-impounded automobiles. No permit shall be granted to premises located east of National City Boulevard. This section does not apply to storage only yards. See Section 18.30.160 (Outdoor Storage) for storage only regulations. 
B.  Yard Area Requirements. The conditional use permit shall require, for its issuance, that the proposed storage area meet the following criteria: 
1.  The storage area shall be in a building or enclosed by a solid fence or wall at least eight feet in height. The construction and maintenance of a required fence shall be in accordance with Chapter 18.43. 
2.  No sign, picture, transparency, advertisement or mechanical device which is used for the purpose of or does advertise or bring to notice any person or persons, or article or articles of merchandise, or any business or profession, or anything that is to be or has been sold, bartered or given away, shall be placed or maintained, or caused to be maintained, upon the outward face of such fence or wall. 
3.  The storage area must contain a gross surface of not less than ten thousand square feet nor more than fifteen thousand square feet devoted to the storage of wrecked vehicles. 
4.  The storage area, including driveways and access roads, shall be surfaced with asphalt cement, or decomposed granite with oil. 
5.  The storage area shall be served by drainage facilities adequate to prevent the accumulation of standing water. The city engineer shall determine the adequacy of proposed drainage facilities. 
6.  Gates in the fence or wall surrounding the storage area shall be constructed of new material, the same height as the fence or wall. No gate shall swing outward. All gates shall be kept closed except when vehicles or pedestrians are exiting or entering the premises. As an alternative to closing all gates, an interior screening fence may be erected so as to prevent public view of the contents of the storage yard during times when the gates are open. 
7.  A four-foot setback from dedicated streets is required. The setback area and the parkway area shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs, or other ground cover in accordance with Chapter 18.44 and adopted guidelines. 
8.  Exterior floodlighting, when used, shall be directed away from adjacent property and streets. All lights shall be shielded in such a manner that the light there from will fall only on the same premises upon which such light source is located. 
9.  A conditional use permit shall not be granted for an area visible from a freeway unless all wrecked vehicles can be stored out of sight of adjacent freeways. 
C.  Rules of Operation. The conditional use permit shall require, for its issuance and continued validity, that permitted storage operations be conducted pursuant to the following rules: 
1.  Stripping of automobiles, removal of parts, and dismantling, salvaging or junking shall be prohibited; provided, however, that the permittee may remove articles required to be removed to permit scrapping of the impounded vehicles. Removed parts may be accumulated for thirty days on the licensed premises. 
2.  All inflammable liquids shall be removed from any unregistered or scrapped vehicle. 
3.  Stored material and vehicles shall be so arranged that reasonable inspection of all parts of the premises can be made at any time by fire, health, police, planning and building authorities. 
4.  Trash containers shall be installed and maintained on the premises, and the premises shall be kept free of trash at all times. 
5.  Wrecked vehicles shall be disposed of in an expeditious manner, and no vehicle shall be retained in storage in excess of three months from the date of impoundment. Upon recommendation of the chief of police of the city or order of a court of competent jurisdiction, the city council may extend the storage time. 
6.  No article shall be piled higher than the enclosing fence or wall, or nearer than two feet to the enclosing fence or wall. 
D.  Conditional Use Permit—Expiration. A conditional use permit granted under the provisions of this title will expire upon the revocation, expiration, or cancellation of a permittee's contract with the City. 
E.  Conditional Use Permit—Revocation for Violation. Violation of any requirement of this title is grounds for revocation of a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.050 - Sale of alcoholic beverages and live entertainment. 
A.  Conditional Use Permit—Required. A conditional use permit is required for the sale of alcoholic beverages, whether for on-site or off-site consumption. 
B.  Conditional Use Permit—Additional Notice Required. In addition to notices required pursuant to Section 18.12.050 (Noticing and Public Hearings), written notice for a public hearing on a conditional use permit for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be provided to owners and occupants of property within a radius of six hundred sixty feet of the exterior boundaries of the property where the sale of alcoholic beverages is proposed. 
C.  Community Meeting—Required. Prior to the public hearing, the applicant shall hold a community meeting to inform residents of a proposal for the sale of alcoholic beverages. The applicant shall provide to the planning division documentation of the meeting and input received. 
D.  Distance Requirements. Establishments where alcoholic beverages are sold for on or off-site consumption shall be located as follows: 
1.  Liquor stores, or other businesses where the principal use involves the sale of alcohol for off-site consumption, shall be: 
a.  A minimum of six hundred sixty feet from any public school (kindergarten through twelfth grade) within the boundaries of the city; and 
b.  A minimum of five hundred feet apart. 
2.  Bars and cocktail lounges or other establishments where the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption is the principal use, shall be: 
a.  A minimum of six hundred sixty feet from any public school (kindergarten through twelfth grade) within the boundaries of the city; and 
b.  No less than one thousand feet apart. 
3.  Restaurants where the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption is accessory or incidental to the principal use shall be a minimum of six hundred sixty feet from any public school (kindergarten through twelfth grade) that is on property zoned as institutional (I) within the boundaries of the city; except that this distance requirement shall not apply to tasting rooms or restaurants (other than fast-food restaurants with drive-through service) where at least thirty percent of the floor area of the building is comprised of seating area. 
4.  Private clubs or lodges, bowling alleys, theaters and other establishments where the sale of alcoholic beverages is accessory or incidental to the principal use shall be: 
a.  A minimum of six hundred sixty feet from any public school (kindergarten through twelfth grade) within the boundaries of the city; and 
b.  No closer than five hundred feet apart. This limitation shall not apply to restaurants. 
5.  No minimum distances from schools or other uses are required for grocery stores, convenience stores or other retail establishments involving the sale of alcohol for off-site consumption as an accessory use. 
E.  Measure of Distance. For the purposes of Section 18.30.050(D) (Distance Requirements): 
1.  The distance between any two establishments that sell alcoholic beverages shall be measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures from the closest exterior structural walls of the establishments. 
2.  The distance between any establishment selling alcohol and a school shall be measured in a straight line, disregarding intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural walls of the establishment to the closest property line of the school. 
F.  Additional Standards for the Sale of Alcohol at Restaurants or Public Eating Places. Restaurants or public eating places shall conform to the following, additional standards: 
1.  Alcoholic beverage sales shall be incidental to food service. 
2.  There shall be no sale of alcoholic beverages after midnight unless otherwise specified by the conditional use permit. The conditional use permit may further restrict the times when alcoholic beverages may be sold. 
G.  Live Entertainment. 
1.  Live entertainment shall be limited to a single entertainer performing musical work (piano bars, etc.) except as provided below. 
2.  Additional entertainers, dancing, audience participation, karaoke, or other live entertainment may be authorized by a conditional use permit in zones where live entertainment is permitted. 
3.  Live entertainment specified in subsection (B) of this section may be permitted by a resolution of approval for a conditional use permit for the sale of alcohol in zones where live entertainment is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012; Ord. No. 2017-2444, § 4, 12-19-2017)  
18.30.060 - Automotive body and paint shops. 
Automobile painting with accessory body and fender work shall be conducted entirely within a building. The hours of operation shall be between seven a.m. and seven p.m., except where the building adjoins a residential area the hours of operation shall be restricted to between eight a.m. and six p.m. Monday through Saturday. (Accessory body work shall be defined as "only that work required in the preparation for complete auto repaint.") 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.070 - Child day care centers. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of establishing child day care center regulations is to implement state law with regard to the provision of child care centers as defined by the California Health and Safety Code to ensure compatibility of such uses with surrounding uses and properties and to avoid any impacts associated with such uses. 
B.  Applicability. Day care centers are permitted as set forth in Division 2 subject to the requirements of this section. 
C.  Site Location. 
1.  Child day care facilities are encouraged to be located near schools, trolley stops, major bus stops, and close to employment centers in order to reduce commute trips and improve air quality. 
2.  All child care facilities shall have direct access to a public street with adequate access to a collector or arterial street system. 
3.  A new child care facility must be located at least six hundred feet away from an existing child day care center. 
D.  Operation and Development Standards. 
1.  The applicant must obtain all licenses and permits required by state law for operation of the facility and shall keep all state licenses and permits valid and current. 
2.  The center shall meet all zoning standards applicable to the site. 
3.  Indoor and outdoor play areas that satisfy the requirements of the State shall be provided. The outdoor play area shall be adjacent to the center and accessible through the center itself. The outdoor play area shall be screened and enclosed by a natural barrier, wall, or fence a minimum of five feet in height. If adjacent to a single-family residential zone, the separating barrier shall be of solid construction. The outdoor play area shall be designed to reduce noise impacts on adjacent properties. 
4.  Parking shall not be located in any required front yard setback and an adequate on-site loading/unloading area shall be provided that can be easily accessed from the child day care center without crossing any driveways or streets. Clearly designated pedestrian walkways should be provided. 
5.  All child day care centers shall comply with the city's noise regulations as set forth in Title 9. 
6.  The drop off and pick up of children from vehicles shall only be permitted on the site's driveway or parking area. A facility with access from an arterial street, as designated by the General Plan, must provide a paved drop-off/pick-up area designated with on-site parking and maneuvering to allow vehicles to pick-up/drop-off children and exit the site without backing out onto the arterial street. 
7.  Any additional conditions regarding safety and access deemed necessary or desirable by the city engineer, fire marshal, or building official must be met. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.080 - Family day care homes. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to implement the California Health and Safety Code provisions regarding day care homes, both large family and small family. 
B.  Applicability. Family day care homes are permitted as set forth in Division 2 subject to the requirements of this section. 
C.  Site Location. Properties used for large family day care homes, as defined by the California Health and Safety Code, shall not be located closer than three hundred feet from any other large family day care home. 
D.  Operation and Development Standards. 
1.  The family day care home must be the residence of the day care provider. 
2.  The day care home must be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the property for residential purposes. 
3.  Hours of operation shall be less than twenty-four hours a day. 
4.  The day care home shall comply with all municipal and state laws and regulations regarding single-family residences and day care homes. 
5.  Noise must be maintained in compliance with the city's noise regulations as set forth in Title 9. 
6.  The provider shall comply with all applicable regulations of the city's fire department regarding health and safety requirements as they relate to day care hoes and shall contain a fire extinguisher and smoke detector device. 
7.  All state licensing standards must be met and the provider shall keep all state licenses and permits current. 
8.  The day care home shall be maintained to retain the appearance of a home consistent with the general character of the neighborhood. 
9.  Large family day care homes shall provide at least one off-street parking space per employee of driving age not living in the home. The residential driveway approach is acceptable for this parking requirement provided that it does not conflict with a required drop-off/pick-up area and does not block the public sidewalk or right-of-way. 
10.  Indoor and outdoor play areas that satisfy the requirements of the state shall be provided. The outdoor play area shall be screened and enclosed by a natural barrier, wall, or fence a minimum of five feet in height. The outdoor play area shall be designed to reduce noise impacts on adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.090 - Condominium conversions. 
The conversion of existing apartments, hotels and motels, and other rental properties to condominiums, community projects, or stock cooperatives may be permitted if the following conditions are satisfied: 
A.  Permit. A conditional use permit is required and the following findings shall be made: 
1.  The proposal is consistent with housing element goals and objectives; 
2.  Plans and reports submitted by the applicant, along with conditions of approval, show that necessary upgrading will be completed prior to the sale of any unit; 
B.  Tentative and Parcel Maps. A conversion shall comply with requirements for tentative and final parcel maps. 
C.  Subdivision Map Act. Requirements of the state Subdivision Map Act will be satisfied, specifically with regard to requirements for notice to tenants and right of tenants to exclusive contract for purchase in condominium, community apartment or stock cooperative projects. 
D.  Physical Elements Reports. 
1.  At the time of submitting the conditional use permit application required in subsection (A) of this section, the applicant shall submit a report or reports on the status of the physical elements of the project, including the condition and remaining useful life of building foundations and walls, roofs, electrical systems, plumbing systems, mechanical systems, recreational facilities, parking and other paved areas and drainage facilities. These reports shall be prepared by California licensed structural or civil engineers or private home inspectors and they shall include a detailed evaluation of the existing physical elements, a recommendation on their status including any necessary repairs or replacement, either immediate or in the future, and a certification of the findings. The reports shall also specifically address or include the following: 
a.  Measures that should be taken to improve sound attenuation between units (except for projects built after July 1, 1979 in compliance with the building code); 
b.  Structural pest report; 
c.  Building history report identifying the date of construction of all elements; 
d.  Characteristics of the building not in compliance with currently applicable building or housing codes, and with codes in effect at the time of construction; 
e.  The need for smoke detectors in individual units, as well as for other on-site fire protection systems maintained by the homeowners association. 
2.  The planning commission, or city council on appeal, shall review these reports to determine the need to repair or replace any existing physical elements as a condition of approving the proposed conversion. 
E.  Other Materials. Any other materials required by the planning division to provide evidence in support of the above conditions shall be submitted before the conditional use permit application is determined complete. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.100 - Conversions to nonresidential use. 
A.  Generally. A structure or building intended or designed to be used as a dwelling unit may be used in the commercial and industrial zones for a permitted commercial or industrial use, subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Approval. Approval of the location and plans by the planning commission is required. 
C.  Removal of Residential Facilities. All facilities for living, sleeping, cooking, and dining shall be permanently removed except for employee dining facilities. 
D.  Compliance with Zoning Regulations. All other provisions of this title shall be complied with. 
E.  Building Occupancy. The structure or building shall not be used or occupied until after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the building official. Any change of occupancy shall comply with all requirements of the building code of the city and this title. 
F.  Dwelling Unit of Historical Character. When application is made for approval to convert a dwelling unit of recognized historical character, the planning commission may deny a permit on grounds of unsuitability of the proposed use. 
G.  Dwelling Unit Used as a Place of Assembly. A dwelling unit or any portion thereof shall be permitted to be converted and/or used as a place of assembly as defined by this title only by the issuance of a conditional use permit. 
H.  Design and Aesthetics. In the approval of any plans for the conversion of a residential structure for any of the uses permitted under this chapter, the planning commission shall take into consideration the architectural design of the structure, as well as the aesthetic quality of the structure and the property. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.110 - Emergency shelters. 
A.  Purpose. This section establishes standards for the development and operation of emergency shelters where permitted by right as set forth in Division 2. 
B.  Permitted Use. In compliance with SB 2 effective January 1, 2008, emergency shelters shall be allowed as a permitted use without the need for a conditional use permit and are exempt from CEQA (California Environmental Quality Act). 
C.  Limitations on Location. 
1.  Eligible Locations. A new facility shall be a permitted use in the light industrial (IL) zone only. 
2.  Separation Between Emergency Shelters. A new emergency shelter shall not be closer than three hundred feet to another emergency shelter as measured between property lines. 
D.  Lighting. Adequate external lighting shall be provided for security purposes to ensure fully lit parking, gathering and waiting areas. 
E.  Building Design Standards. 
1.  Number of Beds. An emergency shelter shall contain a maximum of one bed per one hundred fifty square feet of sleeping area not to exceed fifty beds and shall serve no more than fifty persons. 
2.  Client Waiting Areas. Emergency shelters shall have an interior, enclosed client waiting and intake area large enough to accommodate the number of persons equal to twenty-five percent of the number of beds. The area shall be based on space required for seated persons. Any exterior overflow waiting area shall be fenced, screened, gated, and covered and shall not obstruct sidewalks or driveways. 
3.  Client Gathering Areas. Emergency shelters shall have an interior multipurpose area separate from the sleeping area. The multi-purpose area shall be provided with space equal to at least ten square feet per bed, but not be less than two hundred fifty square feet. The multipurpose area shall have an exterior gathering area equal to at least fifty square feet per bed and shall be fenced, screened, and landscaped. 
F.  Facility Operating Standards. 
1.  On-Site Management. The facility shall maintain a management plan. The management plan must document that management and staffing is sufficient for adequate control of the facility. The management plan shall include descriptions of: 
a.  On-site management. 
b.  Staffing levels and qualifications. 
c.  Client services offered and case management. 
d.  Behavior guidelines including no drug or alcohol use. 
e.  Facility maintenance. 
f.  Emergency plan. 
g.  Security plan. 
2.  Vehicle Parking. The number of off-street parking spaces shall be calculated based on the amount of office space at the facility plus one parking space per ten beds. The square footage of office space shall be used to determine the number of spaces per the standards specified in Chapter 18.45 (Parking and Loading Requirements). 
3.  Length of Stay. Temporary shelter shall be available to residents for a maximum of six months. 
4.  Hours of Operation. The emergency shelter shall only accept clients between the hours of seven a.m. and eight p.m. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.120 - Hazardous waste facilities. 
A.  Definition. 
1.  "Hazardous waste facility" shall be defined as specified by the California Health and Safety Code and San Diego County Hazardous Waste Management Plan. 
B.  Approval. Hazardous waste facilities may be permitted only in the medium industrial (IM), heavy industrial (IH) zones and shall require approval of a conditional use permit. Data, policies, criteria and procedures contained in the San Diego County Hazardous Waste Management Plan shall be utilized for evaluation of applications for hazardous waste facilities. The siting criteria, the conditional use permit procedure and the fair share policies of the plan shall be utilized in making decisions on such applications. 
C.  Grant Conditions. Before any conditional use permit may be granted for a new hazardous waste facility project or for modification of an existing facility, in addition to the conditions required by Section 18.12.110, it shall be found that the proposed facility is in compliance with the following siting criteria documents of the County of San Diego Hazardous Waste Management Plan: 
1.  Section E, entitled "Local and Regional Facility Needs," of Chapter IX, entitled "Siting and Permitting of Hazardous Waste Facilities" (Pages IX-35 through IX-37); 
2.  Appendix IX-A, entitled "Siting Criteria for Evaluating Hazardous Waste Management Facility Siting Proposals in San Diego County"; and 
3.  Appendix IX-B, entitled "General Areas for Siting Hazardous Waste Management Facilities." 
D.  Information Requirements. An application for a conditional use permit for a hazardous waste facility project shall provide information required by the planning director to show conformance with procedural requirements of Article 8.7 of the California Health and Safety Code. Such information may include but shall not be limited to documentation from the state office of permit assistance regarding procedures required for approval of the proposed facility. 
E.  Related Permit Requirements. All applicable zoning, subdivision, conditional use permit and variance decisions made by the city shall be consistent with the siting criteria documents of the County of San Diego Hazardous Waste Management Plan listed in subsection (C), above. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.130 - Helicopter operations. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide rules and regulations governing the conduct of the operation of helicopters and related facilities within the city. 
B.  Conditional Use Permit. No person shall operate or maintain a heliport or helistop without first obtaining a conditional use permit and demonstrating that the facility will comply with FAA regulations. 
C.  Temporary Heliport or Helistop Permits. 
1.  No person shall operate a helicopter to or from any property within the city other than a heliport or helistop approved by the city (except in cases of an emergency situation); provided, however, that the landing and takeoff of helicopters at places other than approved heliports and helistops may be authorized for specifically designated and limited times. Such authorization shall not exceed a thirty-day period. 
2.  Every application for a temporary heliport or helistop permit shall include the following: 
a.  Copy of application for state approval; 
b.  Copy of application for Federal Aviation Administration approval; 
c.  Written approval of landowner or duly authorized agent or representative; 
d.  Certificate of insurance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.140 - Mobile homes and similar temporary structures. 
A.  Use as Dwelling—Restrictions. A mobile home shall not be used for living or sleeping purposes except when located in an approved mobile home park or unless it meets the criteria for factory built housing in state law as defined by Civil Code Section 18.007. 
B.  Restrictions. A mobile home, modular structure, or other temporary structure shall not be used as a business or other commercial use in any zone except that a modular structure may be used as a temporary office or classroom for a period of no longer than one year, subject to the issuance of a temporary use permit. This prohibition shall not apply to any former landfill site which is subject to the regulatory order or directive of a regulatory agency, due to the existence on the site of hazardous materials as defined by Section 25260 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
C.  Mobile Home Park—Conditional Use Permit. The development of a mobile home park shall require the issuance of a conditional use permit to ensure that such development will be compatible with existing and permitted uses in the adjacent areas. The conditions of approval may include, but shall not be limited to, external traffic circulation, screening walls and plantings, park layout and design (including architectural design), lot size and shape, landscaping, signs, parking, usable open space and recreation areas, and service buildings. 
D.  Mobile Home Park—Screening. When located on a lot adjoining another residential use, mobile home parks shall be permanently screened from such adjoining property by a fence or wall and suitable landscaping, adjacent to or opposite the other residential use. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.150 - Outdoor display or sale of merchandise. 
A.  Outdoor Display or Sale of Merchandise Prohibited—General. The outdoor display or sale of merchandise on public or private property is unlawful, except as provided in this section. Merchandise is displayed outdoors when it is placed to the exterior of a building or structure. 
B.  Permitted Displays in Commercial, Mixed-Use, and Industrial Zones. 
1.  In commercial, mixed-use, and industrial zones, service stations, auto dealers, recreational vehicle sales lots, nurseries, licensed flower shops, grocers, and neighborhood corner stores limited to the sale of fresh produce and flowers, and building material yards may display merchandise outdoors only on the same site approved for the business. 
2.  Other businesses in commercial, mixed-use, and industrial zones shall not display or sell merchandise outdoors except pursuant to a determination by the planning department that the display would be customary with that type of business and consistent with or comparable to the types of uses. 
3.  Other items not covered in this section may be permissible as allowed by an established right-of-way enhancement program. 
C.  Special Promotions. 
1.  Except as allowed by subsection (B) all other businesses in the commercial, mixed-use, and industrial zones are permitted to have special promotions at which outdoors display and sales will be allowed, limited to a maximum of three consecutive days each, including all set-up and takedown time. No business shall have more than two such sales in a calendar year. There shall be a period of at least thirty days between sales. 
2.  Special promotions involving outdoor display of merchandise which are to last more than three days, or would involve more than two such sales in any calendar year, are not allowed unless city council approval in accordance with Chapter 15.60 is first obtained. All sales shall be limited to the site approved for the business. 
3.  No business shall conduct a special promotion with an outdoor display on a property unless the business has a permanent business address on that property. This restriction shall not apply to sales conducted entirely indoors. 
D.  Seasonal Sale of Christmas Trees and Pumpkins. 
1.  The seasonal sale of Christmas trees and pumpkins outdoors is permitted only in commercial and mixed-use zones on property developed with a commercial use or on vacant property in a commercial or mixed-use zone. 
2.  Displays and sales of Christmas trees and pumpkins are limited to thirty-five days respectively, including installation and removal of all related materials. A business license shall be obtained each year prior to setting up displays. 
E.  Outdoor Vending Machines. Outdoor vending machines are allowed in all commercial and mixed-use zones. Outdoor vending machines shall: 
1.  Be located along the front facade of a building or against a structure designed to accommodate them; 
2.  Occupy not more than ten percent the length of the wall facing the street or access drive, or twenty feet, whichever is less; 
3.  Not obstruct private pedestrian walkways; a minimum of forty-four inches shall be kept clear of obstructions, or more if pedestrian traffic volume warrants. They are not allowed on public sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012; Ord. No. 2017-2440, § 4, 10-17-2017)  
18.30.160 - Outdoor storage. 
A.  Enclosure. All outdoor storage, in any zone, which occupies a volume of more than sixty cubic feet and is visible from any abutting public street, or which abuts property used for residential purposes, shall be enclosed by a view-obscuring fence or wall at least six feet high. All gates provided for ingress and egress in any required fence or wall shall be at least six feet in height and shall be of view-obscuring construction. 
B.  Stacking Stored Materials—Height Limitation. Merchandise, materials, equipment, or other goods, other than neatly stacked lumber in lumberyards, shall be stacked in outdoor storage areas to a height no greater than that of any building, wall, fence, or gate enclosing the storage area. For scrap metal processing yards, see Section 18.30.180. 
C.  Posting Signs or Devices Prohibited. No sign, picture, transparency, advertisement, or mechanical device which is used for the purpose of or which does advertise or bring to notice any person or persons, or article or articles of merchandise, or any business or profession, or anything that is to be or has been sold, bartered or given away shall be placed or caused to be placed or to be maintained or caused to be maintained upon the outward face of any gate, fence or wall enclosing any outdoor storage area. 
D.  Storage in Yard Setback Prohibited. No storage shall be permitted in any required front or side yard setbacks adjacent to a public street or highway. 
E.  Materials Storage During Construction. During construction and sixty days thereafter, property in said project area may be used for the storage of materials, excluding batch plants, used in the construction of the individual buildings in the project and for the contractor's temporary office. 
F.  Areas Designated for Storage. Except as specified herein, no other areas shall be used for outdoor storage. Areas designated for storage or which are otherwise restricted to vehicular passage shall be indicated on the plot plan and be so maintained. .All areas of the yard open to vehicular passage shall be paved. 
G.  Specific Storage Regulations in Commercial, Mixed-Use, and Industrial Zones. In the commercial, mixed-use, and industrial zones, the following regulations shall apply: 
1.  The storage of all materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust, or which constitute a fire hazard, or which may be edible by or otherwise attractive to insects or rodents, unless said materials or wastes are stored outdoors in closed containers, is prohibited. 
2.  The storage of corrosive materials is permitted subject to the provisions of the city fire code. 
3.  Activities involving the storage of fire and explosive hazard materials shall be conducted in accordance with the city fire code. 
4.  Toxic or dangerous materials shall be stored in a manner that insures against their escape from the premises to the detriment of public safety, health or welfare. 
5.  No material, equipment, or goods of any kind shall be stored on the roof of any building in any zone. 
6.  In the industrial zones, the storage or materials, liquids, or wastes upon any lot in such form or manner that they may be transferred or flow off said lot by natural causes or forces is prohibited. 
7.  Shipping containers and truck trailers shall not be used for storage purposes in any zone, except pursuant to a temporary use permit as approved by the city council. 
H.  Rubbish Storage. 
1.  Rubbish and solid waste shall be disposed of by public facilities, when available. Liquid wastes shall be promptly and properly disposed of in a manner acceptable to the city and to the San Diego Metropolitan Sewer District. Where public facilities are not provided for disposal, rubbish and solid waste shall be contained in rodent proof, nonflammable, waterproof storage containers with close-fitting lids. When liquid wastes are of such a character as to be unacceptable in the public sewer system, such wastes shall be stored in suitable containers or tanks until transfer. Such containers or tanks shall comply with the city fire code and other applicable regulations in this title. 
2.  All storage and disposal facilities shall be screened from all public view. In the residential, commercial, mixed-use, and institutional zones such screening shall be of solid masonry construction with sturdy gates of view-obscuring design. Location and accessibility shall be subject to site plan review. 
3.  Any building or structure or portion of building or structure used for storage of rubbish-and waste shall contain an approved floor drain connected to the public sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.170 - Recycling collection facilities. 
A.  Purpose. It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to establish reasonable regulations for establishment of recycling collection facilities to encourage and facilitate the recycling of glass, aluminum, plastic and nonaluminum metal beverage containers in a safe and convenient manner. 
B.  Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
1.  Igloos. An "igloo" is a small, moveable collection bin or container occupying no more than forty square feet each. 
2.  Mobile Recycling Unit. A "mobile recycling unit" means an automobile, truck, trailer or van, licensed by the department of motor vehicles, which is used for the collection of recyclable materials. A mobile recycling unit also means the bins, boxes or containers, other than igloos, transported by trucks, vans, or trailers, and used for the collection of recyclable materials. 
3.  Recyclable Material. "Recyclable material" is reusable material including aluminum, nonaluminum metal, glass and plastic beverage containers, which are intended for reuse, remanufacture, or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. Recyclable material as described in this section does not include paper, refuse, motor oil or other hazardous materials. 
4.  Recycling Collection Facility. A "recycling collection facility" is a center for the collection of recyclable materials from the public by donation, redemption or purchase. A certified recycling facility means a recycling facility certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. A recycling facility does not include storage containers located on the premises of a commercial or industrial use used solely for the collection of recyclable materials generated by that use. Recycling collection facilities include the following: 
a.  Reverse vending machines; 
b.  Igloos; 
c.  Mobile recycling units. 
5.  Reverse Vending Machine. A "reverse vending machine" is an automated mechanical device which accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers including aluminum and nonaluminum metal cans, glass and plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container's redemption value as determined by the state. A reverse vending machine may sort and process containers mechanically; provided that the entire process is enclosed within the machine. In order to accept and temporarily store all four container types in a proportion commensurate with their relative redemption rates, and to meet the requirements of certification as a recycling facility, multiple grouping of reverse vending machines may be necessary. A "bulk reverse vending machine" is a reverse vending machine that is larger than fifty square feet; is designed to accept more than one container at a time; and will pay by weight instead of by container. 
6.  Small Recycling Facility. A small recycling facility is defined as an igloo or reverse vending machine. 
C.  Types of Facilities Permitted. 
1.  Reverse vending machines, igloos, and mobile recycling units may be permitted subject to conformance with all of the following: 
a.  Location within the MXC-1, MXC-2, MXD-1, MXD-2, CS, IL, and IM zones; 
b.  Location within convenience zones designated by the State of California Department of Conservation, Division of Recycling; 
c.  Certification or application for certification by the State of California; 
d.  Required permits, as described in subsection (D); 
e.  Operation and design standards, as described in subsection (E); 
f.  No recycling collection facility shall be permitted if it is found that the facility or its operation will have a detrimental effect on public health, safety, or general welfare. 
D.  Permits Required. 
1.  Site Plan Review. Small recycling facilities, as defined in subsection (B), shall require site plan review approval. 
2.  Conditional Use Permit. Mobile recycling units, as defined in subsection (B), shall require conditional use permit approval. 
E.  Operation and Design Standards. 
1.  Reverse vending machines shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Established in conjunction with a commercial use or community service facility which is in compliance with the zoning, building, and fire codes of the city: 
b.  Located within thirty feet of the entrance to the commercial structure and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation; 
c.  Not occupy parking spaces required by the primary use; 
d.  Except for bulk reverse vending machines, occupy no more than fifty square feet of floor space per installation, including any protective enclosure, and be no more than eight feet in height; no more than four reverse vending machines at the site; bulk reverse vending machines shall occupy no more than three hundred square feet of floor space per installation, including any protective enclosure; 
e.  Constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material; 
f.  Clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions, and the identity and phone number of the operator or responsible person to call if the machine is nonoperative; 
g.  Have a sign area of a maximum of four square feet per machine, exclusive of operating instructions; 
h.  Maintained in a clean, litter-free condition on a daily basis; 
i.  Illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe operation if operating hours are after dusk; 
j.  Installation of all wiring required in accordance with the National Electrical Code, latest edition. 
2.  Igloos shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Established in conjunction with an existing commercial use or community service facility which is in compliance with the zoning, building, and fire codes of the city; 
b.  Occupy an area no larger than two hundred square feet; 
c.  Set back at least ten feet from any front property line and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation; 
d.  Accept only glass, metal, and plastic containers; 
e.  No power-driven processing equipment used; 
f.  Containers constructed and maintained with durable, waterproof and rust-proof material, covered when site is not attended, secured from unauthorized entry or removal of material, of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected and collection schedule; 
g.  All recyclable material stored in containers, and materials not left outside of containers at any time; 
h.  Maintained free of litter and any undesirable materials; 
i.  Not be located within fifty feet of a residentially zoned property; 
j.  Operation of attended facilities located within one hundred feet of a property zoned or occupied for residential use only during the hours of nine a.m. and seven p.m.; 
k.  Noise levels not exceeding sixty dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned or occupied property, and otherwise not exceeding sixty-five dBA; 
l.  Location of containers for the twenty-four-hour donation of materials at least one hundred feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use unless there is a recognized service corridor and acoustical shielding between the containers and the residential use; 
m.  Labeling of containers to identify the type of material which may be deposited, identification of the facility with the name and telephone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation, and display of notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling enclosure or containers; 
n.  Signing permitted as follows: 
i.  Identification signs with a maximum of four square feet, in addition to informational signs required in subsection (E)(2)m, above; 
ii.  Signs consistent with the character of the location; 
iii.  Directional signs, bearing no advertising message, installed with the approval of the city manager or his/her designee if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way; 
iv.  Authorization from the city manager or his/her designee for increase in the number and size of signs upon finding that it is compatible with adjacent businesses. 
o.  Required landscape area not occupied or interfered with; 
p.  No occupation of parking spaces on the site unless deemed necessary and authorized by the city manager or his/her designee; no additional parking spaces required for customers of an igloo collection facility located at the established parking lot of a host use; one space of host use permitted to be occupied by an attendant, if needed. 
3.  Mobile recycling units shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Established in conjunction with an existing commercial use or community service facility which is in compliance with the zoning, building, and fire codes of the city; 
b.  No larger than three hundred fifty square feet and occupy no more than three parking spaces not including space that will be periodically needed for removal of materials or exchange of containers; 
c.  Set back at least ten feet from any front property line and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation; 
d.  Accept only glass, aluminum, nonaluminum, and plastic containers; 
e.  No power-driven processing equipment used; 
f.  Containers constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material, covered when site is not attended, secured from unauthorized entry or removal of material, and of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected and collection schedule; 
g.  All recyclable materials stored in containers or in the mobile unit vehicle, and not left outside of containers at any time; 
h.  Maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials; mobile facilities, at which truck or containers are removed at the end of each collection day, swept at the end of each collection day; 
i.  Noise levels not exceeding sixty dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned or occupied property, and otherwise not exceeding sixty-five dBA; 
j.  Not to be located within fifty feet of a residentially zoned property; 
k.  Operation of attended facilities located within one hundred feet of a property zoned or occupied for residential use only during the hours of nine a.m. and seven p.m.; 
l.  Location of containers for the twenty-four-hour donation of materials at least one hundred feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use unless there is a recognized service corridor and acoustical shielding between the containers and the residential use; 
m.  Labeling of containers to identify the type of material which may be deposited; identification of the facility to identify the name and telephone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation, and display of a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling enclosure or containers; 
n.  Signing permitted as follows: 
i.  Identification signs with a maximum of four square feet, in addition to informational signs required in subsection (E)(3)m, above; 
ii.  Signs consistent with the character of the location; 
iii.  Directional signs, bearing no advertising message, installed with the approval of the city manager or his/her designee if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way; 
iv.  Authorization from the city manager or his/her designee for increase in the number and size of signs upon finding that it is compatible with adjacent businesses. 
o.  Required landscape area not occupied or interfered with; 
p.  No additional parking spaces required for customers of a mobile recycling unit located at the established parking lot of a host use; one space of the host use permitted to be occupied by the attendant, if needed; 
q.  Area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking during hours when the mobile unit is scheduled to be present; 
r.  No reduction of available parking spaces below the minimum number required for the primary host use unless a parking study shows that existing parking capacity is not already fully utilized during the time the recycling facility will be on the site; reduction in available parking spaces in an established parking facility then permitted as follows: 
i.  For a commercial host use: 
Number of 
Parking Spaces 
Available 	Maximum 
Reduction 
0—25 	0 
26—35 	2 
36—49 	3 
50+ 	4 
 
ii.  For a community facility host use, a maximum of four spaces reduction will be allowed when not in conflict with parking needs of the host use. 
F.  Additional Requirements. Additional requirements may be required as conditions of permit approval. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.180 - Scrap metal processing. 
A.  Regulations Generally. Scrap metal yards, scrap or used metal sales, and scrap metal processing shall be operated in accordance with the provisions of this section. This shall not relieve the operators of scrap metal processing uses from complying with all city regulations, laws, and ordinances. 
B.  Site Plan Review Required. All scrap metal processing uses shall be subject to site plan review. 
C.  Salvage or Junk Storage Restrictions. The storage of salvage or junk shall not be placed or allowed to remain outside of the enclosed yard area. It may be stored above the height of the fence or wall, provided such storage is not within ten feet of an exterior lot line. Nonmetallic salvage or processing not clearly incidental to the principal use shall not be allowed. 
D.  Fences and Walls—Required. The entire premises shall be enclosed by fences and walls of uniform height in relation to the ground upon which they stand. Such fences or walls shall be a minimum of eight feet high and shall not exceed 15 feet in height. 
E.  Fences and Walls—Materials. All fences and walls open to view from any street shall be constructed of the following materials: 
1.  Metallic panels, at least .024 inches thick, painted with a baked-on enamel or similar permanent finish. All fences constructed with metallic panels exposed to view from the exterior side shall have an interior face of solid wood not less than two inches thick from the ground to the top of such fence; 
2.  Masonry; 
3.  Other materials comparable to the foregoing if approved by the planning division. 
F.  Fences and Walls—Construction Standards. All fences and walls shall be constructed in a workmanlike manner and shall consist solely of new materials, unless the director of planning approves the substitution of used materials where, in his opinion, such used materials will provide the equivalent in service, appearance, and useful life. 
G.  Fences and Walls—Painting. All fences and walls, excluding masonry and approved permanent finish panels, shall be painted a uniform complimentary color, excluding black, which blends with the surrounding terrain and improvements, and shall be maintained in a neat, orderly condition at all times. Such fence or wall shall contain no painted signs or posters except as approved by the director of planning. In all cases, colors shall be subject to approval by the director of planning. 
H.  Standards for Structures. Any structures which are used as part of the yard boundaries and/or are exposed to view from a street frontage shall be subject to painting, maintenance and sign requirements for fences and walls as provided in Chapter 18.43. The planning division may approve other appropriate architectural treatment. 
I.  Paving of Yards. Areas designated for storage or which are otherwise restricted to vehicular passage shall be indicated on the site plan and shall be so maintained. All areas of the yard open to vehicular passage shall be paved 
J.  Landscaping. 
1.  Along each street frontage, all required setbacks and the adjacent street parkways shall be fully landscaped. 
2.  A permanent automatic irrigation system shall be provided which satisfactorily irrigates all planted areas. 
3.  All landscaped areas shall be continuously and properly maintained in good condition. 
K.  Painting and Maintenance. All equipment, structures, etc., extending above the height of exterior fences shall be continuously maintained and painted in a neat and orderly fashion. 
L.  Storage and Combustibles. Containers approved by the city fire department shall be provided for the storage of combustible materials removed from scrap autos delivered to the site. 
M.  Litter Prohibited. The entire site shall be continuously maintained to prevent accumulations of weeds, rubbish, litter, or combustible waste. Any incidents of rat or vermin harborage shall be promptly corrected. 
N.  Performance Standards. All salvage operations shall comply with the performance standards for air pollution, noise, vibration, and glare as set forth in Section 18.40.030 and Title 7 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.190 - Service stations and convenience stores with gasoline pumps. 
A.  Conditional Use Permit Required. The development and construction of all service stations shall be subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit. 
B.  Frontage. The site shall have a minimum of one hundred feet of frontage on a dedicated street. 
C.  Minimum Site Area. The minimum site area shall be fifteen thousand square feet. 
D.  Site Planning Standards. 
1.  Bay doors of service stations and automotive maintenance and repair facilities should not be visible from the major street, whenever possible. 
2.  Fuel pump islands and canopies should be screened by the main building structure. The convenience store should be placed at the street frontage with display windows along the sidewalk, to encourage pedestrian use. 
3.  Curb cuts shall be limited to one per street for corner locations, or two per street for mid-block locations. 
4.  Curb cuts on the same street shall be spaced at least twenty-five feet apart. 
E.  Screening. When a service station adjoins a residential zone along a rear or side lot line, a masonry screening wall, not less than five feet and no more than six feet in height, shall be erected along such adjoining lot line. 
F.  Building Fronts. 
1.  All building materials and designs shall be consistent with the general standards for commercial businesses. Metal buildings are not permitted. 
2.  The design of stand-alone gas stations and convenience stores should conform to the dominant existing or planned character of the surrounding neighborhood or development. This can be accomplished through the use of similar forms, materials and colors. 
3.  The design of a facility that occupies a pad or portion of a building within a larger commercial center should be designed to reflect the design elements of that center. 
4.  All sides of a building visible from the street shall express consistent architectural detail and character. 
G.  Pump Island Canopies and Other Buildings and Structures. All structures on the site (including kiosks, car wash buildings, pump island canopies, and screen walls) shall be architecturally consistent with the main structure, including roof design, color, materials, and architectural details. 
H.  Landscaping—Generally. Ten percent of the gross site area shall be devoted to landscaping. 
I.  Open Area—Surfacing. All open areas, not included in landscaped areas shall be paved. 
J.  Use Regulations. The operation of all service stations shall be in accordance with the following regulations: 
1.  Uses permissible at a service station do not include body or fender work or automobile painting unless they are permissible uses within the particular zone. Dismantling of automobiles for the purpose of selling parts is prohibited. 
2.  All repair work being conducted shall be within a structure which shall be attached to the existing service station facility. 
3.  Adequate facilities for such repair shall be available. 
4.  No outdoor storage of disabled vehicles, vehicles under repair, automobile parts, or repair equipment shall be allowed at any time. 
5.  Major repairs shall be conducted only between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m. 
6.  Operations outside permanent structures shall be limited to the dispensing of motor fuels and servicing of tires, batteries and/or automobile accessories. 
K.  Gasoline Pumps as an Accessory Use. This section shall have no effect on the installation and operation of a gasoline pump or pumps, or lube oil drums which are used solely to service the motorized equipment of commercial, manufacturing or industrial use of the land upon which the pump or drum is installed; provided, however, that the pump or drum shall not be installed or operated on any parcel of land not included within the land of the permissible principal use. 
L.  Sale of Gasoline as an Accessory Use. 
1.  The sale of gasoline as an accessory use to a permitted use shall require the issuance of a conditional use permit. 
2.  The sale of gasoline as an accessory use will be allowed only in zones in which the sale of gasoline as a principal use is allowed. 
M.  Sale of Non-automotive Products at Service Stations. The sale of nonautomotive products in service stations is permitted as follows: 
1.  Such products must be displayed within an enclosed permanent building. 
2.  The display area shall be a maximum of two hundred sixteen cubic feet, except that a conditional use permit may be issued to authorize additional areas of display, where such use is otherwise permitted by this title. The sale of any alcoholic beverages is prohibited, regardless of the display area, unless specifically authorized by a conditional use permit. 
N.  Lighting. 
1.  General. All lighting shall be directed away from adjoining properties and streets and shall be so shielded and adjusted that the light is directed to fall only on the same premises upon which the light source is located. 
2.  Canopy Lighting. 
a.  Lights shall not be mounted on the top or sides of the canopy. The sides shall not be illuminated in any manner. 
b.  Fuel pump canopies shall not be internally illuminated. Light fixtures shall be completely recessed into the canopy so that the light source is concealed. 
O.  Enhanced Vapor Recovery Systems (EVR). As required by AST Executive Order VR-401-B adopted by State of California Air Resources Board, as of April 1, 2009, all gasoline dispensary facilities with underground storage tanks must upgrade to an Enhanced Vapor Recovery System (EVR) Phase II. All EVR Systems, including pipes that and other components that extend beyond/above the tank, shall be screened from view. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.200 - Sidewalk cafés. 
A.  Purpose. Sidewalk cafés make a significant contribution to the quality of public spaces and community life. They provide an active street frontage that is lively and dynamic. They are natural locations for social interaction. The purpose of this section is to provide procedures for and standards to encourage the establishment of sidewalk cafes wherever permitted. 
B.  Permit Requirements. A sidewalk café shall require the approval of a right-of-way permit as specified by an established right-of-way enhancement program. 
C.  Review Authority. A sidewalk café may be approved by the planning division if it is determined that the proposed café is in conformity with all of the requirements of this section. An encroachment permit must thereafter be obtained from the city council. 
D.  Limitations and Requirements. 
1.  Where Permitted. A sidewalk café may be permitted only in a zoning district that allows indoor restaurants, and then only if the sidewalk café is situated adjacent, as specified below, to an indoor restaurant and the sidewalk café's operation is incidental to and a part of the operation of such adjacent indoor restaurant. 
a.  A sidewalk café may be located on the public sidewalk immediately adjacent to and abutting the indoor restaurant which operates the café, provided that the area in which the sidewalk café is located extends no farther along the sidewalk's length than the actual sidewalk frontage of the operating indoor restaurant and all other applicable provisions of this section are fulfilled. 
b.  The service of alcoholic beverage to customers using the sidewalk café is prohibited. 
2.  Sidewalk Clearances. A sidewalk café may be permitted only where the sidewalk is wide enough to adequately accommodate both the usual pedestrian traffic in the area and the operation of fifty percent of the sidewalk's width at any point and not less than eight consecutive feet of sidewalk width at every point shall be kept clear and unimpeded for pedestrian traffic. 
3.  Outdoor Furniture. All tables and chairs comprising a sidewalk café shall be set back not less than two feet from any curb and from any sidewalk or street barrier, including a bollard, and shall not be situated within eight feet of any designated bus stop. All outdoor dining furniture, including tables, chairs, umbrellas, and planters, shall be movable. All outdoor furniture must be of commercial quality to withstand the wear of outdoor use; plastic tables and chairs are not permitted. Outdoor furniture should be complimentary to the adjoining indoor business design and make a positive contribution to the street environment. Umbrellas must be secured with a minimum base of not less than sixty pounds. Outdoor heaters, music, or speakers are prohibited. 
4.  Signage. No signing shall be allowed at any outdoor café except for the name of the establishment on an awning or umbrella fringe. 
5.  Food and Beverages. A sidewalk café may serve only food and nonalcoholic beverages prepared or stocked for sale at the adjoining indoor restaurant. 
6.  Service Requirements. The outdoor preparation of food and busing/server stations are prohibited at sidewalk cafes. The presetting of tables with utensils, glasses, napkins, condiments, and the like is prohibited. All exterior surfaces within the café shall be easily cleanable and shall be kept clean at all times by the permittee. Trash and refuse storage for the sidewalk café shall not be permitted within the outdoor dining area or on adjacent sidewalk areas and the permittee shall remove all trash and litter as they accumulate. The permittee is responsible for maintaining the outdoor dining area, including the sidewalk surface and furniture and adjacent areas in a clean and safe condition. 
7.  Hours of Operation. Sidewalk cafes may only operate between the hours of seven a.m. and ten p.m. and shall be setback a minimum of one hundred fifty feet from the property line of any parcel occupied by a detached single-family residence. Tables, chairs, and all other furniture used in the operation of an outdoor café shall be removed from the sidewalk and stored indoors at night and whenever the café is not in operation. 
E.  Power to Suspend Operation of Sidewalk Café. The city shall have the right and power, acting through the city manager or his/her designee, to suspend the operation of a sidewalk café at any time because of anticipated or actual problems or conflicts in the use of the sidewalk area. Such problems and conflicts may arise from, but are not limited to, scheduled festivals and similar events, or parades or marches, or repairs to the street or sidewalk, or from demonstrations or emergencies occurring in the area. To the extent possible, the permittee shall be given prior written notice of any time period during which the operation of the sidewalk café will be suspended by the city, but any failure to give prior written notice shall not affect the right and power of the city to suspend the café's operation at any particular time. 
F.  Findings and Conditions. In connection with granting approval for a minor use permit for a sidewalk café, the planning division shall make findings that the proposed operation meets the limitations of this section and may impose conditions in granting its approval as deemed are needed to ensure that the proposed operation will meet the operating requirements and conditions set forth in this section and to assure that the public safety and welfare will be protected. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012; Ord. No. 2017-2440, § 5, 10-17-2017)  
18.30.210 - Small wind energy systems. 
A.  Purpose. The intent of the section is to allow for the limited use of wind turbines or windmills throughout the city for the purpose of small scale generation of electricity to serve the needs of a home, institutional or open space land use, or business. These provisions are intended to ensure that such facilities are well designed, carefully sited, and operated in a manner that will not pose a nuisance or hazard to the general public or nearby neighbors. In addition, these provisions are intended to preserve and protect public health and safety without significantly increasing the cost or decreasing the efficiency of small wind energy systems. 
B.  Definitions. 
1.  "Roof peak" is the highest point of a roof excluding any architectural feature such as a cupola, parapet, turret, tower, elevator shaft enclosure, or similar architectural embellishment. 
2.  "Small wind energy system" means a wind energy system consisting of a single wind turbine, tower, and associated control or conversion electronics providing electricity for a home, accessory dwelling unit, multi-family residential building, or small business. 
3.  "Total height" means the vertical distance from ground level to the tip of a fully extended wind turbine blade at its highest point. 
4.  "Tower" means a freestanding structure that supports a wind turbine. 
5.  "Wind energy system" means equipment that converts and then stores or transfers energy from the wind into usable forms of energy and includes any base, blade, foundation, generator, nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer, turbine, vane, wire, or other component used in the system. 
6.  "Wind turbine" means the mechanical and electrical conversion components mounted at the top of a tower in a wind energy system. 
C.  Small Wind Energy System Standards. A small wind energy system shall be a permitted use in all zoning districts subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Lot Size and Maximum Height. 
a.  Small mono-pole wind energy systems shall be subject to the height limit of the underlying zone. One mono-pole wind energy system is permitted for each half-acre or portion thereof not to exceed three. Wind turbine systems shall comply with the FAA height regulations and coastal zone requirements. 
b.  Roof-mounted wind energy systems shall be allowed on any lot size with a total height limit of ten feet above the peak of the roof and located the furthest distance from adjacent residences. 
2.  Setbacks. 
a.  A wind tower shall be set back a distance equal to the total height to the top of a fully extended blade from any public right-of-way or overhead utility lines and all property lines. 
b.  No part of the wind system structure, including guy-wire anchors, may extend closer than accessory building setbacks of the appropriate zone to the property lines of the installation site. 
3.  Access. All ground mounted electrical and control equipment shall be secured to prevent unauthorized access and the tower shall be designed and installed so as not to provide step bolts or a ladder readily accessible to the public for a minimum height of eight feet above the ground. 
4.  Noise. Small wind energy systems shall comply with the noise ordinance of the National City Municipal Code. 
5.  Approved Wind Turbines. Small wind turbines must be approved by the emerging technologies program of the California Energy Commission or any other small wind certification program recognized by the American Wind Energy Association. 
6.  Appearance. 
a.  The wind generator and tower shall be painted in subdued tones of white, silver, light grey, or light blue or the manufacturer's original paint or finish shall be permitted if it complies with the subdued tones identified herein or should be designed and painted a color that blends with the surrounding natural or manmade features. 
b.  Where mounted on a building, the installation shall be well integrated with the architecture of the building. 
7.  Safety Precautions. 
a.  A wind energy system shall be equipped with manual and automatic overspeed controls to limit the rotational speed of the blade within the design limits of the rotor. 
b.  All wind towers shall have lightening protection. 
c.  If a wind tower is supported by guy wires, the wires shall be clearly visible to the height of at least six feet above the guy wire anchors. 
d.  The minimum distance between the ground and any part of the rotor blade system shall be fifteen feet. 
e.  A six-feet-high fence with a locking gate shall be placed around the system's tower base. 
D.  Permits. 
1.  Small roof mounted wind energy systems are an accessory use permitted in all zoning districts. No small wind energy systems shall be erected, constructed, or installed without first receiving a building permit from the appropriate city authority. A building permit shall also be required for any modification to an existing small wind energy system. 
2.  Small mono-pole wind energy systems and meteorological towers shall not be erected, constructed, or installed without first receiving a conditional use permit and a building permit from the appropriate city authorities. A building permit shall also be required for any modification to an existing system. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.220 - Telecommunications facilities. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to provide a uniform and comprehensive set of standards for the development, siting, and installation of wireless telecommunications facilities and antenna installation. These regulations are intended to protect and promote the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of National City and to preserve community character and protect aesthetic quality in accordance with the guidelines and intent of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and to encourage siting in preferred locations to minimize aesthetic impacts and to minimize the intrusion of these uses into residential areas. 
B.  Commercial Telecommunications Facilities. 
1.  Telecommunication facilities are subject to a conditional use permit and design review and shall comply with all applicable provisions of this section. 
2.  Design guidelines for commercial facilities. To the greatest extent possible, commercial telecommunication facilities shall be sensitively designed and located to be compatible with and minimize visual impacts to surrounding areas, including public property. To this end, each facility shall comply with the following design guidelines. 
a.  Innovative design solutions that minimize visual impacts should be utilized; stealth solutions where facilities are not detectable are especially encouraged. 
i.  A good faith effort in achieving co-location shall be required of the host entity. Requests for utilization of facility space and response to such requests shall be made in a timely manner and in writing and copies shall be provided to the city. Co-location is not required in cases where the visual impacts are found to be substantial, the facility cannot reasonably accommodate additional facilities, or where good faith lease arrangements fail. 
ii.  All properties found suitable for co-location and multiple users shall be designed to promote facility and site sharing. To this end telecommunication facilities and necessary appurtenances, shall be shared by site users, when in the determination of the planning commission, as appropriate, this will minimize overall visual impacts to the community. 
b.  Telecommunication facilities shall be as small as possible and the minimum height necessary without compromising reasonable reception or transmission. 
c.  Antennas and their support structures should be located on the rear half of property or structures when reasonable transmission and/or reception would not be impaired and when visual impacts would be reduced, unless no other feasible alternative location exists. 
d.  Telecommunication facilities and appurtenances should not be situated between the primary building on the parcel and any public or private street adjoining the parcel. 
e.  Telecommunication facilities should be located and designed to avoid blocking and/or substantially altering scenic views. 
f.  Building mounted telecommunication facilities are encouraged rather than telecommunication towers. 
g.  Building mounted telecommunication facilities should be integrated with existing structures. 
h.  Telecommunication facilities should be designed and painted a color that blends with the surrounding natural or manmade features. 
i.  Telecommunication facilities and appurtenances shall be screened by existing and/or proposed structures and landscaped to the extent possible without compromising reception and/or transmission. 
j.  The design of fencing, landscaping, and other screening for telecommunication facilities shall be integrated and compatible with surrounding improvements. 
k.  Multiple telecommunication facilities of reduced heights are encouraged to cover a service area where the visual impacts would be less than a single larger and more visually obtrusive tower. 
l.  Co-location of commercial telecommunication towers and the use of the same site by multiple carriers is encouraged where feasible and found to be desirable. 
m.  Monopoles or guyed/lattice towers are discouraged except where satisfactory evidence is provided demonstrating that a self-supporting tower is needed to provide the height and/or capacity necessary for the proposed facility and visual impacts would be minimized. 
n.  All utility lines serving the facility shall be under-grounded. 
o.  Each commercial telecommunication facility shall be installed in a manner that will maintain and enhance existing native vegetation. Suitable landscaping to screen the facility shall also be installed where necessary. 
p.  All major commercial telecommunication facilities, other than government owned facilities, shall be prohibited in residential zones. 
q.  All major commercial telecommunication facilities shall be located at least 75 feet from any habitable structure, except for a habitable structure on the property in which the facility is located. 
3.  Commercial transmission towers are prohibited. 
4.  Telecommunication facilities shall conform to the requirements of the FCC. 
C.  Amateur Radio and Citizen's Band Antennas. Amateur radio and citizen's band antennas shall comply with the following regulations, and all other applicable requirements of this section. 
1.  The following amateur radio and citizen band facilities require site plan review only: 
a.  An antenna facility that is not within the public view provided the facility otherwise complies with all other applicable provisions of this section. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to prove that the proposed facility will not be in public view. 
b.  No more than one ground mounted antenna per parcel, not to exceed thirty feet in height setback a distance equal to the height of the facility from the property line. 
c.  No more than one building mounted antenna per parcel, not to exceed twelve feet in height above the highest part of the building. 
D.  Receive-Only Television and Radio Antennas. Receive-only TV and radio antennas shall comply with the following regulations, and all other applicable requirements of this section. 
1.  The following facilities require site plan review only provided they comply with subsection (E): 
a.  An antenna that is not within the public view provided the facility otherwise complies with all other applicable provisions of this section. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to prove that the proposed facility will not be in public view. 
b.  Ground mounted facility that is a satellite dish one meter (3.28 feet) or less in diameter. 
c.  Building mounted facility that is a satellite dish one meter (3.28 feet) or less in diameter. 
E.  Development Criteria for All Facilities. Each antenna and other telecommunications facility, including exempt facilities, shall comply with the following requirements. 
1.  The antenna shall be accessory to the primary use of the property which is not a telecommunications facility. 
2.  No more than one citizen band, amateur radio, receive only TV or radio antenna tower is allowed per parcel. 
3.  Telecommunication facilities shall not be located within any setback area required by the applicable zoning district. 
4.  Antennas and appurtenances should not be installed between the primary structure and any private or public street adjoining the parcel unless sufficiently screened, and no other feasible alternative exists. 
5.  No portion of an antenna array shall extend beyond the property lines of the subject parcel, unless the affected property owner has given written consent to the encroachment and the consent has been recorded at the San Diego County Recorder. Any consent given under this condition shall set forth a procedure by which the consent may be terminated. 
6.  The facility shall be as small as possible and the minimum height necessary without compromising reasonable reception and/or transmission. 
7.  All hardware such as brackets, turnbuckles, clips, and similar items subject to rust or corrosion shall be protected by galvanizing or paint. 
8.  Satellite dishes shall be painted a color that blends with their surroundings. 
9.  Satellite dishes shall not be used as a sign or contain any advertising copy 
10.  Facilities shall be screened by existing and/or proposed structures and landscaping to the extent possible without compromising reception and/or transmission. 
11.  Each facility shall comply with all federal, state, and city codes, including FCC and FAA standards. 
F.  Permit Requirements. A telecommunications facility shall require conditional use permit approval in compliance with this section, if not considered an amateur radio and citizen's band antenna pursuant to subsection (C) or exempt pursuant to subsection (D). 
1.  Conditional Use Permit Required. 
a.  A conditional use permit is required for all commercial telecommunication facilities. The review authority for conditional use permits is the planning commission. 
b.  Application requirements for commercial facilities. In addition to the conditional use permit application requirements, the following information shall be submitted when applying for a telecommunications facility: 
i.  A narrative description of the proposed facility, including the type of facility, type of technology and consumer services that provider will provide to its customers; 
ii.  Area development, service area, and network maps; 
iii.  Alternative site or location analysis; 
iv.  Title reports; and 
v.  Visual impact analysis, including photo montages, field mock ups, line of site sections, and other techniques shall be prepared by or on behalf of the applicant which identifies the potential visual impacts of the facility, at design capacity. Consideration shall be given to views from public areas as well as from private properties. The analysis shall assess visual impacts of the facility, and shall identify and include all technologically feasible mitigation measures. 
c.  Exceptions. Exceptions to the requirements of this section may be granted through conditional use permit approval by the planning commission. 
G.  Abandonment. Upon abandonment of a telecommunication facility, the facility shall be removed by the applicant and/or property owner and, where applicable, the site shall be restored to its natural condition. 
H.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, all "small wireless facilities" as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.6002(l), as may be amended or superseded, shall be subject to permits and other requirements as specified in City Council Policy No. 506, which is adopted and may be amended or repealed by a City Council resolution. If City Council Policy No. 506 is repealed and not replaced, an application for a small wireless facility shall be processed pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012; Ord. No. 2019-2457, § 3, 5-7-2019)  
18.30.230 - Tobacco specialty businesses. 
Tobacco specialty businesses, where permitted pursuant to the Land Use Code, shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  A conditional use permit is required. 
2.  The business shall not be located within one thousand feet of any school, playground, recreation center or facility, childcare center, or library in the City of National City. 
3.  No alcohol or food may be sold or consumed on the premises. 
4.  No person under the age of twenty-one years of age may enter the premises unless that person is accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012; Ord. No. 2018-2451, § 3, 11-20-2018)  
18.30.240 - Urban agriculture. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of urban agriculture is to ensure that urban garden areas are appropriately located and protected to meet needs for local food production, community health, recreation, community education, garden-related job training, environmental enhancement, preservation of green space, and community enjoyment. 
B.  Definitions. 
1.  "Coldframe" means an unheated outdoor structure consisting of a wooden or concrete frame and a top of glass or clear plastic, used for protecting seedlings and plans from the cold. 
2.  "Community farm" is an area of land larger than one acre managed and maintained by an individual or group of individuals to grow and harvest food and horticultural products for shareholder consumption or for sale or donation. Shareholders may arrange to work on the farm in exchange for a share of the crops and/or pay for a portion of the crop in advance. A community farm may be a principal or accessory use. Sale and donation of food and horticultural products grown in the community farm may occur on-site. 
3.  "Greenhouse" means a building made of glass, plastic, or fiberglass in which plants are cultivated. 
4.  "Home garden" means a garden maintained by one or more individuals who reside in a dwelling unit located on the subject property. Food and horticultural; products grown in the home garden may be used for personal consumption or for donation or sale. On-site sales are not permitted. A home garden is an accessory use to a principal residential use. 
5.  "Hoophouse" means a structure made of PVC piping or other material covered with translucent plastic, constructed in a "half-round" or "hoop" shape. 
6.  "Neighborhood garden" is an area of land, one acre or less, managed and maintained by an individual or group of individuals to grow and harvest food and horticultural products for personal or group consumption, for sale or donation. A neighborhood garden may be divided into separate garden plots for cultivation by one or more individuals or may be farmed collectively by members of the group. Sale and donation of food and horticultural products grown in the neighborhood garden may occur on-site. A neighborhood garden may be a principal or accessory use. 
7.  "Rooftop garden" means any garden on the roof of a building. Besides the decorative benefit, roof plantings may provide food, temperature control, hydrological benefits, architectural enhancement, habitats or corridors for wildlife, and recreational opportunities. 
C.  Permitted Primary Uses. Cultivation of edible vegetables, flowers, herbs, fruits and other plants in the ground, in raised beds, and in greenhouses which may have occasional sales of items at the site. Sale of nonagricultural times is prohibited. 
D.  Permitted Accessory Uses. 
1.  Only the following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in both neighborhood gardens and community farms: 
a.  Open space associated with and intended for use as garden areas. 
b.  Signs limited to identification, information and directional signs, including sponsorship information where the sponsorship information is clearly secondary to other permitted information on any particular sign, in conformance with the regulations of the signage sections. 
c.  Benches, bike racks, raised/accessible planting beds, compost bins, picnic tables, seasonal farm stands, fences, garden art, rain barrel systems, and children's play areas. 
d.  Buildings, restroom facilities with composting toilets, and planting preparation houses. 
e.  Off-street parking and walkways, in conformance with the regulations of Division 4. 
f.  Tool sheds and shade pavilions. 
2.  Only the following accessory uses shall be permitted on community farms: 
a.  Greenhouses, hoophouses, coldframes, and similar structures used to extend the growing season. 
b.  Buildings limited to barns, restroom facilities with composting toilets, and planting preparation houses. 
c.  Cold storage. 
d.  Packing facilities. 
e.  Market stands. 
E.  Supplemental Regulations. Uses and structures shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the following regulations: 
1.  Location. Buildings associated with a community farm or neighborhood garden shall be set back from property lines of a residential district a minimum distance of ten feet, 
2.  Height. No building or other structure shall be greater than sixteen feet in height. 
3.  Building Coverage. The combined area of all buildings, excluding greenhouses and hoophouses, shall not exceed fifteen percent of the garden site lot areas for community farms and five percent for neighborhood gardens. Buildings and other structures may not exceed 12 feet in height. 
4.  Parking and Walkways. Off-street parking shall be permitted only for those garden sites exceeding 15,000 square feet in lot area. Such parking shall be limited in size to 15 percent of the garden site lot area and must be surfaced in accordance with the parking section of this Land Use Code. Walkways shall be paved in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
5.  Signs. Signs shall not exceed four square feet in area per side and shall not exceed six feet in height. 
6.  Farm Stands. Farm stands that sell produce grown on site shall be removed from the premises or stored inside a building on the premises during that time of the year when the garden is not open for public use. 
7.  Interior Fences. Fences around individual garden plots is permitted but not required. Interior fences shall be open and shall not exceed four feet in height. 
8.  Exterior Fences. Fences located on the perimeter of a community farm or neighborhood garden shall not exceed six feet in height, shall be at least fifty percent open if they are taller than four feet, and shall be constructed of wood, chain link, or ornamental (tubular) steel. For any garden that is fifteen thousand square feet in area or greater and is in a location that is subject to design review and approval by the regulating authority, no fence shall be installed without review by the city planning division. 
9.  Operating Rules. The garden management shall have an established set of operating rules addressing the governance structure of the garden, hours of operation, maintenance and security requirements and responsibilities; a garden coordinator to perform the coordinating role for the management of the community gardens; and, must assign garden plots according to the operating rules established for that garden. The name and contact number/address of the garden coordinator and a copy of the operating rules shall be kept on file with the city planning division. 
10.  Hours of Operation. Retail sales and all other public use of the farm shall begin no earlier than seven a.m. and end by seven p.m. every day of the week. 
F.  Certain Activities Prohibited. 
1.  Use of insecticides made from synthetic chemical materials is forbidden. 
2.  Use of synthetic herbicides and weed killers is prohibited. 
3.  Composting of animal parts is prohibited. 
4.  Production of intoxicating or poisonous plants is forbidden. 
5.  Use of chemical rodenticides, except for those that are acceptable under organic regulations. 
6.  Water, fertilizer, and other organic materials shall not drain onto adjacent property. 
7.  Use of barbed wire is prohibited. 
G.  Procurement of Water. 
1.  Procurement of water from public supplies should be negotiated between the Sweetwater Authority and the individual or organization conducting agricultural activities on the site. 
2.  Use of private sources of water, such as water delivered through a hose from a spigot attached to a participant's house, is permitted. 
3.  Use of on-site rainwater (i.e., rain barrels) shall be permitted providing it is not maintained for human consumption. 
4.  The use of water for irrigation shall be in conformance with Section 18.44.190 (Water Efficient Landscape Regulations) of this Land Use Code. 
H.  Toxic or Flammable Chemicals. 
1.  Gasoline used for the operation of lawnmowers or other combustion engine-driven gardening machinery must be kept in sealed containers in locked, ventilated structures. 
2.  No flammable materials or other chemical except the permitted chemicals mentioned above may be used or stored for an urban agriculture land use. 
I.  Machinery. Tractors, lawnmowers, and other farm-related machinery may be used and stored a long as they are in good working order and do not create a nuisance as defined elsewhere in the Municipal Code. 
J.  Prevention of Growth of Poisonous or Injurious Weeds. 
1.  Parties using or otherwise occupying urban agriculture land uses are responsible for preventing the growth of those weeds defined as poisonous or injurious. 
2.  Invasive species as defined by the California Native Plant Society and San Diego County American Society of Landscape Architects are not permitted and shall be promptly removed from the site. 
K.  Handling and Preparation of Food for Sale. Refer to county health department for rules regarding food and food establishments. These rules are to apply where parties involved in agriculture activities seek to sell food on-site. 
L.  Soil Dangers and Toxicity. 
1.  Prior to implementing neighborhood gardens and community farms and before any food products may be grown in topsoil, such soil should be tested for contaminants that would render it unsuitable for cultivation, including, but not limited to: lead and other toxic heavy metals; industrial solvents; gasoline; perclorethylene; and other chemicals that can be transmitted to people via soil contact or consumption of foods grown in such soil. 
2.  Area of dry, loose soil that may be moved by wind should be covered by mulch or plastic or otherwise confined. 
M.  Rooftop Gardens. For multi-unit residential buildings and residential care facilities, rooftop gardens are highly encouraged. Rooftop gardens are also permitted on nonresidential buildings. Rooftop gardens can be grown in containers or as a "green roof system." A rooftop must be structurally capable of supporting the additional weight of a rooftop garden and the people who use them. Rooftop gardens should: 
1.  Be accessible to all residents of a residential building. 
2.  Have access to water. 
3.  Be provided with a storage area for equipment, material, and gardening tools. 
4.  Have a minimum safety enclosure of forty-two inches in height. 
5.  Be provided with shade if used by the elderly. 
6.  Be provided with a composting bin or bins. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.250 - Veterinary hospitals and clinics. 
A.  Restriction on Types of Animals Served. Veterinary clinics shall be limited to serving only those kinds of small domesticated animals or household pets commonly maintained in residence with man. 
B.  Conditional Use Permit Required. Veterinary hospitals or clinics shall be subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit. In addition to complying with the provisions of a conditional use permit, such uses shall: 
1.  Be located no closer than one hundred feet to any residential zone, or to any restaurant, hotel or motel; 
2.  Show that adequate measures and controls have been taken to prevent offensive noise and odor; 
3.  Not allow the incineration of refuse or animal carcasses on the premises; 
4.  Not be operated as a kennel. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.260 - Neighborhood corner stores. 
A.  Purpose. The neighborhood corner store is established largely to serve adjacent residential neighborhoods. The corner store allows for a small convenience store. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  Neighborhood corner stores are permitted in all residential zones, but limited to the following corner sites: 
a.  Intersections of an arterial streets with an arterial street; 
b.  Intersections of an arterial street with a collector street; 
c.  Intersections of a collector street with a collector street. 
2.  The Circulation Element of the General Plan identifies the locations of all arterial and collector streets. 
C.  Definition. A small retail business (three thousand square feet maximum) located in a residential area established for the sale of convenience goods limited to food, groceries, non-alcoholic beverages, toiletries, cleaning products, magazines and newspapers, indoor vending/ATM machines, lottery tickets, over-the-counter medication, and any other products determined by the city to be of the same general character as those listed here. The space devoted to the sale of non-food items shall be limited to ten percent of the gross floor area. Corner stores are strongly encouraged to provide fresh produce. Outdoor vending machines are not permitted. A corner store may include a single residential unit. A corner store may be accessory to a residential unit. 
D.  Permitted Locations. Neighborhood corner stores are permitted in residential zones at intersections of collector and/or arterial streets. 
E.  Setbacks. 
1.  Front and corner side setback. Buildings shall be located between zero feet and ten feet from the front and/or corner side property line. 
2.  Side/rear setbacks. A corner store shall meet the minimum standards for setbacks of the residential zoning district that it is located. 
F.  Parking. Parking is allowed in rear yards but may be permitted in side yards by conditional use. Use of on street parking to meet the parking requirements of corner stores is permitted; however, the number of on street parking spaces used to meet the parking requirements may not extend further than twenty feet beyond the edge of the corner store parcel. 
G.  Architectural Standards. 
1.  Building Footprint. The building footprint for any individual nonresidential building shall not exceed three thousand square feet. The maximum length of building frontage is seventy-five feet. 
2.  Building Character. New buildings and renovations to existing buildings shall be harmonious with the character of nearby residential neighborhoods. 
3.  Drive-through Facilities. Drive through facilities are not permitted. 
4.  Outdoor Uses. Outdoor uses such as seating and display of fresh produce and flowers may be established consistent with Section 18.30.150 (Outdoor Display of Merchandise). Outdoor display of produce and flowers is limited to a maximum length of fifteen percent of the front facing building façade or fifteen percent if the façade facing a parking lot. Produce and flowers shall not obstruct the flow of pedestrian traffic. 
H.  Performance Standards. 
1.  Lighting. Lighting for the neighborhood corner store shall be appropriately shielded to not negatively impact the residential neighborhood. 
2.  Hours of Operation. Neighborhood corner stores are only permitted to operate between the hours of seven a.m. to ten p.m. A neighborhood corner store shall be allowed to operate so that neighboring residents are not exposed to offensive noise, especially from traffic, routine deliveries or late night activity. 
3.  Noise. All neighborhood corner stores shall comply with the noise standards contained in Title 12. No amplified sound including music shall be audible to neighboring residents. 
4.  Sale of Beer, Wine, and Alcohol Prohibited. Neighborhood corner stores are not permitted to sell beer, wine, or other alcohol. Neighborhood corner stores shall not be permitted to apply for a conditional use permit to sell beer, wine, or other alcohol. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.270 - Motels. 
A.  Construction or Expansion. Any proposal for the construction or expansion of a motel in any zone shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  All motels shall have a manager's apartment. 
2.  Kitchen or kitchenette facilities are prohibited in all but the resident manager's unit. 
3.  All motels shall be located on lots that are at least twenty thousand square feet in size and the minimum number of units provided shall be twenty. 
4.  Motel rooms shall be at least three hundred square feet in size including the bathroom. 
5.  A swimming pool at least five hundred twenty-five square feet in size shall be provided on all sites. 
6.  On-site parking shall be provided in accordance with Division 4. 
7.  Landscaped areas shall be provided per Division 4. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.280 - Markets that sell seafood. 
Markets that sell fresh or frozen seafood that are less than twenty-five thousand square feet in area shall be located a minimum distance of three hundred feet from any residentially zoned properties. A conditional use permit shall be required for all markets that sell fresh or frozen seafood. This section shall not apply to manufacturers' of prepackaged frozen products. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.290 - Bed and breakfast inns. 
A.  Conditions for Operating a Bed and Breakfast Inn. 
1.  Permitted in any residence listed on the city's list of historic properties subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit. 
2.  Operated as an accessory use to the owner's residential use. The bed and breakfast inn shall be operated by the owner of the property only. 
3.  Check-in/check-out time shall be between nine a.m. and eight p.m. only. 
4.  Breakfast shall be the only meal served to guests. 
5.  No long-term rental of rooms shall be permitted. The maximum stay for guests shall be seven days. 
6.  No cooking facilities shall be allowed in the guest rooms. 
7.  If the use at any time becomes unduly intrusive to the neighborhood, the permit may be revoked at the discretion of the planning commission. The decision of the planning commission shall be final. 
8.  The historic character of the structure shall be maintained. 
9.  Bed and breakfast inns shall comply with all applicable adopted city fire and building codes. 
10.  The number of rooms permitted in the bed and breakfast inn shall be specified in the conditional use permit. 
B.  Design Requirements. The following design requirements shall apply to all bed and breakfast inns: 
1.  Parking shall be provided at a ratio of one off-street parking space for each guest room plus two spaces for the owner's unit. In addition, one space shall be provided for each employee of the shift of maximum employment. 
2.  One sign shall be permitted subject to approval of the planning commission at the time of the conditional use permit consideration. Such sign shall be compatible with the historic character of the structure in design, color and materials. The sign shall not exceed twelve inches wide by sixteen inches long and shall be mounted at a maximum height of four feet. Modification of the sign, at a later time, shall be subject to approval of the city manager or his/her designee in accordance with site plan review. 
3.  Bed and breakfast inns shall comply with the design regulations for the underlying zone in which the site is located. 
4.  Bed and breakfast inns shall be subject to the provisions of site plan review. 
C.  Preliminary Departmental Review. Prior to submittal for a conditional use permit to operate a bed and breakfast inn, the applicant may request that the building official, or his/her designee, and the fire marshal, or his/her designee, conduct an inspection of the proposed bed and breakfast inn. After such inspection the applicant will be notified of the findings of the preliminary inspection and given a tentative list of modifications that will be required for the structure as conditions of the conditional use permit. Upon submission of the conditional use permit application and review by the departments, the above list may be added to or deleted from. The planning commission shall consider the findings of the director of building and safety and the fire chief when considering the conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.300 - Solar energy systems. 
Solar collectors are permitted outright as an accessory use to any principal use subject to the following standards: Solar collectors are not considered as "reflective roofing materials" and there is no limit to the specific percentage of roof coverage. 
A.  Allowed Height of Solar Energy Systems. 
1.  Single-family: Except within the coastal zone, photovoltaic solar energy systems may extend up to five feet above the height limit in the zoning district. Solar water or swimming pool heating systems may extend up to seven feet above the height limit in the zoning district; 
2.  All Other Properties: Except within the coastal zone, photovoltaic solar energy systems may extend up to five feet above the roof surface on which they are installed, even if this exceeds the maximum height limit in the district in which it is located. Solar water or swimming pool heating systems may extend up to seven feet above the roof surface on which they are installed even if this exceeds the maximum height limit in the district in which it is located. 
B.  Side and Rear Yard Setbacks. 
1.  Excluding solar collector panels, solar energy system equipment may be installed within the required side and rear yard but shall not be closer than three feet to any property line. 
C.  Visibility of Solar Energy Systems. 
1.  Excluding solar collector panels, their necessary support structure, and conduit, solar energy systems shall not be visible from the public right-of-way adjacent to the front property line. 
2.  Solar collector panels, their necessary support structure, and conduit, shall be installed in the location that is the least visible from abutting streets directly facing the subject property so long as installation in that location does not significantly decrease the energy performance or significantly increase the cost of the solar energy system as compared to a more visible location. 
3.  Solar collector panels, not located on the rooftop of a primary structure, garage, or accessory structure on lots adjacent to RS-1and RS-2 zones shall be limited to a maximum height of six feet. Solar collector panels located in all other zones shall comply with the maximum height permitted for an accessory structure in said zone. 
D.  Solar Collectors on Historic Properties. 
1.  Add solar panels on roof surface or roof surfaces not visible from a public street or park. However, solar shingles may be added to a roof surface visible from a public way if low or non-reflective shingles are used. 
2.  Place solar panels or other solar devices on a non-character-defining roofline of a non-primary elevation (not readily visible from public streets). Run solar panels and devices parallel to the original roofline. 
3.  Set solar panels and solar devices back from the edge of a flat roof to minimize visibility. Panels and devices may be set at a pitch and elevated, if not highly visible from public streets. 
4.  Select solar panels, solar devices, mechanical equipment and mounting structures with non-reflective finishes such as an anodized finish. 
5.  Where permitted, paint mechanical equipment attached to the building fascia the same color as the fascia in order to blend into the building. 
6.  Locate detached arrays of solar panels and solar devices at a historic site in the rear or side yard if the arrays are not highly visible from the public streets or public parks and do not detract from other major character defining aspects of the site. The location of detached solar arrays should also consider visibility from adjacent properties, which shall be reduced to the extent possible while still maintaining solar access. 
7.  Use solar devices in non-historic windows, walls, siding or shutters that do not face public streets. 
8.  Use solar panels and solar devices that are similar in color to roof materials, if available. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.310 - Tattoo parlors and body-piercing establishments. 
A.  Restrictions. 
1.  No tattoo or body piercing establishment shall be located within one-mile of another such establishment. 
2.  Tattoo parlors and body-piercing establishments shall be located no less than 1,000 feet from a church, school, or playground. 
3.  Tattoo parlors and body-piercing establishments shall be no closer than two hundred fifty feet from a residential zone. 
4.  No tattoo and body-piercing establishments shall be located east of Interstate 805. 
5.  A conditional use permit is required. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.320 - Pawn shops and businesses engaged in secondhand dealing and/or the purchase and selling of gold and other precious metals. 
A.  Restrictions. 
1.  No pawn shops and businesses engaged in secondhand dealing and/or the purchase and selling of gold and other precious metals shall be located within two thousand feet of another such business. This shall not apply to shopping centers of fifty thousand square feet or more. 
2.  Pawn shops and businesses engaged in secondhand dealing and/or the purchase and selling of gold and other precious metals shall be no closer than two hundred fifty feet from residential zones. 
3.  No pawn shop or businesses engaged in secondhand dealing and/or the purchase and selling of gold and other precious metals shall be located east of Interstate 805. This shall not apply to shopping centers of fifty thousand square feet or more. 
4.  A conditional use permit is required. 
5.  A pawn shop or businesses engaged in secondhand dealing and/or the purchase and selling of gold and other precious metals that provides payday lending is not exempt from the regulations of payday lenders. 
6.  No more than six pawn shops shall be allowed within National City. 
7.  Secondhand dealers (as defined in the Glossary) shall only be permitted as accessory to a legitimate retail business that sells as new the item(s) in question as its primary business function. 
a.  Total gross receipts of precious metals purchased or taken for credit shall not exceed fifty percent of total retail sales of precious metals. 
8.  All pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers shall require, at minimum, a secondhand dealer license and shall abide by state-mandated reporting requirements for secondhand tangible personal property as required in the Business and Professions Code. 
a.  These requirements shall also be required of retail businesses that offer trade-ins or credit for secondhand tangible personal property. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012; Ord. No. 2012-2377, § 2, 10-30-2012)  
18.30.330 - Payday lenders. 
A.  Restrictions. 
1.  No more than twelve payday lending establishments shall be allowed within National City. 
2.  Payday lenders shall be located within shopping centers of fifty thousand square feet or more and within a multi-tenant building. 
3.  A conditional use permit is required. 
4.  A pawn shop which provides payday lending is not exempt from these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.340 - Medical marijuana dispensaries. 
A.  Prohibition. 
1.  Medical marijuana dispensaries are prohibited. 
B.  Definitions. 
1.  For purposes of this section, "medical marijuana dispensary" shall mean a facility where marijuana is made available for medical purposes in accordance with Section 11362.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
2.  For purposes of this section, "marijuana" shall have the same meaning as the definition of that word in Section 11018 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.345 - Medical Marijuana Cultivation. 
A.  Prohibition. 
1.  Cultivation of marijuana for medicinal purposes is prohibited. 
2.  Cultivation of marijuana is prohibited regardless of purpose. 
B.  Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply: 
1.  "Cultivation of marijuana" shall mean the planting, growing, cultivating, harvesting, drying, or processing of marijuana. 
2.  For purposes of this section, "marijuana" shall have the same meaning as the definition of that word in Section 11018 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2409, § 1, 1-19-2016)  
18.30.350 - Auto body uses. 
A.  General Operation and Maintenance. 
1.  A separate business license shall be required of all autobody businesses operating within the city. 
2.  An integrated maintenance and operational plan (IMOP) shall be required of all new autobody businesses. The IMOP shall be maintained on site and provided upon request. The plan shall be in addition to, and complementary with, California's required injury and illness program (IIP). 
3.  All autobody activities shall be conducted entirely within a building. All sanding, mixing and other pre-painting activities, as well as painting activities, are prohibited to be performed outside of a building, 
B.  Air Pollution. 
1.  Separate spray booths and mixing rooms shall be required. Paint spray booths shall include appropriate ventilation and filtration systems, as well as exhaust filters and/or overspray arrestors. 
2.  Low-volatile organic compound (VOC)-content paints shall be utilized for all painting processes (e.g., pretreatment coating, primer, paint). 
3.  All relevant federal, state and/or local air quality authority permits shall be required for new and renewing businesses. All such permits shall be kept current and copies provided with the application for or annual renewal of a city business license. 
4.  Emissions shall be at least ninety-eight percent efficient in accordance with the National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants (NESHAP), Subpart HHHHHH, or current standard in place at the time of application. 
C.  Hazardous Materials. 
1.  Where possible, hazardous materials, such as used oil, used oil filters, antifreeze, solvents and other materials, shall be recycled. During storage prior to recycling, all waste fluids shall be stored in separate containers. 
2.  All flammable or combustible materials shall be stored a minimum of fifty feet from the front property line. All such storage shall comply with the adopted Uniform Fire Code. 
3.  Prep stations or work areas which allow sanding, mixing and other pre-painting activities shall be separated from open work areas. All such prep stations shall be located within separate and properly ventilated areas of the facility where hazardous materials can be controlled. 
4.  Where practical, floor drains shall not be installed in spray booth areas. If floor drains are necessary, a control system shall be installed that captures and contains waste streams. 
5.  Floor drains cannot connect to stormwater or sanitary sewer systems near any spray booth areas, hazardous material storage areas (e.g., mixing rooms), or hazardous waste storage areas. 
6.  All new autobody facilities shall use reusable cloth rags and towels. Rags and towels for disposal shall be stored in a marked container and disposed of at an approved facility. 
7.  All waste streams, including paints, solvents and automobile fluids, shall be separated and clearly labeled. All containers shall remain closed except when adding or removing waste. 
D.  Parking and Site Layout. 
1.  Parking for auto body uses shall be provided at a ratio of one parking space per five hundred square feet of gross floor area. All such parking area shall be located at the rear of the property. 
2.  Separate ingress and egress shall be provided for new auto body uses. Driveways shall be designed so that vehicles exiting the property may do so in a forward direction. 
3.  Auto body uses shall be located a minimum of five hundred feet from schools or residential properties, as measured from property line to property line. 
4.  Vehicle access doors (e.g., bay doors, garage doors, roll-up doors) shall be located at the rear of the property. In the case of a corner lot or non-vehicular right-of-way, other methods of screening may be used. 
5.  Queuing in front of vehicle entry doors shall be provided for no more than four cars. Vehicles in the queue shall not block traffic flow on the property. The queuing area shall be a minimum of twenty-four feet wide and a maximum of one hundred four feet long. 
6.  All vehicle loading and unloading areas shall be located behind the building. 
E.  Noise. 
1.  All repair activities shall be in accordance with Title 12 (Noise Control) of the National City Municipal Code. 
F.  Vehicle Storage. 
1.  All new auto body uses shall provide a minimum of five hundred square feet and a maximum of two thousand square feet of vehicle storage area. 
2.  Vehicle storage time shall not exceed thirty days. Vehicles awaiting repair shall be stored in a designated storage area and shall not be stored in parking or other open areas. 
3.  No vehicles shall be stored on adjacent streets or within the public right-of-way. 
G.  Security and Fencing. 
1.  All vehicle storage areas shall be screened from adjacent properties. 
2.  Fencing or screening shall be solid and decorative in nature, and shall be a minimum of six feet high and a maximum of eight feet high. 
H.  Pollution Prevention. 
1.  No hazardous materials shall be released into any groundwater system. Waste disposal systems including, but not limited to, discharge pits, dry wells, cesspools, septic system drain fields or shallow injection wells are prohibited. 
2.  Floor drains shall connect to a holding area or separator to collect waste, which shall be disposed of separately. 
3.  A storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall be required for all new autobody businesses. The SWPPP shall be consistent with Chapter 14.22 of the National City Municipal Code and shall be available at any time for review by city inspectors. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.30.360 - Fast food eating places. 
A.  Additional Notice Required. In addition to notices required pursuant to Section 18.12.050, written notice for a public hearing on a conditional use permit for a fast food eating place shall be provided to occupants of property within a radius of three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property where the fast food eating place will be located. 
B.  Fast food eating places shall be located a minimum of three hundred feet from any residential zoned properties, except for those located within the MXC 2 or MXD 2 zone. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012; Ord. No. 2013-2383, § 2, 9-3-2013)  
18.30.370 - Massage establishments. 
Massage establishments may be located in any zone where medical offices are permitted in accordance with Chapters 10.70 and 10.79. 
(Ord. No. 2019-2455, §§ 5, 7, 1-22-2019)  
DIVISION 4. - GENERAL DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS  
Chapter 18.40 - GENERAL STANDARDS 
 
18.40.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter expands upon the standards of Division 2 by addressing details of site planning, building design, landscaping, parking and loading, outdoor lighting, and signs and outdoor advertising displays. These standards are intended to ensure that all development produces an environment of stable and desirable character, is compatible with existing and future development, and protects the use and enjoyment of neighboring properties, consistent with the General Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.40.020 - Applicability. 
The requirements of this chapter shall apply to existing and new development and land uses and shall be considered in combination with the standards for the applicable zone in Division 2 and Specific Use Regulations in Division 3. If there is conflict, the standards in Division 3 shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.40.030 - Performance standards for all development and land uses. 
A.  Purpose. This section provides performance standards that are designed to minimize various potential operational impacts of land uses and development within the city, and promote compatibility with adjoining areas and land uses. 
B.  Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to all new and existing land uses, in all zones, unless an exemption is specifically provided. 
C.  Noise. No use shall be established nor any activity conducted which violates the standards of the Noise Control Ordinance—Title 12 of the Municipal Code. 
D.  Air Emissions. Other than as permitted by the County of San Diego Air Pollution Control District, no visible dust, gasses, or smoke shall be emitted. 
E.  Combustibles and Explosives. The use, handling, storage, and transportation of combustibles and explosives shall comply with the Uniform Fire Code and California Code of Regulations Title 19. 
F.  Dust. Activities that may generate dust emissions (e.g., construction, grading, commercial gardening, and similar operations) shall be conducted to limit the emissions beyond the site boundary to the maximum extent feasible. Appropriate methods of dust management shall include the following, subject to approval by the building division. 
1.  Water all active construction areas twice per day and use erosion control measures to prevent water runoff containing silt and debris from entering the streets and storm drain system; 
2.  Cover trucks hauling soil, sand, and other loose material; 
3.  Pave, water, or apply non-toxic soil stabilizers on unpaved access roads and parking areas; 
4.  Sweep and collect (i.e., vacuum) paved access roads and parking areas daily; and 
5.  Sweep and collect (i.e., vacuum) streets daily if visible material is carried onto adjacent public streets. 
6.  Hydroseed or apply non-toxic soil stabilizers to inactive construction areas; 
7.  Enclose, cover, water, or apply non-toxic soil binders to open materials stockpiles; 
8.  Limit traffic speeds on unpaved roads to fifteen mph; 
9.  Install sandbags or other erosion control measures to prevent silt runoff to public roadways; 
10.  Replant vegetation in disturbed areas within ten days after project completion; 
11.  Install wheel washers for all exiting trucks, or wash off the tires or tracks of all trucks and equipment leaving the site; 
12.  Install wind breaks, or plant trees/vegetation at windward sides of construction areas, or avoid removing existing vegetation which acts as a windbreak; 
13.  Suspend excavation and grading activity when winds (instantaneous gusts) exceed twenty mph or dust clouds cannot be prevented from extending beyond the site; and 
14.  Limit area subject to excavation, grading, and other construction activities at any one time. 
15.  Limit access to the construction sites, so tracking of mud or dirt on to public roadways can be prevented. 
16.  Projects that have significant construction period exhaust emissions shall reduce fleet average emission rates. Developers or contractors shall provide a plan for approval by the city or SDAPCD demonstrating that the heavy-duty (>50 horsepower) off-road vehicles to be used in the construction project for more than an accumulated forty hours, including owned, leased and subcontractor vehicles, will achieve emission standards similar to in-use equipment that meets CARB certified Tier II standards. 
G.  Ground Vibration. No ground vibration shall be generated that is perceptible without instruments by a reasonable person at the property lines of the site, except for vibrations from temporary construction or demolition activities, and motor vehicle operations. 
H.  Light and Glare. 
1.  Outdoor lighting shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 18.46 (Outdoor Lighting). 
2.  Any operation or activity producing glare shall be conducted or shielded so as not to cause illumination in residential zones in excess of five-tenths footcandles. Flickering or intrinsically bright sources of illumination shall be controlled so as not to be a nuisance in residential zones. 
3.  Illumination levels shall be measured with a photoelectric photometer having a spectral response similar to that of the human eye, following the standard spectral luminous efficiency curve adopted by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA). 
I.  Liquid Waste. No liquid shall be discharged into a public or private body of water, sewage system, watercourse, or into the ground, except in compliance with applicable regulations of the Regional Water Quality Control Board. 
J.  Odor. 
1.  No obnoxious odor or fumes shall be emitted that are perceptible without instruments by a reasonable person at the property line of the site. For mixed-use buildings, commercial uses that emit odors, such as restaurants and nail salons, shall be properly ventilated to as not to impact adjoining residential uses. 
2.  No use shall be established nor any activity conducted which violates the standards of the Odor Control Ordinance—Title 7.08—Environmental Conditions of the Municipal Code. 
K.  Radioactivity, Electrical Disturbance or Electromagnetic Interference. None of the following shall be emitted: 
1.  Radioactivity, in a manner that does not comply with all applicable State and Federal regulations; or 
2.  Electrical disturbance or electromagnetic interference that interferes with normal radio or television reception or with the function of other electronic equipment beyond the property line of the site; or that does not comply with all applicable Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and other applicable state and federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
Chapter 18.41 - SITE PLANNING STANDARDS 
 
18.41.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide guidance and standards for site planning for nonresidential and multi-unit residential development in order to enhance safety, convenience and attractiveness for walking, transit use and bicycling; provide safe access to businesses and minimize pedestrian conflicts; and foster an attractive, quality environment to foster community pride and attract desired development and uses. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.41.020 - Nonresidential site planning standards. 
These standards apply to those areas in the city that will be developed as commercial use without a residential component (mixed-use) or areas where only a commercial use is permitted. This section considers two basic types of development: freestanding buildings and multi-tenant strip developments including mini-malls. 
A.  Shopping Center Development. 
1.  When shopping centers are set back from the street with parking in front, thirty percent of the street frontage shall be lined with buildings. 
2.  Parking lots for shopping centers should provide vehicular connections to adjacent commercial projects. 
3.  Pedestrian walkways for shopping centers should provide pedestrian connections to adjacent uses. 
4.  Access drives for commercial centers should be located at least two hundred feet apart and at least one hundred feet from any major intersection. Access drives should be located a minimum of ten feet from property lines unless a shared drive is provided. 
5.  For neighborhood-serving and convenience retail centers and office and institutional developments, the first row of parking which is perpendicular to an access drive from a street shall be set back at least forty feet from the sidewalk to provide adequate queuing distance from the street and for pedestrian safety. Larger community or regional retail centers may require significantly more setback area as determined by the engineering division. 
B.  Freestanding or "Pad" Buildings. 
1.  Except for drive-through/drive-in establishments, parking for freestanding retail or "pad" buildings fronting a public street shall be located a maximum of twenty feet from the property line. Freestanding buildings adjacent to a public street are discouraged from being separated from the sidewalk with parking. 
2.  The building entry shall be accentuated with architectural details and landscaping. 
3.  Freestanding restaurants may provide outdoor seating at the building entry. 
C.  Drive-Through Businesses. 
1.  Minimum vehicular queuing distance shall be established through the conditional use permit process. 
2.  Drive through business aisles shall have a minimum interior turning radius of twenty-five feet for any curves. A smaller radius may be established through the conditional use permit process with the approval of the city engineer. 
3.  A drive-through window or lane shall not be placed between the right-of-way or internal drive and the associated building unless a ten-foot wide landscape strip extending the entire length of the drive-through queuing is installed and maintained with a minimum three-foot height continuous hedge and ornamental trees spaced a minimum of twenty feet on center. 
D.  Industrial Site Planning Standards. Planning standards for industrial buildings and business parks include the following: 
1.  Services areas shall be located at the sides or rear of buildings. Service areas located at the exterior side of buildings shall be screened from view by a combination of screen walls, landscaping, and/or portions of the building. 
2.  Loading areas must be designed so that trucks will not need to back in from the public street onto the site. 
3.  Parking for visitors shall be convenient to the main entrance. 
4.  Emphasis shall be placed on the building entry. 
5.  Buildings should be oriented so as to provide space for plazas and courtyards. 
6.  Outdoor storage and equipment shall be screened from public right-of-ways. 
E.  Pedestrian Walkways. 
1.  A pedestrian walkway within a retail center, office, industrial or institutional development shall be a minimum of five feet wide. Pedestrian walkways immediately adjacent to and perpendicular to parking stalls shall be a minimum of six feet wide. 
2.  Materials for pedestrian walkways may include concrete, concrete pavers, brick, stone or combination thereof or materials as approved by the planning division. 
3.  A pedestrian walkway shall provide direct pedestrian access from peripheral sidewalks to the sidewalks that front on-site buildings and building entrances. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012; Ord. No. 2013-2383, § 3, 9-3-2013)  
18.41.030 - Multi-unit residential site planning standards. 
A.  Pedestrian Access. 
1.  Unit Entries Adjacent to a Street. Multi-unit projects should be designed with each unit adjacent to a street having its primary pedestrian entrance from the street sidewalk, or as forecourt projects with at least the primary building entrance having access to the street sidewalk. Where individual units have access to the street sidewalk, private "front yard" outdoor space may be differentiated from the public right-of-way by a porch, or small yard (i.e., patio) enclosed by a low wall or fence not to exceed forty-two inches in height. 
2.  Pedestrian walkways shall be provided to every unit entry. 
3.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 4450 et seq., of Chapter 7 of Title 1 of the Municipal Code, containing requirements for facilities necessary to assure access and usability for the physically handicapped, in all multi-unit residential projects the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Safe, convenient, well-drained pedestrian access to dwelling units, parking lots, and service areas, by provision of walks, steps or stepped ramps, so constructed as to assure reasonable durability and economy of maintenance, shall be required. 
b.  Pedestrian walkways shall be a minimum of thirty-six inches in width. 
c.  Pedestrian walkways shall be graded or ramped to no steeper than a one-to-twelve slope. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.41.040 - Common usable open space requirements. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prescribe standards for the development of open space areas provided for the exclusive use of the occupants of a multi-unit residential building. 
B.  Standards. 
1.  For projects of three units or more, common usable open space shall be required in a minimum amount of three hundred square feet per dwelling unit. 
2.  Private usable open space may be substituted for such common usable open space but may not exceed one hundred square feet per unit. Each square foot of private usable open space shall be considered equivalent to two square feet of required common usable open space, and may be so substituted, subject to the minimum requirements for actual common usable open space. All units shall be provided with at least sixty square feet of private usable open space. 
3.  Both common and private usable open space provided at ground level may be provided in the interior side yard and rear yard setback areas, within courts, and within exterior side yard setback areas to within five feet of the property line. 
4.  Private usable open space provided above the first floor may be located in the front setback area to within twelve feet of the front property line. 
5.  A minimum of forty percent of the required common usable open space shall be provided outdoors. 
6.  Common usable open space areas shall have no dimension less than twenty feet. 
7.  Private usable open space areas shall have no dimension less than five feet. 
8.  See the Westside Specific Plan for other open space requirements related to the MCR-1 and MCR-2 zones. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
Chapter 18.42 - BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
18.42.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of standards for building design and materials is to focus efforts on good design in order to create a quality image for the city, making new buildings and building additions compatible with their surroundings, encourage reinvestment, and improve the city's economic vitality. These standards apply to those areas in the city that will be developed as a commercial or institutional use without a residential component (mixed-use) or areas where only a commercial or institutional use is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.42.020 - Projections into setbacks and courts. 
A.  Requirements—General. Every required front, side, and rear setback shall be open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky, unless otherwise provided. In addition to permitted accessory buildings and structures, the following structures may be erected or projected into any required setback: 
1.  Fences and walls may be erected or projected into any required setback as provided in this section. 
2.  Cornices, belt courses, sills, eaves, or other similar architectural features (other than bay windows or vertical projections) may project into a required interior side setback not more than two inches for each one foot of width of such side setback, and may project into any other required setback, passageway or other open space not more than thirty inches, provided the width of an exterior side setback is not reduced to less than three feet. 
a.  Bay windows or other vertical projections may be permitted, subject to the limitations stated in subsection (A)(2), provided that no floor area is added. This may be accomplished through a minimum thirty-six-inch gap between ground level and the lower limit of the projection, or some form of permanent interior physical limitation (cabinetry, counter, etc.). The projection may not be greater than thirty percent of the width of the elevation from which it projects. 
3.  Eaves may project into a required interior side setback not more than four inches for each one foot of width of such side setback, provided the width of such side setback is not reduced to less than two and one-half feet. Eaves may also project into any other required setback, passageway or other open space not more than thirty inches, provided the width of an exterior side setback is not reduced to less than two and one-half feet. 
4.  Chimneys may project into a required setback, passageway or other required open space not more than two feet, provided the width of any required side setback is not reduced to less than three feet. 
5.  Fire escapes may project into any setback not more than four feet. 
6.  Open unenclosed stairways or balconies, not covered by a roof or canopy, may project into a required rear setback not more than four feet, and into a required front setback, exterior side setback side or other required open space not more than thirty inches, provided the width of an exterior side setback is not reduced to less than two and one-half feet. 
7.  Open, unenclosed porches, platforms or landing places, including access stairways, not covered by a roof or canopy, which do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building, may project into any required setback passageway or other open space not more than four feet, provided that in no event shall any such porch, platform or landing place be more than four feet above the adjacent natural ground level. 
8.  A one-story unenclosed breezeway, not over five feet in width, extending from a main residential building to an accessory parking or other accessory structure, may project into a required rear or exterior side yard setback a distance not to exceed the required setback of the accessory structure. 
9.  Awnings or canopies without enclosing walls or screening may be attached to the exterior walls of a residential structure provided that: 
a.  Such awnings or canopies do not extend more than four feet into a required front setback and have no vertical support within the setback or space; 
b.  Such awnings or canopies do not extend more than thirty inches into a required side setback, rear setback, or other required open space, but in no event nearer than thirty inches to an interior lot line; 
c.  Where such awnings or canopies project into a required front or side setback or other required open space, they may extend only over the windows or doors to be protected and for twelve inches on each side thereof. 
10.  Entry arbors, either freestanding or as part of a fence as provided for in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012; Ord. No. 2015-2401, § 2, 3-3-2015)  
18.42.030 - Accessory structures. 
A.  Conditions. Accessory structures and uses may be developed as permitted in this title, provided they are located on the same lot or parcel of land, and are incidental to and do not substantially alter the character of the principal permitted use. 
B.  Alteration. No accessory structure shall be structurally altered, converted, enlarged or maintained for the purpose of providing a second dwelling units unless such accessory structures are made to conform to all regulations of this title for new structures. 
C.  Westside Specific Plan. Accessory structures in the RS-4 zone shall maintain a three-foot setback from the side lot line and the rear lot line and a minimum of six feet between structures, but shall not be located in the front yard setback required except as provided by this title. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.42.040 - Screening mechanical equipment and elevator housing. 
A.  Standards Applicable to All Zones. 
1.  All mechanical equipment located at ground level shall be enclosed within a permanent noncombustible enclosure subject to the approval of the building official, and subject to all yard and setback regulations. 
2.  All elevator housing and mechanical equipment located on the roof of any building shall be screened from adjacent views and contained within a completely enclosed penthouse or portion of the same building having walls and roofs with construction and appearance similar to the building served by the equipment and other appurtenances. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.42.050 - Commercial and institutional building design standards. 
A.  Applicability. This section provides standards for commercial buildings including retail, service, office, and institutional buildings in any zone where they are permitted. 
B.  Commercial Retail Buildings. 
1.  Large Format Retail or Anchor Stores. 
a.  Ground floor façades that face public streets shall have arcades, pergolas or galleries; display windows, accentuated entries or entry pavilions; awnings; raised planters; or special corner treatments such as towers, turrets, angled corners with parapets, or similar architectural treatments on at least sixty percent of the total façade length. 
b.  Façades greater than one hundred twenty feet in length measured horizontally shall incorporate wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of at least two percent of the length of the façade and extending at least twenty-five percent of the length of the façade. 
c.  A minimum of twenty-five percent transparency (clear vision glass) is required on the ground floor of a large format retail or anchor store. 
2.  Freestanding or "Pad" Buildings. 
a.  Freestanding retail buildings fronting a sidewalk shall be provided with sufficient display windows meeting the transparency requirements identified in subsection (E) below. 
b.  Freestanding retail or "pad" buildings within centers (multi-tenant strip developments) that do not front on a public street shall exhibit a minimum of a fifty percent window to fifty percent wall on at least three building facades. 
3.  Retail Shops/Multi-Tenant Development. 
a.  Buildings facades within a multi-tenant development must provide a repeating pattern that shall include at least one of the following elements at horizontal intervals of no more than thirty feet: 
i.  Color change; 
ii.  Texture change; 
iii.  Material change; or 
iv.  Structural bay expression through a change in plane no less than twelve inches in width such as an offset, reveal, or project rib. 
b.  Retail storefronts set back from a street with parking in front shall provide a minimum sixty percent transparency through the use of clear vision windows and doors when located along a sidewalk, building arcade or gallery. 
c.  Doors and windows mounted flush with the wall surface shall not be used unless in conjunction with an arcade or covered walkway. Doors and windows shall be set back in their wall openings to reveal the thickness of the wall when an arcade or covered walkway is not provided. 
C.  Building Aesthetics and Materials. 
1.  Articulation is required to reduce the mass and scale of large monolithic commercial buildings. Articulation is required on at least three sides of a building's façade by use of color, changes in materials, arrangement of façade elements (such as insets, offsets or varying setbacks, canopies, window recesses, arches, arcades or colonnades, varied roof planes, vertical projections, and fenestration). The service side of a building's façade shall not require the same articulation unless it is visible from an adjacent street, park or open space or residential/residentially-zoned area. 
2.  Any side of an office, commercial and institutional building visible from or adjacent to residential areas or residentially zoned lands shall be treated in the same manner as the street facing façade. 
3.  For buildings that front on a public right-of-way, internal private street or private drive intended to function as a street, the following minimum standards for transparency or clear vision glass are required: 
a.  Ground floor retail: Sixty percent. 
b.  Upper story retail: Forty percent. 
c.  Ground floor office or institutional: Fifty percent. 
d.  Second floor office or institutional: Thirty-five percent. 
4.  Rooflines. 
a.  Both single and multi-tenant buildings shall have variations in the rooflines and roof features that are consistent with the buildings mass and scale. Roofs shall meet at least two of the following requirements: 
i.  Decorative parapets that are a minimum of three feet in height. 
ii.  A three-dimensional cornice treatment a minimum of twelve inches in height. 
iii.  Overhanging eaves that extend at least two feet beyond the building façade. 
iv.  Three or more roof planes. 
v.  Any other treatment that in the opinion of the planning division, meets the intent of this section. 
5.  Exterior facades of new buildings should be constructed of materials which will withstand the abuses of weathering and possible defacing due to vandalism. These materials should be easily maintained and attractive from any distance. In the commercial and mixed-use zones, the exteriors of all buildings or accessory structures shall be constructed of stucco, masonry, architectural concrete masonry units, pre-cast concrete, rock, and/or wood or wood simulated siding; provided, however, that all buildings or structures shall have an integrated color or painted exterior. 
a.  Metal for use as a primary exterior building material is not permitted. The use of metal is permitted only as an accent material and may not exceed ten percent of each building façade face. 
b.  Building fronts shall incorporate and present either a finished parapet or overhang to the street. 
c.  All roof edges shall be finished with facia and/or combination fascia gutter. 
d.  Finished soffits are required. 
e.  The use of decorative materials to enhance the aesthetic appearance of the building or structure shall be required on any portion of the building or structure abutting upon a public street. 
6.  The exterior walls of all buildings or structures constructed within the commercial and mixed-use zones shall be of new material; provided, however, that quality used materials such as rock, red brick, or decorative masonry may be permissible. Other forms of architectural treatment of used materials may be approved by the planning division. 
7.  Color. 
a.  The use of colors on the exterior of a building shall be limited to an appropriate and complementary palette. 
b.  Large areas of intense white color shall be avoided except on rooftops. 
c.  The color palette chosen for a building should be compatible with the colors of adjacent buildings except where existing buildings strongly diverge from these standards. 
d.  Fluorescent or neon colors shall be avoided. 
8.  Accessory structures shall have compatible architectural details, design elements, and roof designs as the primary structure. 
9.  Trash and recycling enclosures. 
a.  Standards are found in Title 7, Section 7.10.080 (Enclosures required). 
b.  Enclosures shall be provided with receptacles for both rubbish and recyclable materials. 
c.  Enclosures shall be constructed with a roof. 
D.  Prohibited Exterior Wall Materials. The following materials are prohibited as a primary exterior wall material: 
1.  Unfinished concrete and concrete block, except split-face concrete block or slump block. 
2.  Corrugated metal, standing seam metal, or other metal wall materials. 
3.  Reflective mirror-type glass. 
4.  Plywood, including T-11 or similar wood products. 
5.  Imitation "rock work" veneer. 
6.  Corrugated fiberglass. 
7.  Asphalt shingles. 
8.  Plastic or plastic laminates. 
E.  Prohibited Roofing Materials. The following materials are prohibited for use as a roofing material: 
1.  Corrugated metal. 
2.  High contrast or brightly colored glazed tile, except where desirable for accent purposes. 
3.  Highly reflective surfaces. 
4.  Aluminum sheet metal. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.42.060 - Industrial building design standards. 
A.  Building Aesthetics and Materials. 
1.  Long unbroken building facades shall be avoided. Facades with varied front setbacks shall be required. 
2.  Warehouses shall avoid blank front and exterior side wall elevations on street frontages through the use of building indentations and architectural details. 
3.  Building entrances to industrial use buildings shall be enhanced with architectural elements and landscaping for emphasis. 
4.  Materials. 
a.  All buildings and structures shall be constructed of metal, stucco, masonry, architectural concrete masonry units, pre-cast concrete, rock, and/or wood or wood simulated siding, and shall have an integrated color or painted exterior. 
b.  Thirty percent, including doors, of the gross area, to a twelve-foot height, of any building or structure abutting on the front or exterior side yard of a lot shall be constructed of, or surfaced with, glass, stone, wood, brick, and/or decorative masonry as architectural treatment to increase the aesthetic appearance of the building. On a corner lot, if the treatment required on the exterior side yard is concentrated on the corner of the building or structure and is located nearest the corner of the intersecting streets, the percentage of required area for decorative purposes may be reduced on the exterior side yard to ten percent. 
c.  Where the end use of any building or structure prohibits the use of decorative materials in either the front or exterior side of any building or structure or it is not economically feasible to use decorative materials, a color combination of the exterior surface of integrated or painted finish may be permitted, subject to site plan review. 
d.  The exterior walls of all buildings or structures in the industrial zones shall be of new material; provided, however, that quality used materials such as rock, red brick, or decorative masonry may be permissible. Other forms of architectural treatment of used materials may be approved by the planning division. 
e.  Metal buildings shall have the architectural appearance of conventionally built structures and an exterior surface that includes stucco, plaster, glass, stone, wood, brick, decorative masonry, or wood sheathing. 
5.  Trash and recycling enclosures. 
a.  Standards are found in Title 7, Section 7.10.080 (Enclosures required). 
b.  Enclosures shall be provided with receptacles for both rubbish and recyclable materials. 
c.  Enclosures shall be constructed with a roof. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.42.070 - Residential building design standards. 
A.  Multi-Unit Residential Building Design Standards. 
1.  The exterior design, height, and bulk of multi-unit projects should not negatively impact adjacent lower density residential areas. 
2.  Façade and Roof Articulation. A structure with three or more attached units should incorporate wall and roof articulation to reduce apparent scale. Changes in wall planes and roof heights, and elements such as balconies, porches, arcades, dormers, and cross gables can avoid a barracks-like quality. Long flat walls and roofs shall be avoided. Secondary hipped or gabled roofs covering the entire mass of a building are preferred. 
3.  Scale. Because multi-unit projects are usually taller than one story, their bulk can be imposing on surrounding uses. Structures with greater height may require additional setbacks at the ground floor level and/or upper levels. 
4.  Balconies Porches or Patios as Part of Multi-unit Structures are Required. These elements shall be used to break up large wall masses, offset floor setbacks, and add human scale to structures, and increase neighborhood safety by providing opportunities for "eyes on the street." Individual unit entrances within a multi-unit project shall have individual covered porches. 
5.  Trash and Recycling Enclosures. 
a.  Standards are found in Title 7, Section 7.10.080 (Enclosures required). 
b.  Enclosures shall be provided with receptacles for both rubbish and recyclable materials. 
c.  Enclosures shall be constructed with a roof. 
6.  Laundry Facilities. For multi-unit residential projects containing nine units or more that do not provide a washer and dryer for each unit, the following laundry facilities shall be provided: one washer and one dryer for each twenty dwelling units. The minimum requirement shall be one washer plus one dryer for multi-unit residential projects containing nine to twenty dwelling units. 
7.  Storage Space. In all multi-unit residential projects, a storage space of not less than one hundred fifty cubic feet for each unit plus fifty cubic feet for each additional bedroom more than one. The cubic feet utilized by mechanical equipment (e.g., water heater, furnace, etc.) may not be included in the cubic footage requirement. A bedroom closet shall not be included in the cubic footage requirement. 
B.  Mobile Homes/Factory-Built Housing. 
1.  Definition. Factory-built housing includes modular housing and residential structures certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 and as defined in 798.3 of the Civil Code. All factory-built housing and the lot on which it is placed shall comply with all applicable provisions of Title 18 of the National City Municipal Code and the Design Guidelines. 
2.  Eligibility. A mobile home shall not be located on a permanent foundation, on a private lot, unless it: 
a.  Was constructed after September 15, 1971, and was issued an insignia of approval by the California Department of Housing and Community Development or was constructed after July 1, 1976, and was issued an insignia of approval by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development; and 
b.  Has not been altered in violation of applicable codes. 
3.  Criteria. Mobile homes placed on a permanent foundation system, on a private lot, shall: 
a.  Be occupied only as a residential use type; 
b.  Meet all requirements for the zone in which located; 
c.  Be attached to a foundation system in compliance with all applicable building regulations and Section 18551 of the Health and Safety Code; 
d.  Have a minimum width of twenty feet; 
e.  Be covered with an exterior material customarily used on conventional dwellings and approved by the planning division pursuant to site plan review. The exterior covering material shall extend to the ground, except that when a solid concrete or masonry perimeter foundation is used, the exterior covering material need not extend below the top of the foundation; 
f.  Have a roof consisting of shingles or other material customarily used on conventional dwellings; 
g.  A mobile home may be required to have a porch, eaves or roof with eaves when it is determined, pursuant to site plan review, it is necessary to have it compatible with the dwellings in the area. 
4.  Foundation System. The most recently adopted California Building Code specifies regulations for the mobile home foundation system. These regulations provide: 
a.  Foundation system definition. A "foundation system" is an assembly of material constructed below, or partly below grade, not intended to be removed from its installation site, which is designed to support the structure and engineered to resist the imposition of external natural forces; 
b.  That mobile home foundation systems be designed in accordance with the provisions of the most recently adopted California Building Code, and local soil conditions. Design conditions for roof, wind, and seismic loads applicable to permanent building foundations shall be applicable to the mobile home foundation system; 
c.  The mobile home shall be installed in accordance with installation instructions provided by: 
d.  The manufacturer of the mobile home; or 
e.  A California-licensed architect or engineer for an individual mobile home where manufacturer's installation instructions are not available; 
f.  That both the foundation system and connection of the mobile home to the foundation system shall be capable of withstanding the design loads and concentrated loads identified in the installation instructions; 
g.  A foundation system plan shall be provided in addition to the installation instructions. The foundation system plan may be: 
i.  Provided by the mobile home manufacturer either as a part of, or separate from, the installation instructions; 
ii.  Provided by the installation contractor; 
iii.  Required to be signed by a California-licensed architect or engineer; 
iv.  A foundation system plan approved by the California Department of Housing and Community Development will be accepted. 
5.  Utility Connections. The mobile home electrical, gas, water and drain connections shall be made permanent in a manner applicable to permanent buildings. Gas shut-off valves, meters and regulators shall not be located beneath the mobile homes. 
6.  Surrender of Registration. Prior to occupancy, the owner shall request a certification from the planning division that a certificate of occupancy be issued pursuant to Section 18551(b)(2) of the California Health and Safety Code. Thereafter, for an existing mobile home, any vehicle license plate, certificate of ownership and certificate of registration issued by a state agency is to be surrendered to the appropriate state agencies. 
7.  Park and School Fees. Mobile homes placed on a permanent foundation shall be subject to local park and school fees in the same manner as conventional single-family dwellings. 
8.  Modification of Criteria. Modification of the criteria set forth in this section may be granted by the planning division if the site plan review finds that such modification will not be detrimental to the public interest or surrounding residents or properties. No such modification may be granted from Subsections (3)a, (3)b, and (3)c of this section. 
9.  Additions. Additions to a mobile home placed on a permanent foundation shall be made in accordance with all applicable laws, codes, and ordinances enforced by the city, and installation instructions provided by (site plan review required): 
a.  The manufacturer of the mobile home; or 
b.  A California-licensed architect or engineer; or 
c.  A building addition plan approved by the California Department of Housing and Community Development. 
C.  Single-family Infill Standards. 
1.  Architectural Considerations. 
a.  New single-family projects should incorporate the distinctive architectural characteristics of surrounding development, for example: window and door detailing, decoration, materials, roof style and pitch, finished-floor height, porches, bay windows, dormers, chimneys, balconies, shutters, decorative molding, and similar architectural details. 
b.  Rooflines of building additions shall be constructed to integrate the addition with the existing building. Contrasting rooflines which emphasize the separate construction of the addition, such as shed roofs extending from the wall of a structure with a hip or gable roof are prohibited. 
c.  Exterior materials, window details, and colors of building additions should match those of existing structures. 
d.  Roof pitches in common use in the residential neighborhood are gable and hip. New residential construction and additions should incorporate roofs which are compatible with the existing neighborhood style. Minimize the use of flat roofs unless the surrounding context suggests their use, or the structure being added on to has a flat roof. 
e.  Walls should be of either wood or simulated wood clapboard or stucco where the style and context would allow it. Brick or stone is recommended as an accent material. Clay tile is also a very suitable material for roofs and accents, but very shiny glazed roof tile should be avoided. 
f.  If concrete block is used for exterior wall construction, it shall receive a finish coat of stucco. 
g.  While two-story construction is considered acceptable in single-story neighborhoods, the structure should incorporate both vertical and horizontal variations in the wall planes in order to reduce the overall bulk of the project and develop a smaller scale to be compatible with adjacent single story structures. 
h.  The use of any roof mounted equipment is highly discouraged for single-family units. If alternatives are not feasible, equipment must be screened from view in a manner which blends with the architectural style of the house, including use of materials and colors. 
2.  Site Design Considerations. 
a.  New development should continue the functional, on-site relationships of the surrounding neighborhood. For example, in many older neighborhoods, common patterns that should be continued are entries facing the street, front porches, and parking at the rear. 
b.  Front setbacks for new single-family development in existing neighborhoods should be either: 
i.  Equal to the average setback of all residences and buildings on both sides of public streets within one hundred feet of the property lines of the new project or 
ii.  Equal to the average of the two immediate adjacent buildings. 
c.  In cases where averaging between two adjacent existing buildings is chosen, the new building may be averaged in a stepping pattern. 
d.  Side yard setbacks in the neighborhood create a certain rhythm along the street. New projects or additions should be respectful of the open space pattern created by these setbacks. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
Chapter 18.43 - FENCES AND WALLS 
 
18.43.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations for fences and walls. The intent is to enhance the aesthetic appearance of property by providing standards relating to the quality of design materials; to create buffers between different land uses; and to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.43.020 - Screening requirements. 
A.  Between Land Uses. 
1.  Where the side or rear setback of a commercial or industrial use abuts a residential zone, those side or rear setbacks of the commercial or industrial use shall be screened from the residential zone by an opaque fence or wall with a minimum six feet and a maximum height not to exceed eight feet. 
2.  Where the side or rear setback of a multi-family residential use abuts a single-family residential zone, those side or rear setbacks of the multi-family residential use shall be screened from the single-family residential zone by and opaque fence or wall with a minimum six feet and a maximum height not to exceed eight feet. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.43.030 - Parking lots. 
A.  Screening. 
1.  Parking lots shall be screened from adjacent residential zones and adjacent streets with a five- to six-foot-high fence or wall within a five-foot-wide landscape buffer. 
2.  The screening requirements for parking lots may be waived when the parking lot serves the structure or use to which the parking is accessory. 
3.  Required screening shall be continuous, broken only for access driveways and walkways. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.43.040 - Materials, construction, and maintenance. 
A.  Fences and Walls. 
1.  All fences and walls shall be constructed of new or good used material, and all fences and walls shall be kept in good repair and adequately maintained. Any dilapidated, dangerous, or unsightly fences or walls shall be removed, unless otherwise required, or repaired. 
2.  All masonry walls shall conform to the requirements of the California Building Code. All masonry walls require a building permit. 
3.  Wood fencing must be constructed using pressure-treated wood posts set in concrete footings. 
4.  Vinyl fencing is permitted. 
5.  Chain Link Fences. Chain link fencing of minimum nine-gauge wire and three and one-half inch by five inch mesh with two and one-half inch by five-sixteenths inch redwood slats may be used in screening residential or industrial areas. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.43.050 - Maximum height. 
A.  Fences and Walls. 
1.  Fences and walls not exceeding eight feet in height and hedges may be located in setback areas; provided, that if located in any front setback or exterior side setback of any corner lot, they shall not exceed four feet in height, except that a residentially developed property in a residential zone may have a fence, wall or hedge not exceeding six feet in height within the exterior side setback of a corner lot. 
2.  Fences, walls and hedges over four feet in height shall not be permitted in the rear setback area of a reversed corner lot where such reverse corner lot abuts a front setback of the key lot at the rear. 
3.  The height of retaining walls contributes to the allowable height of fences and walls; provided, that within interior side setbacks and rear setbacks, the required height of screens or protective fences shall not be inhibited by the height of a retaining wall. The height of such protective fences shall be measured from the top of the retaining wall above or upon which the protective fence is placed. 
4.  Masonry walls shall not exceed a height of eight feet. Masonry walls that include a retaining wall shall not exceed a maximum height of six feet for the masonry wall and two feet eight inches for the retaining wall. 
5.  Up to thirty percent of the length of a fence may exceed the height limits specified in this section by up to six inches. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.43.060 - Prohibited fences. 
A.  Materials. 
1.  The use of barbed wire, electrified fence, concertina or razor wire fence in conjunction with any fence, wall, or hedge, or by itself within any zoning district, is prohibited in residential and commercial zones unless required by law or regulation of the city, the state, or the federal government. 
2.  The use of barbed wire above six feet in height is only allowed in industrial zones except for front and exterior side yards. 
3.  In the Westside Specific Plan area, the use of chain link, barbed wire and razor wire fencing shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.43.070 - Entry arbors. 
A.  Requirements. Arbors may be placed freestanding, or at entrances along fences within required front and exterior side setbacks, subject to the following standards: 
1.  The height of the arbor shall not exceed ten feet. 
2.  The width of the arbor shall not exceed six feet between centerlines of the supports. 
3.  A maximum two-foot overhang is permitted on each side of the center of the supports. 
4.  The depth of the arbor shall be no more than two feet six inches. 
5.  A minimum six-foot eight-inch vertical clearance above grade is required. 
6.  Supports shall not exceed six inches by six inches (horizontal dimensions). 
7.  The arbor shall not be enclosed on any side other than where attached to a building or by an entry gate that is part of an allowed fence. 
8.  Arbors may encroach into the entire width of the required front or exterior side setback. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.43.080 - Openings in view-obscuring fences. 
A.  When Allowed. 
1.  With the approval of a site plan, the planning division may allow view-obscuring fences to have visual openings, for security surveillance. Such openings shall not exceed twenty-four inches in width and the aggregate of openings shall not exceed fifteen percent of the linear length of the fence along any side of an enclosed area. 
2.  Upon recommendation of the chief of police, the planning division or building division may require that security openings be provided in view-obscuring fences constructed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.43.090 - Special fences. 
A.  Conditions and Restrictions. Special fences are subject to review and approval by the planning division. Staff may impose reasonable conditions or restrictions including, but not limited to, neighbor notification, setbacks and landscape screening as staff deems necessary to secure the purpose of this title and to assure compatibility of the special fence with adjoining properties and those in the general vicinity, and may require guarantees and evidence that such conditions are being, or will be, complied with. 
B.  Types. Special fences include, but are not limited to the following: 
1.  Recreation Area Fence. Fences not to exceed twelve feet in height may be located near or around tennis courts, badminton courts, batting cages, golf courses/driving ranges, basketball or volleyball courts and similar play areas, providing that all parts of the fence over six feet are made of open-wire construction or other corrosion-resistant material; 
2.  Security Fences. Fences not to exceed eight feet in height may be located near and around industrial, industrial or research uses where required for security purposes, screening, or containing and protecting hazardous materials; 
3.  Swimming Pool Fences. Fences required for swimming pools are governed by Chapter 15.40 of the Municipal Code. Swimming pool fences are subject to building official approval. 
4.  Wood fence posts greater than eight inches in width or depth; 
5.  Front yard fence posts with more than two attached lights. In no event shall such posts exceed four feet in height plus a two-foot-high light fixture; 
6.  Chain link fencing in residential areas is permitted in the side and rear yards with vinyl-coating and landscape screening. Chain link fencing shall not exceed six feet in height in these areas. Chain link fencing in front yards in residential areas is not permitted; 
7.  Gates exceeding four feet in width for pedestrian use or fourteen feet in width for driveway use; 
8.  Other structures which in the opinion of the review authority are of a similar nature. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.43.100 - Traffic visibility triangles. 
A.  Sight Requirements. 
1.  Also known as a "sight visibility triangle," each corner or reversed corner lot in the commercial and industrial zones shall maintain a yard area conforming to the traffic visibility triangle requirements as defined in Table 18.43.100, except that a single supporting column, for a cantilevered roof or second story, having a diameter of eight inches or less may be located in the triangle area. 
2.  A visibility triangle is the area encompassed by the triangle formed by projecting lines of a specified distance from the point of intersection of the front and side street edges of pavement and a straight line connecting the termini of said projected lines. Within the area comprising the triangle, no tree, fence, wall, shrub, or other physical obstruction higher than three feet above the official grade lot line grade shall be permitted. 
3.  The following traffic visibility triangles shall be established for the following intersection types as identified in Table 18.43.100 below: 
TABLE 18.43.100 
Traffic Visibility Triangles 
Classification of Intersection Types 	Distance Measurements from Point of Intersection of Front and Side Lot Lines 
Driveway or Alley with any street 	As provided by Caltrans 
and AASHTO stopping sight distance criteria 
Local — Local 	25' 
Local — Collector 	25' 
Driveway — Collector or Arterial Street 	30' 
Collector — Arterial 	30' 
Arterial — Arterial 	30' 
 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
Chapter 18.44 - LANDSCAPING 
 
18.44.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide property owners with standards in landscaping their properties. These standards will be used by the planning division, planning commission, and city council when reviewing plans for landscaped areas. These standards are also intended to provide direction for the design, installation, and maintenance of water efficient landscaping as directed by California state law. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.44.020 - Applicability. 
These standards shall be used when preparing landscape and irrigation plans for all multi-family residential, commercial, industrial, and institutional projects. Projects with a total landscaped area of five hundred square feet or less, private yard areas for single-family dwellings, and registered historic sites shall be exempt from requirements for water efficiency identified in this chapter. These standards shall not apply to revegetation plans that will be reviewed individually by staff and all appropriate state and federal agencies. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.44.030 - Definitions. 
A.  Definitions Used in this Chapter. 
1.  "Landscaping" means the use of architectural and horticultural materials to provide control of erosion, dust, weeds, and accumulation of litter in a manner complementary to the purpose of adding natural environmental quality to the premises. "Landscaping" includes the planting and maintenance of some combination of trees, shrubs, ground cover, vines, flowers, lawns or other planting materials, other than weeds, providing shade, visual screening, aesthetic enhancement, soil conservation, and the removal or reduction of fire hazards, rodent harborages, vermin, and disease-bearing creatures. In addition, the combination or design may include natural features such as rock and stone and structural features such as pools, artwork, screens, walls, fences, and benches. See also "fence," defined in the glossary, and "screening," defined in the glossary. 
2.  "Landscaping maintenance" includes sufficient irrigation, fertilization, pruning, trimming and training, and all other reasonable acts necessary to keep plants in a healthy vigorous condition. "Maintenance" also includes removal of weeds, dead materials and accumulated litter, rubble or other foreign substances; and reseeding, and replacement of dead plants and planting where necessary to restore a landscaped area to the level of coverage required of a new installation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.44.040 - Landscape plan. 
A.  Requirements. A detailed landscape plan shall be submitted as part of a site plan review. The landscape plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following items: 
1.  The landscape plan shall be drawn at the same scale as the plot or site plan or at a minimum scale of one inch to twenty feet. 
2.  The landscape plan shall locate and identify existing and proposed buildings, walls, fences, walks, drives, utilities, etc. 
3.  Proposed plant location, spacing, size, species (common and botanical name). 
4.  Existing and proposed contours on-site and one hundred feet beyond the site at intervals not to exceed two feet. 
5.  Height and type of construction of wall or fence, including footings. 
6.  Provide the types and amounts of soil amendments (additives mixed with the soil) used per one thousand square feet. 
7.  Significant site details to resolve specific site conditions, such as tree wells to preserve existing trees or culverts to maintain existing natural drainage patterns. 
8.  Planting and staking details in drawing form to ensure proper installation and establishment of proposed materials. 
9.  Identification of existing trees proposed to be saved including individual tree caliper size and species. Clearly reference on the plan the total number of trees proposed to be preserved, caliper of tree saved, and number of trees requested for credit consideration. 
10.  Identification of tree protection method for trees proposed to be preserved. 
11.  Identification of existing trees over two and one-half inch caliper proposed to be removed. 
12.  Identification of grass and other groundcover or proposed seed mix and the amount in pounds to be used per one thousand square feet and method of planting. 
13.  Prepare calculations for the total number of parking spaces and number of parking lot shade canopy trees required to be placed within the interior of the parking area. 
14.  Prepare calculations for the square footage of the twenty percent landscape area requirement. The twenty percent required landscape area shall be clearly denoted on the landscape plan. 
15.  For sites with existing buildings and parking that are proposed for expansion, label the net percent increase and calculated landscape requirement. 
16.  An irrigation and planting plan shall be submitted that meets the requirements of the water efficient landscape regulations of this chapter. 
17.  Each landscape plan shall be prepared by a California licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, certified nurseryman, or other professional determined by the city to be qualified. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.44.050 - Requirements. 
A.  General. 
1.  Where on-site landscaping is required by this chapter as part of a project, all landscaping work shall be included in such permit. Such landscaping shall not be considered complete until approved by the planning division. 
2.  Notwithstanding other provisions of this title requiring on-site landscaping, all buildings erected hereafter shall have the surrounding courts, yard areas, open-space areas, and public street parkways, that are otherwise unimproved, landscaped in accordance with Section 18.54.030. This shall include centrally controlled mechanical irrigation systems. 
3.  New single-family and two-family residences shall be landscaped with a minimum of: 
a.  Complete landscaping of all slopes steeper than 3:1; 
b.  Turf or suitable ground cover on all other ground area lying between the curb, or edge of roadway, within adjoining streets and the rear line of the rearmost main building and the area between the main building and the rear property line on reversed corner lots; 
c.  This required landscaping shall include irrigation systems meeting the guidelines of this chapter. All street parkways and slopes more than three feet in height shall have permanent centrally controlled mechanical irrigation systems. 
4.  All street parkways and slopes more than three feet in height shall have permanent centrally controlled mechanical irrigation systems. 
5.  Street trees shall be installed within the parkway of public streets at a ratio of one per thirty linear feet of frontage and may not interfere with effective street lighting. Tree selection and tree location shall be approved by the planning division. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.44.060 - Plant materials. 
A.  Requirements. 
1.  Landscaping shall include a variety of trees, shrubs, and groundcover. 
2.  Plant materials shall conform to or exceed the plant quality standards of the latest edition of American Standard for Nursery Stock published by the American Association of Nurserymen, or the equivalent. 
3.  Plant materials shall be sized and spaced to achieve immediate effect and shall not be less than a fifteen-gallon container for trees, five-gallon container for specimen shrubs, and six-inch pots for mass planting, unless otherwise approved by the regulating authority. 
4.  Plant materials shall be selected for low water demand and drought tolerance; use of appropriate native species; adaptability to the National City environment; the geological and topographical conditions of the site; ability to provide shade; and, soil retention capability. 
5.  Plants having similar water use shall be grouped together in distinct hydrozones. 
6.  Deciduous trees shall be used to shade buildings and parking lots in summer and allow for passive solar heating of buildings in winter. 
7.  Street trees shall be planted at a rate of one tree for every thirty linear feet of right-of-way. The review authority may modify this requirement depending on the chosen tree species and its typical spread at maturity. 
8.  Shrubs. A minimum of two five-gallon shrubs shall be provided for every six feet of distance along street frontages. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.44.070 - Turf lawn. 
A.  Restrictions. 
1.  Turf lawn is the landscape element which requires the most water and maintenance; therefore, the use of turf must be limited to functional areas such as playgrounds, entertainment areas, picnic areas, employee areas, play areas, etc. 
2.  Turf shall not exceed twenty percent of the total landscaped area. Decorative cool season turf shall not exceed fifteen percent of the landscaped area. 
3.  Turf shall not be used in parking lot islands or strips. 
4.  Turf may not be planted in areas with a width of less than six feet. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.44.080 - Soils and mulching. 
A.  Requirements. 
1.  A minimum of one foot depth of uncompacted soil shall be provided for water absorption and root growth in each planted area. 
2.  Soil shall be prepared and/or amended to be suitable for the landscaping to be installed. 
3.  A minimum of two to three inches of mulch such as ground bark or other composted organic material shall be added in each non-turf area to the soil surface after planting. Any plant type that is intolerant to mulch shall be excluded from this requirement. 
4.  If a weed control barrier is needed, only porous fabrics shall be used under mulches. 
5.  Gravel or crushed rock for use as mulching is not permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.44.090 - Miniumum percentage of net lot area to be landscaped. 
The minimum area of each site to be landscaped with trees, shrubs, groundcover, or turf lawn shall be twenty percent of the net site area, except for a reduction approved by the city manager or his/her designee due to lot size, sites with existing development, or for lots with zero setback requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.44.100 - Statuary structures and other lawn art. 
Statuary structures and other lawn art shall be limited to a maximum of three structures and shall not exceed four feet in height and two feet in depth unless otherwise determined by the planning division. Staff may impose reasonable conditions or restrictions including, but not limited to, neighbor notification, setbacks and landscape screening as staff deems necessary to secure the purpose of this title and to assure compatibility of the statuary structures and other lawn art with adjoining properties and those in the general vicinity, and may require guarantees and evidence that such conditions are being, or will be, complied with. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.44.110 - Landscape location requirements. 
A.  Provisions. Landscaping shall be provided in all areas of a site subject to development with structures, grading, or the removal of natural vegetation, as follows: 
1.  Setbacks. The setback and open space areas required by this Land Use Code, and easements for utilities and drainage courses shall be landscaped except where: 
a.  Occupied by approved structures; 
b.  Occupied by required paved areas; 
c.  A required single-family dwelling residential setback is screened from public view; or 
d.  They are retained in their natural state, and the review authority determines that landscaping is not necessary to achieve the purposes of this chapter. 
2.  Unused Areas. Any area of a project site not intended for a specific use, including a commercial pad site intended for future development, shall be landscaped unless retained in the natural state, and the review authority determines that landscaping is not necessary to achieve the purposes of this chapter. 
3.  Areas Adjacent to Side or Rear Property Lines. A parking area for a nonresidential use or multi-unit residential project shall provide a perimeter landscape strip at least eight feet wide where the parking area adjoins a side or rear property line. The requirement for a landscape strip may be satisfied by a setback or buffer area that is otherwise required to be eight feet or greater. Trees shall be provided within the landscape strip at the rate of one for each thirty linear feet of landscaped area. 
4.  Areas Adjacent to Buildings. When a parking area is located adjacent to a nonresidential structure, a minimum eight-foot-wide landscape strip shall be provided adjacent to the structure, exclusive of any building entries, or areas immediately adjacent to the wall of the structure that serves as pedestrian accessways. Landscape strips shall be planted with a combination of canopy trees, ornamental trees, shrubs, perennials, ornamental grasses, and groundcover. 
5.  Areas Adjacent to Residential Use. A parking area for a nonresidential use or multi-unit residential project adjoining a residential use in an RS zone shall provide a landscaped buffer with a minimum ten-foot width between the parking area and the common property line bordering the residential use. A solid, continuous decorative masonry wall or fence and landscape buffer shall be provided along the property line, except for approved access points, to address land use compatibility issues (e.g., nuisance noise and light/glare), as determined by the review authority to be necessary. Trees shall be provided at the rate of one for each thirty linear feet of landscaped area. 
6.  Parking Lot Landscape Requirements. 
a.  A minimum of one shade canopy tree shall be required for every seven parking spaces in a parking lot for all zones. 
b.  All of the required parking lot trees shall be placed within the parking lot envelope, described as the area including the parking lot surface and extending a minimum of eight to ten feet from the edge of the parking lot. 
c.  Landscape areas within the parking lot island shall be planted with a combination of required canopy trees, ornamental trees, shrubs, perennials, ornamental grasses, and groundcover. 
d.  A minimum of two-thirds of the required trees shall be placed within the interior of the parking area. A maximum of one-third may be placed within the ten-foot landscape area that surrounds a parking lot. 
e.  A parking area for a nonresidential use adjacent to a public street shall be designed to provide a minimum ten-foot-wide landscape planting strip between the street right-of-way and the parking lot. 
f.  A parking area for a residential use except for dwelling or duplex, shall be designed to provide a landscaped planting strip between the street right-of-way and parking area equal in depth to the setback required by the applicable zoning district. 
g.  The landscaping shall be designed and maintained to screen vehicles from view from the street to a minimum height of three feet, but shall not exceed any applicable height limit for landscaping within a setback or traffic visibility triangle. Screening materials may include a combination of plant materials, earth berms, solid decorative masonry walls, raised planters, or other screening devices which meet the intent of this requirement. 
h.  All landscaping including canopy tree placement shall be dispersed throughout the parking lot in order to balance and soften the large areas of pavement and help direct traffic flow within the lot. 
i.  A permanent underground irrigation system shall be provided for all landscaped areas. 
7.  Paved Areas. Paving within the required front and exterior setbacks in the residential zones is prohibited, except for driveways, walkways, and porches approved through site plan review or as part of a landscaping plan 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.44.120 - Tree preservation. 
A.  Site Plan Requirements, Maintenance, and Credits. 
1.  All trees over eight inches caliper shall be identified on the site plan and landscape plan with notations of trees to be preserved and trees to be removed. 
2.  Trees intended to be preserved shall be noted with a unique symbol on the site plan and be protected during construction through the use of construction fencing at or beyond the drip line of the tree or trees to be preserved. 
3.  Trees to be preserved shall be considered for credit only if they are located on the developed portion of the site. To obtain credit consideration, the preserved trees shall be of a high quality and at least two and one-half inches caliper. 
4.  The following credits will be considered for high quality trees that are preserved: 
a.  Two and one-half to 7.99 inches: One tree. 
b.  Eight inches to 11.99 inches: Two trees. 
c.  Twelve inches and over: Three trees. 
5.  To protect and encourage the continued health and vitality of the preserved trees, the ground within the drip line shall be maintained in the existing natural state. Storage of soils, construction equipment or other materials during or after construction within the tree dripline is prohibited. 
6.  If preserved trees die within three years after construction, the property owner shall replace with the number of trees that would have been required had the tree preservation credit not been provided. Said trees shall be replaced within thirty days of written notice from the city or within an extended time period as specified in said notice. 
7.  The minimum number of required trees shall not be reduced by less than fifty percent through the use of approved tree credits, unless the planning commission determines that during the site plan review existing vegetation intended to be preserved would provide adequate landscaping, shading, buffering or screening comparable to that required under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.44.130 - Landscaping work included in building permit inspections. 
Where on-site landscaping is required by this title as part of a project for which a building permit is also required, all landscaping work shall be included in such permit. Such landscaping shall not be considered complete until inspected, certified for compliance, and approved by the planning division. The city fire department is authorized to annually inspect all properties for adequacy of landscaping maintenance as a part of its annual weed abatement program. Conditions of inadequate landscaping maintenance that cannot be abated pursuant to the weed abatement provisions of the California Health and Safety Code, which nonetheless constitute unsightly or otherwise detrimental conditions, shall be reported to code enforcement for enforcement under this title. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.44.140 - Traffic visibility triangle. 
Refer to Table 18.43.100, Traffic Visibility Triangle, for regulations on landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.44.150 - Maintenance required. 
A.  Property Owner Responsibilities. 
1.  It shall be the responsibility of each property owner to adequately maintain the landscaping of private property and the adjoining public street parkway landscaped, except street trees. All landscaping shall be properly maintained. Trees located within public street parkways will be pruned and trimmed by city forces and not by private property owners. 
2.  All trees, shrubs, plants, and other landscaping of parking lots, including interior landscaped areas, setbacks, and parkways shall be periodically and systematically watered, weeded, fertilized, and maintained in a healthy, growing condition. Dead growth should be promptly replaced so as to maintain the designed planting scheme. 
3.  Landscaping—Pruning or Trimming. All growth in landscaped areas should be controlled by pruning, trimming or otherwise so that: 
a.  It will not interfere with the maintenance or repair of any public utility; 
b.  It will not restrict pedestrian or vehicular access; 
c.  It will not constitute a traffic hazard because of reduced visibility. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.44.160 - Certain trees a public nuisance. 
Any tree or shrub growing or standing on private property in such a manner that any portion thereof interferes with utility poles, lines, wires or electroliers lawfully erected, constructed or maintained along any public street, sidewalk, or intersection or with any person or persons lawfully using the same, or any such tree which has become diseased or weakened in such a manner as to be dangerous to persons lawfully using the streets or sidewalks, or any such tree which has roots that pose a hazard to pedestrians using a sidewalk constitutes a public nuisance. The public works department shall cause notice to be served upon such property owner directing that such public nuisance be abated or removed within seven days after said notice is served. The public works department is authorized to abate or cause to be abated such public nuisance by trimming, pruning, cutting or removing all or such portion of such tree, shrub or plant as may be necessary to eliminate such interference, obstruction or condition. Whenever it is necessary for the public works department to direct the use of city employees to abate, remove, or cause to be abated or removed, public nuisances as contained in this section, he/she shall determine the cost of the work performed by city employees and bill the property owner the cost of the work performed. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.44.170 - Nonconforming landscaping. 
All properties, now landscaped, which are inadequately maintained shall be brought into compliance with this chapter upon not less than ninety days' from the date of a written notice from the city. All properties not now landscaped shall be landscaped whenever a building permit for structures valued ten thousand dollars or more is issued for the site. All other properties or portions of properties, not landscaped shall be kept free of rubbish, litter, debris, unused merchandise, unused building materials, machinery or vehicular paraphernalia not essential to the occupancy of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.44.180 - Public utilities. 
No species of trees or large shrubs shall be planted under overhead lines or over underground utilities if its growth might interfere with the installation or maintenance of any public utilities. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.44.190 - Water efficient landscape regulations. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide property owners with standards in landscaping their properties. These standards will be used by the planning division, planning commission, and director or parks and recreation when reviewing plans for landscaped areas. These standards are also intended to provide direction for the design, installation, and maintenance of water efficient landscaping as directed by California state law. 
1.  Promote the values and benefits of landscapes while recognizing the need to utilize water and other resources as efficiently as possible. 
2.  Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, maintaining, and managing water efficient landscapes. 
3.  Promote the use, when available, of tertiary treated recycled water, for irrigating landscaping. 
4.  Use water efficiently without waste by setting a maximum applied water allowance (MAWA) as an upper limit for water use and reduce water use to the lowest practical amount. 
5.  Encourage water users of existing landscapes to use water efficiently and without waste. 
B.  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this section: 
1.  "Automatic irrigation controller" means an automatic timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system. Automatic irrigation controllers shall schedule irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (ETo) (weather-based) or moisture sensor data. 
2.  "Building permit" means a permit to engage in a certain type of construction at a specific location. 
3.  "Certified landscape irrigation auditor" means a person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization, or other accredited certification program. 
4.  "Developer" means a person who seeks or receives permits for or who undertakes land development activities who is not a single-family homeowner. Developer includes a developer's partner, associate, employee, consultant, trustee, or agent. 
5.  "Director" means the development services director or anyone to whom the director has designated or hired to administer or enforce this section. 
6.  "Discretionary permit" means any permit requiring a decision-making body to exercise judgment prior to its approval, conditional approval, or denial. 
7.  "Estimated total water use" (ETWU) means the estimated total water use in gallons per year for a landscaped area. 
8.  "ET adjustment factor" (ETAF) means a factor that when applied to reference ETo, adjusts for plant water requirements and irrigation efficiency, two major influences on the amount of water that is required for a healthy landscape. 
9.  "Evapotranspiration" (ETo) means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces, and transpired by plants during a specified time period. 
10.  "Reference evapotranspiration" means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is given in inches per day, month, or year and is an estimate of the ETo of a large field of four inches to seven inches tall, cool season turf that is well watered. Reference ETo is used as the basis of determining the MAWA so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated. 
11.  "Grading" means any importation, excavation, movement, loosening, or compaction of soil or rock. 
12.  "Hardscape" means any durable surface material, pervious, or non-pervious. 
13.  "Homeowner-provided landscaping" means landscaping installed either by a private individual for a single-family residence or installed by a California licensed contractor hired by a homeowner. 
14.  "Hydrozone" means a portion of the landscape area having plants with similar water needs. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated. 
15.  "Invasive plant species" means species of plants not historically found in California that spread outside cultivated areas and may damage environmental or economic resources. 
16.  "Irrigation audit" includes an in depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. An irrigation audit may include, but is not limited to, inspection, system tune up, system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule. 
17.  "Irrigation efficiency" means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. 
18.  "Landscaped area" means an area with outdoor plants, turf, and other vegetation. A landscaped area may include a water feature either in an area with vegetation or that stands alone. A landscaped area may also include design features adjacent to an area with vegetation. A landscaped area does not include the footprint of a building, decks, patio, sidewalk, driveway, parking lot, or other hardscape. A landscaped area also does not include an area without irrigation designated for non-development such as designated open space or area with existing native vegetation and areas dedicated for food production. 
19.  "Landscape manual" means the Water Efficient Landscape Design Manual, approved by the City of National City that establishes specific design criteria and guidance to implement the requirements of this section. 
20.  "Low head drainage" means a sprinkler head or other irrigation device that continues to emit water after the water to the zone in which the device is located has shut off. 
21.  "Low volume irrigation" means the application of irrigation water at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low volume emitters such as drip lines or bubblers. 
22.  "Maximum applied water allowance" (MAWA) means the maximum allowed annual water use for a specific landscaped area based on the square footage of the area, the ETAF, and the reference ETo. 
23.  "Mulch" means an organic material such as leaves, bark, straw, or inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, or decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface to reduce evaporation, suppress weeds, moderate soil temperature, or prevent soil erosion. 
24.  "Overspray" means the water from irrigation that is delivered outside an area targeted for the irrigation and makes contact with a surface not intended to be irrigated. 
25.  "Pervious" means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into underlying soil. 
26.  "Plant factor" means a factor when multiplied by the ETo, estimates the amount of water a plant needs. 
27.  "Recycled water" means waste water that has been treated at the highest level required by the California Department of Public Health for water not intended for human consumption. 
28.  "Recreational areas" means areas of active play or recreation, such as parks, playgrounds, sports fields, golf courses, school yards, picnic grounds, or other areas where turf provides a playing surface or serves other recreational purposes. 
29.  "Runoff" means water that is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscaped area. 
30.  "Special landscaped area" means an area of the landscape dedicated to edible plants, an area irrigated with recycled water, or an area dedicated as turf area within a park, sports field, or golf course where turf provides a passive or active recreational surface. 
31.  "Standard urban storm water mitigation plan" (SUSMP) means a plan designed to reduce pollutants and runoff flows from new development and significant redevelopment. 
32.  "SUSMP manual" means the manual prepared for implementation of SUSMP requirements, and available for reference at the city's development services department and on the city's website. 
33.  "Storm water management and discharge control" means regulations contained in Chapter 14.22 of the Municipal Code enacted to reduce the effects of polluted discharge on water of the state, to secure benefits from the use of storm water as a resource, to ensure compliance with the San Diego Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB) and applicable state and federal law. 
34.  "Subsurface irrigation" means an irrigation device with a delivery line and water emitters installed below the soil surface that slowly and frequently emit small amounts of water into the soil to irrigate plant roots. 
35.  "Tertiary treated recycled water" means water that has been through three levels of wastewater treatment including filtration and disinfection, but not intended for human consumption. 
36.  "Transitional area" means a portion of a landscaped area that is adjacent to a natural or undisturbed area and is designated to ensure that the natural area remains unaffected by plantings and irrigation installed on the property. 
37.  "Turf" means a groundcover surface of mowed grass. 
38.  "Water feature" means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. A water feature includes a pond, lake, waterfall, fountain, artificial streams, spa, and swimming pool. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment or storm water best management practices are not water features. 
39.  "WUCOLS III" means Water Use Classification of Landscape Species and refers to the Department of Water Resources 1999 publication or the most current version. 
C.  Applicability. 
1.  All new industrial, commercial, institutional, or multi-family residential development with a total landscaped area less than two thousand five hundred square feet shall provide the following: 
a.  Install on-site landscaping and below grade automatic irrigation system in accordance with the landscape manual. 
b.  Landscaping shall be installed in all areas not utilized for structures, parking, drainage, and hardscape. 
c.  Drought tolerant landscaping and water efficiency in accordance with this section and the landscape manual is encouraged. 
d.  Parkways, between the curb and the sidewalk, bordering the development shall be provided with ground cover, shrubs, and at a minimum one fifteen-gallon street tree every forty linear feet. 
2.  All new single-family and two-family residences with a total landscaped area less than five thousand square feet shall provide the following: 
a.  Install on-site landscaping and below grade automatic irrigation systems in accordance with the landscape manual. 
b.  Landscaping shall be installed on all areas not used for structures, driveways, drainage, and hardscape. 
c.  Drought tolerant landscaping and water efficiency for all new landscaping consistent with this section is encouraged. 
d.  Parkways, between the curb and the sidewalk, bordering the development shall be provided with groundcover, shrubs, and at a minimum one fifteen-gallon street tree every forty linear feet. 
3.  For all other projects that exceed the landscape area identified in Section 18.44.190(C)(1) and (C)(2) of this section shall apply to the following projects when a building permit or a discretionary permit is required: 
a.  A project for an industrial, commercial, institutional, or multi-family residential use with a total landscaped area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred square feet. 
b.  Developer installed residential and common area landscapes where the total landscaped area for the development is equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred square feet. 
c.  A new single-family residence with homeowner provided landscaping, where the landscaped area is equal to or greater than five thousand square feet. 
d.  A model home that includes a landscaped area. 
e.  A public agency project that contains a landscaped area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred square feet. 
f.  A rehabilitated landscape for an existing industrial, commercial, institutional, public agency, or multi-family use where a building permit or discretionary permit is being issued, and the applicant is installing or modifying two thousand five hundred square feet or more of landscaping. 
4.  This section shall not apply to the following: 
a.  A registered local, state, or federal historical site. 
b.  An ecological restoration project that does not require a permanent irrigation system. 
c.  A mined land reclamation project that does not require a permanent irrigation system. 
d.  A botanical garden or arboretum, open to the public. 
e.  Any single-family residence that is being rebuilt after it was destroyed due to a natural disaster, such as a fire, earthquake, or hurricane. 
D.  Administration and Enforcement. 
1.  The director shall administer and enforce this section. 
2.  The director shall provide guidance to applicants on how to comply with the requirements of this section. 
E.  Landscape Documentation Package. 
1.  Building permit applications for projects shall submit and have approved a landscape documentation package to the development services department prior to issuance of a building permit. A minimum of three percent of the construction cost to install the landscaping and irrigation improvements shall be submitted as a deposit to review the landscape documentation package. The developer shall be billed for actual costs incurred by the city, including actual labor charges and consultant fees, less the amount of the deposit. In addition to the fee, the landscape documentation package shall contain the following. 
a.  A soils management report and plan that complies with subsection (F). 
b.  Planting and irrigation plans that comply with subsection (G). 
c.  A water efficient landscape worksheet that complies with subsection H. 
d.  A grading plan that complies with subsection (I) below, and Chapters 14.22 (Storm Water Management and Discharge Control) and 15.70 (Grading) of the Municipal Code. 
F.  Soils Management Report. 
1.  The soils management report as required by Section 18.44.190(E)(1)a, above shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect, licensed civil engineer, licensed architect, or other landscape professional appropriately licensed by the state, and shall contain the following information: 
a.  An analysis of the soil for the proposed landscaped areas of the project that includes information about the soil texture, soil infiltration rate, pH, total soluble salts, sodium, and percent organic matter. 
b.  Recommendations about soil amendments that may be necessary to foster plant growth and plant survival in the landscaped area using efficient irrigation techniques. 
c.  Proposed soil amendments and mulch as follows: 
i.  The report shall identify the type and amount of mulch for each area where mulch is applied. Mulch shall be used as follows: 
•  A minimum two-inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces in each landscaped area except in turf areas, creeping or rooting ground covers or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated. 
•  Stabilizing mulch shall be applied on slopes. 
•  The mulching portion of seed/mulch slurry in hydro-seeded applications shall comply with subsection (F)(1), above. 
•  Highly flammable mulch material shall not be used. 
•  The report shall identify any soil amendments and their type and quantity. 
2.  When a project involves mass grading of a site, the soils report shall be submitted with the certificate of completion required by subsection (S). 
G.  Planting and Irrigation Plan. 
1.  The planting and irrigation plans required shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect, licensed civil engineer, licensed architect, or other landscape professional appropriately licensed by the state. The plans shall: 
a.  Include the MAWA for the plans, including the calculations used to determine the MAWA. The calculations shall be based on the formula in subsection (K). 
b.  Include the ETWU for the plans, including the calculations used to determine the ETWU. The calculations shall be based on the formula in subsection (L). 
c.  Include a statement signed under penalty of perjury by the person who prepared the plan that provides, "I am familiar with the requirements for landscape and irrigation plans contained in the City of National City Water Efficient Landscape Regulations (LUC Chapter 4 Section 18.44.190). I have prepared this plan in compliance with those regulations. I certify that the plan implements those regulations to provide efficient use of water." 
d.  Demonstrate compliance with best management practices identified in Municipal Code Chapter 14.22, including the storm water management, discharge control ordinance and standard urban stormwater mitigation plan (SUSMP). 
e.  Demonstrate compliance with state and city requirements for defensible space around buildings and structures, and avoid the use of fire prone vegetation. 
2.  The planting plan shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The plan shall include a list of all vegetation by common and botanical plant name, which exists in the proposed landscaped area. The plan shall state what vegetation will be retained and what will be removed. 
b.  The plan shall include a list of all vegetation by common and botanical plant name which will be added to each landscaped area. Invasive plant species shall not be added to a landscaped area. The plan shall include the total quantities by container size and species. If the applicant intends to plant seeds, the plan shall describe the seed mixes and applicable purity and germination specifications. 
c.  The plan shall include a detailed description of each water feature, including the type and surface area of all water features that will be included in the landscaped area. The water feature shall utilize a recirculating water system. 
d.  The plan shall be accompanied by a drawing showing the specific location of all vegetation, retained or planted, the plant spacing and plant size, natural features, water features, and hardscape areas. The drawing shall include a legend listing the common and botanical plant name of each plant shown on the drawing. 
e.  All plants shall be grouped in hydrozones, and the irrigation shall be designed to deliver water to hydrozones based on the moisture requirements of the plant grouping. A hydrozone may mix plants of moderate and low water use or mix plants of high water use with plants of moderate water use. No high water use plants shall be allowed in a low water use hydrozone. The plan shall also demonstrate how the plant groupings accomplish the most efficient use of water. 
f.  The plan shall identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants. 
g.  The plan shall demonstrate that landscaping when installed and at maturity will be positioned to avoid obstructing motorists' views of pedestrian crossings, driveways, roadways, and other vehicular travel ways. If the landscaping will require maintenance to avoid obstructing motorist's views, the plan shall describe the maintenance and the frequency of the proposed maintenance. 
h.  The plan shall avoid the use of landscaping with known surface root problems adjacent to a paved area, unless the plan provides for installation of root control barriers or other appropriate devices to control surface roots. 
i.  Plants in a transitional area shall consist of a combination of site adaptive and compatible native and/or non-native species. Invasive species shall not be introduced or tolerated in a transitional area. The irrigation in a transitional area shall be designed so that no overspray or runoff shall enter an adjacent area that is not irrigated. 
j.  Where applicable, the plan shall identify passive and active recreational areas. 
k.  Parkways, between the curb and the sidewalk, bordering the development shall be provided with ground cover, shrubs, and at a minimum one fifteen-gallon street tree every forty linear feet. 
3.  The irrigation plan shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The plan shall show the location, type, and size of all components of the irrigation system that will provide water to the landscaped area, including the controller, water lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices. 
b.  The plan shall show the static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply and the flow rate in gallons, the application rate in inches per hour, and the design operating pressure in pressure per square inch for each station. 
c.  The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, overspray, low-head drainage and other similar conditions where irrigation water flows or sprays onto areas not intended for irrigation. The plan shall also demonstrate how grading and drainage techniques promote healthy plant growth and prevent erosion and runoff. 
d.  The plan shall identify each area irrigated with recycled water. 
e.  The plan shall provide that any slope greater than twenty-five percent will be irrigated with an irrigation system with a precipitation rate of seventy-five hundredths inches per hour or less to prevent runoff and erosion. As used in this section, twenty-five percent grade means one foot of vertical elevation change for every four feet of horizontal length. An applicant may employ an alternative design if the plan demonstrates that no runoff or erosion will occur. 
f.  The plan shall provide that all wiring and piping under a paved area that a vehicle may use, such as a parking area, driveway or roadway, will be installed inside a PVC conduit. 
g.  The plan shall provide that irrigation piping and irrigation devices that deliver water, such as sprinkler heads, shall be installed below grade if they are within twenty-four inches of a vehicle or pedestrian use area. The director may allow on-grade piping where landform constraints make below grade piping infeasible. 
h.  The plan shall provide that only low volume irrigation shall be used to irrigate any vegetation within twenty-four inches of an impermeable surface unless the adjacent impermeable surfaces are designed and constructed to cause water to drain entirely into a landscaped area. 
i.  The irrigation system shall provide for the installation of a manual shutoff valve as close as possible to the water supply. Additional manual shutoff valves shall be installed between each zone of the irrigation system and the water supply. 
j.  The irrigation system shall provide that irrigation for any landscaped area will be regulated by an automatic irrigation controller using either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data. 
k.  The irrigation system shall be designed with a landscape irrigation efficiency necessary to meet the MAWA. 
l.  The plan shall describe each automatic irrigation controller the system uses to regulate the irrigation schedule, and whether it is a weather-based system or moisture detection system. The plan shall depict the location of electrical service for the automatic irrigation controller or describe the use of batteries or solar power that will power valves or an irrigation controller. 
m.  Parkways, between the curb and the sidewalk, bordering the development shall be provided below grade irrigation. 
H.  Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet. The water efficient landscape worksheet required by Section 18.44.190(E)(1)(c) shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect, licensed civil engineer, licensed architect, or other landscape professional appropriately licensed by the state, and shall contain the following: 
1.  A hydrozone information table that contains a list of each hydrozone in the landscaped area of the project and complies with the following requirements: 
a.  For each hydrozone listed, the table shall identify the plant types and water features in the hydrozone, the irrigation methods used, the square footage, and the percentage of the total landscaped area of the project that the hydrozone represents. 
b.  The plant types shall be categorized as turf, high water use, moderate water use, or low water use. 
2.  Water budget calculations, which shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The plant factor used shall be from WUCOLS III. A plan that mixes plants in a hydrozone that requires a different amount of water shall use the plant factor for the highest water using plant in the hydrozone. 
b.  Temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the low water use hydrozone. Temporarily irrigated as used in this section means the period of time when plantings only receive water until they become established. 
c.  The surface area of a water feature, including swimming pools, shall be included in a high water use hydrozone. 
d.  The calculations shall use the formula for the MAWA in subsection (K) and for the ETWU in subsection (L). 
e.  Each special landscaped area shall be identified on the worksheet and the area's water use calculated using an ETAF of 1.0. 
I.  Grading Plan. The required grading plan shall comply with the Municipal Code Chapters 14.22 (Storm Water Management and Discharge Control) and 15.70 (Grading). See the SUSMP Manual for implementation guidelines for Chapter 14.22 to reduce runoff and the discharge of pollutants. The grading plan shall be prepared by a California licensed civil engineer, and shall comply with following requirements: 
1.  The grading on the project site shall be designed for the efficient use of water by minimizing soil erosion, runoff, and water waste, resulting from precipitation and irrigation. 
2.  The plan shall show the finished configurations and elevations of each landscaped area including the height of graded slopes, the drainage pattern, pad elevations, finish grade, and any storm water retention improvements. 
J.  Irrigation Schedule. The irrigation schedule shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect, licensed civil engineer, licensed architect or other landscape professional appropriately licensed by the state, and shall provide the following information: 
1.  A description of the automatic irrigation system that will be used for the project. 
2.  The irrigation schedule shall consider irrigation run times, emission device, flow rate, and current reference evapotranspiration so that applied water meets the estimated total water use. Total annual applied water shall be less than or equal to maximum applied water allowance (MAWA). Actual irrigation schedules shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers using current reference evapotranspiration data or soil moisture sensor data. 
3.  Overhead irrigation will be scheduled between four p.m. and nine a.m., unless weather conditions prevent it. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance. 
4.  The parameters used for setting the irrigation system controller for watering times for: 
a.  The plant establishment period. 
b.  Different seasons during the year. 
c.  Established landscaping and temporarily irrigated areas. 
d.  Irrigation uniformity or efficiency setting. 
5.  The consideration used for each station based on the following factors: 
a.  The days between irrigation. 
b.  Stations run time in minutes for each irrigation event, designed to avoid runoff. 
c.  Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event, designed to avoid runoff. 
d.  Amount of water to be applied on a monthly basis. 
e.  The root depth setting. 
f.  The plant type setting. 
g.  The soil type. 
h.  The slope factor. 
i.  The shade factor. 
j.  Application rate setting. 
k.  Irrigation uniformity or efficiency setting. 
K.  Maximum Applied Water Use. 
1.  A landscape project subject to this section shall not exceed the MAWA. The MAWA for a landscape project shall be determined by the following calculation: MAWA = (ETo)(0.62)[0.7 × LA + 0.3 × SLA]. 
2.  The abbreviations used in the equation have the following meanings: 
a.  MAWA = Maximum applied water allowance in gallons per year. 
b.  ETo = Evapotranspiration in inches per year. 
c.  0.62 = Conversion factor to gallons per square foot. 
d.  0.7 = ET adjustment factor for plant factors and irrigation efficiency. 
e.  LA = Landscaped area includes special landscaped area in square feet. 
f.  0.3 = the additional ET adjustment factor for a special landscaped area (1.0 - 0.7 = 0.3). 
g.  SLA = Portion of the landscaped area identified as a special landscaped area in square feet. 
L.  Estimated Total Water Use. 
1.  An applicant for a project subject to Section 18.44.190 shall calculate the ETWU for each landscaped area and the entire project using the following equation: ETWU = (ETo)(0.62)(PF × HA/IE + SLA). 
2.  The abbreviations used in the equation have the following meanings: 
a.  ETWU = Estimated total water use in gallons per year. 
b.  ETo = Evapotranspiration in inches per year. 
c.  0.62 = Conversion factor to gallons per square foot. 
d.  PF = Plant factor from WUCOLS. 
e.  HA = Hydrozone area in square feet. Each HA shall be classified based upon the data included in the landscape and irrigation plan as high, medium, or low water use. 
f.  IE = Irrigation efficiency of the irrigation method used in the hydrozone. 
g.  SLA = Special landscaped area in square feet. 
3.  The ETWU for a proposed project shall not exceed the MAWA. 
M.  Adjustment to Landscaped Area for Non-Vegetated Area. Rock and stone or pervious design features, such as decomposed granite ground cover that are adjacent to a vegetated area may be included in the calculation of the MAWA and ETWU provided the features are integrated into the design of the landscape area and the primary purpose of the feature is decorative. 
N.  Regulations Applicable to Use of Turf on Landscaped Areas. The following regulations shall apply to the use of turf on a project subject to Section 18.44.190: 
1.  Only low volume or subsurface irrigation shall be used for turf in a landscaped area when either of the following occurs: 
a.  On a slope greater than twenty-five percent grade where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape. 
b.  Where any dimension of the landscaped area is less than eight feet wide. 
2.  On a roadway improvement project, commercial, industrial, institutional, or multi-family project, no turf shall be allowed on a center island median strip or on a parking lot island. 
3.  A ball field, park, golf course, cemetery, and other similar use shall be designed to limit turf in any portion of a landscaped area not essential for the operation of the facility. 
4.  No turf shall be allowed in a landscaped area that cannot be efficiently irrigated to avoid runoff or overspray. 
O.  Projects with Model Homes. A person who obtains a permit to construct a single-family residential development that contains a model home or homes shall provide a summary of this section to each adult visitor that visits a model home. If an adult visitor is accompanied by one or more adults during the visit only one set of written materials is required to be provided. Each model home shall provide an educational sign in the front yard of the model home visible and readable from the roadway that the home faces that states in capital black lettering at least two inches high on a white sign, "THIS MODEL HOME USES WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING AND IRRIGATION." 
P.  Recycled Water. 
1.  A person who obtains a permit for a project that is subject to this section shall use recycled water for irrigation and decorative water features when tertiary treated recycled water is available from the water purveyor who supplies water to the property. 
2.  A person using recycled water shall install a dual distribution system for water received from the water purveyor. Pipes carrying recycled water shall be purple. 
3.  A person who uses recycled water under this section shall be entitled to an ETAF of 1.0. 
4.  This section does not excuse a person using recycled water from complying with all state and local laws and regulations related to recycled water use. 
Q.  Landscaping and Irrigation Installation. A person issued a landscape approval for a project shall install the approved landscaping and irrigation system before final inspection of the project. 
R.  Landscaping and Irrigation Maintenance. 
1.  A property owner using water on property subject to a landscape approval shall prepare a maintenance schedule for the landscaping and irrigation system on the project. The schedule shall provide for (1) routine inspection to guard against runoff and erosion and detect plant or irrigation system failure; (2) replacement of dead, dying and diseased vegetation; (3) eradication of invasive species; (4) repairing the irrigation system and its components; (5) replenishing mulch; (6) soil amendment when necessary to support and maintain healthy plant growth; (7) fertilizing, pruning, and weeding and maintaining turf areas; and (8) maintenance to avoid obstruction of motorists' view. The schedule shall also identify who will be responsible for maintenance. 
2.  After approval of a landscape plan, the owner is required to: 
a.  Maintain and operate the landscaping and irrigation system on the property consistent with the MAWA. 
b.  Maintain the irrigation system to achieve efficiency that meets or exceeds the MAWA. 
c.  Replace broken or malfunctioning irrigation system components with components of the same materials and specifications, their equivalent or better. 
d.  Ensure that when vegetation is replaced, replacement plantings are representative of the hydrozone in which the plants were removed, and are typical of the water use requirements of the plants removed, provided that the replaced vegetation does not result in mixing high-water use plants with low-water use plants in the same hydrozone. 
S.  Certificate of Completion. Each person issued a landscape approval shall submit: 
1.  A signed certificate of completion, under penalty of perjury, on a form provided by the City of National City within ten days after installation, that includes the following: 
a.  A statement verifying that the landscaping and irrigation were installed as allowed in the approved landscape and irrigation plan, all recommended approved soil amendments identified in the soil management report were implemented, the installed irrigation system is functioning as designed and approved, the irrigation control system was properly programmed in accordance with the irrigation schedule, and the person operating the system has received all required maintenance and irrigation plans. 
b.  "As-built" plans submitted by the landscape design professional of record showing the changes when there have been significant changes to the landscape plan during the installation of landscaping or irrigation devices or irrigation system components. 
c.  Signature by the landscape design professional of record. 
2.  An irrigation schedule that complies with subsection (J) that describes the irrigation times and water usage for the project. 
3.  A landscaping and irrigation system maintenance schedule that complies with subsection (R). 
4.  A soil management report that complies with subsection (F) if the applicant did not submit the report with the landscape documentation package. 
T.  Waste Water Prevention. No person shall use water for irrigation that results in runoff, low head drainage, overspray or other similar condition, water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, structures, walkways, roadways, or other paved areas. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
Chapter 18.45 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 
 
18.45.010 - Purpose. 
A.  Intent of this Chapter. 
1.  Provide for the establishment of accessory off-street parking and loading facilities incidental to new uses and to major alterations and enlargements of existing uses, in order to prevent or to progressively alleviate traffic congestion and shortage of curb space; 
2.  Prescribe minimum off-street parking and loading requirements for the various structures and uses irrespective of the districts in which they occur; 
3.  Ensure that off-street parking and loading facilities are designed, developed and maintained in a manner that will assure their usefulness, provide for public safety, and, where appropriate, insulate surrounding uses from their impact. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.45.020 - Requirements—General. 
For any structure or use hereafter constructed, established, substantially altered, increased in intensity of use, or changed in, off-street parking and loading facilities conforming to the requirements of this chapter shall be provided on the same lot as the main building or structure or on contiguous property. 
A.  Required for New or Moved Structures. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided for all structures and uses hereafter constructed, established, or moved to new sites. 
B.  Additional Facilities for Altered Structures—Requirements. 
1.  Additional parking and loading facilities need not be provided where any structure is renovated or repaired, provided said structure is not increased in intensity of use or changed to a use requiring additional facilities. 
2.  Parking and loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for an equivalent new structure where any such structure is in any way structurally altered to the extent of more than twice the latest assessed valuation prior to the alteration. (This provision applies to existing structures which, upon the effective date of the National City Land Use Code, are nonconforming as to parking and loading. The "latest assessed valuation" requirement is identical to the requirement for all nonconforming structures under the nonconforming provisions.) 
C.  Increase in Intensity of Use. 
1.  For the purpose of this chapter, an increase in the intensity of use of any structure or premises shall mean the addition of dwelling units, employees, gross floor area, seating capacity, or any other unit of measurement specified in this title as a basis for determining required parking and loading facilities. 
2.  When the intensity of use of any structure or premises, excluding single-family detached dwellings, is increased by less than fifty percent, parking and loading facilities shall be provided for the increase but not for any existing deficiency in such facilities. 
3.  When the intensity of use is increased by more than fifty percent, excluding single-family detached dwellings, parking and loading facilities shall be provided for the entire structure or premises. 
4.  When consecutive increases in intensity of use amount to a total increase of more than fifty percent, parking and loading facilities shall be provided for the entire structure or premises. Consecutive increases shall be figured from the effective date of the National City Land Use Code or from the time of the initial construction or establishment, whichever is more recent. 
5.  When a single-family detached dwelling is increased or expanded to more than two thousand five hundred square feet of floor area and/or more than four bedrooms, off-street parking facilities shall be provided for the increase but not for any existing deficiency in such facilities. Parking facilities required as a result of this chapter may be provided in a garage, carport, or surface space. 
D.  Change in Use. When the use of any structure or premises is changed to a different use, parking and loading facilities shall be provided for the different use, in compliance with the provisions of this section for increase in intensity of use. 
E.  Permitted Facilities. Any off-street parking or loading facility which is permitted but not required by this title shall comply with all regulations in this chapter governing the location, design, improvement, operation and maintenance of such facilities. 
F.  Reduction of Existing Facilities. Accessory parking and loading facilities in existence on the effective date of the National City Land Use Code, or authorized and subsequently established under a building permit issued prior to said effective date, shall not be reduced below, or if already less than, shall not be further reduced below, the requirements for an equivalent new structure or use. All such facilities shall be continued for as long as the structure or use served is continued, or until equivalent facilities are substituted in conformance with the requirements of this title. In no case, however, shall it be necessary to continue parking or loading facilities in excess of those required by this title for equivalent new structures or uses. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.45.030 - Off-site facilities. 
A.  Off-site Facilities—Recorded Agreements. 
1.  Where required parking or loading facilities are provided on a lot other than the lot on which the structure or use served is located, as a prerequisite to the issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy, the property owners for which the facilities are required to be provided shall record an agreement, approved by the city attorney as to form and content, in the office of the county recorder as a covenant running with the land for the benefit of the city. The agreement shall provide that said facilities shall be continued so long as the structure or use they intended to serve is continued. 
2.  Said agreement shall remain in effect until satisfactory evidence has been submitted to the planning division either that other parking or loading facilities meeting the requirements of this title have been provided or that the structure or use served has been removed or changed so as to no longer require said facilities. Upon submission of such evidence, the planning division shall remove the restriction from the property. 
B.  Off-site Facilities—Certificate of Occupancy for Building or Structure Being Served. 
1.  Any certificate of occupancy for the structure or use referred to in Section 18.43.030(A) shall be valid only while such parking facilities are continued and shall bear a notation to that effect. 
2.  Each such certificate shall be continuously displayed in a conspicuous place in the building, or, if there is no building, on the premises. The city manager or his/her designee shall keep a record of each off-site parking or loading facility and shall periodically inspect such facilities to ensure their continuation. 
3.  If such facilities are not continued, the certificate of occupancy for the structure or use served by the facilities shall be automatically canceled. The building official shall notify the person having custody of said structure or use of the cancellation of the certificate and the reasons therefore. The structure or use shall not thereafter be occupied or used until the required facilities are again provided in accordance with the provisions of this title and a new certificate is issued. 
C.  Requirements—General. Where there is a combination of structures or uses on a lot, the total number of parking stalls and loading facilities required shall be the sum of the individual requirements of the various structures or uses on the premises. 
D.  Unspecified Uses—Determination of Parking Requirements. Parking requirements for structures and uses not specified in Section 18.45.050 shall be determined by the planning commission based on the requirements for the most comparable structure or use specified. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.45.040 - Site plan review required. 
All parking facility improvements shall comply with the provisions of Section 18.12.070 (Site Plan Review). Improvements subject to review include, but are not limited to, driveways, access to streets and alleys, arrangement of parking stalls, aisles and maneuvering areas, signs and traffic-control devices, striping, surfacing, lighting, landscaping, screening, pedestrian walkways, fire access ways, obstructions, traffic flow and protective barriers. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.45.050 - Off-street parking requirements by land use. 
The off-street parking and loading spaces as required by this section shall be completed and made available for use, including curb break and driveway installed to the established grade of the street, prior to the occupancy of the building served. 
A.  Off-Street Parking Schedule. Each land use shall be provided the number of parking spaces required as determined in Table 18.45.050. In addition, the following information shall be used to determine off-street parking requirements. 
1.  Floor Area. Where Table 18.45.050 establishes a parking requirement based on the floor area of a use in a specified number of square feet (e.g., one space per two hundred fifty square feet), the floor area shall be construed to mean gross floor area. 
2.  Fractions. Where application of the requirements in Table 18.45.050 results in a fractional requirement, a fraction of 0.5 or greater shall be increased to the next higher number and a fraction of less than 0.5 shall be reduced to the next lower number. 
TABLE 18.45.050 
Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements by Land Use 
Uses and Structures 	Minimum Parking Spaces Required 
(Unless Otherwise Specified) 
Residential Uses 
Dwelling, single detached (RS-1 zone) 	2 covered spaces, plus one additional uncovered space per bedroom greater than four bedrooms or one additional uncovered space for dwellings greater than 2,500 SF, whichever is greater. 
Dwelling, single detached (all other RS and RM zones, except within the Westside Specific Plan area) 	One covered space and one uncovered space, plus one additional uncovered space per bedroom greater than four bedrooms or one additional uncovered space for dwellings greater than 2,500 SF, whichever is greater. 
Dwelling, single attached 	1.5 spaces per dwelling unit in a garage or carport 
Dwelling, multiple 	1.3 spaces per 1-bedroom dwelling unit plus 1.5 spaces per 2-bedroom or more unit, and conveniently located guest parking of ½ space per unit for 20 units or less, plus ¼ space for each unit over 20. Half of the required guest parking spaces may include parking spaces on dedicated public streets along the sides of the streets that are adjacent to the site. 
Fraternity, sorority house, or dormitory 	1.5 spaces for each sleeping room 
Mobile home parks 	2 spaces per unit 
Rectory 	1 garage space per bedroom 
Rooming or boarding house 	1 space per guest room 
Second dwelling unit 	1 space in addition to primary residence parking requirements 
Senior housing 	1 space per unit plus 1 guest space for each 10 units 
RS-4 (Westside Specific Plan): Units greater than 1,200 square feet 	2 spaces per unit 
RS-4 (Westside Specific Plan): Units less than 1,200 square feet 	1.7 spaces per unit 
Commercial and Office Uses 
Banks and financial institutions 	3 spaces per 1,000 square feet floor area 
Offices, administrative, clerical, and professional 	Number of required parking spaces varies depending on the amount of floor area as identified in the column to the left. 
 • First 5,000 square feet 	 • 1 space per 200 square feet floor area 
 • 5,000 to 10,000 square feet 	 • 1 space per 250 square feet floor area 
 • 10,000 to 30,000 square feet 	 • 1 space per 300 square feet floor area 
 • 30,000 to 100,000 square feet 	 • 1 space per 350 square feet floor area 
 • Over 100,000 square feet 	 • 1 space per 400 square feet floor area 
Offices, medical/dental office or outpatient clinic, veterinary hospitals and clinics 	1 space per 300 square feet floor area 
Lodging - Hotel, motel, bed and breakfast inn 	1 for each guest bedroom, plus 1 for the manager's unit 
Restaurant, bar, nightclub, pool hall, bowling alley, or similar establishment 	10 spaces per 1,000 square feet floor area 
Gasoline service station 	1 space per 1,000 square feet of lot area; less the footprint of any convenience store area, plus 3.3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of convenience store area 
Commercial recreation, indoor 	2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet floor area 
Retail sales 	1 for each 250 square feet of floor area 
Personal services 	1 space per 300 square feet of floor area 
Shopping centers with multiple tenants 	1 space per 200 square feet floor area 
Vehicle repair or service, including car wash 	1 space per 500 square feet floor area 
Vehicle sales or rental (new and used) 	1 space per 500 square feet floor area plus one per every 2,500 square feet outdoor display area 
Theater/auditorium, stadium/sports arena 	1 space per 5 seats 
Mausoleum/crematory 	25 spaces per 1,000 square feet of seating area 
CL zone (Westside Specific Plan): Office 	2.9 spaces per 1,000 square feet floor area 
CL zone (Westside Specific Plan): Retail 	3.6 spaces per 1,000 square feet floor area 
CL zone (Westside Specific Plan): Industrial 	2 spaces per 1,000 square feet floor area 
Mixed-Uses in the MXD and MXC Zones 
Nonresidential uses 	Minimum: 2 spaces per 1,000 square feet floor area 
Residential - studio, 1 bedroom, and 2 bedroom units 	Minimum: 1 space per unit 
Residential - 3 or more bedroom units 	Minimum: 1.5 spaces per unit 
MCR Zones in the Westside Specific Plan 
Residential units greater than 1200 square feet 	1.5 spaces per unit 
Residential units less than 1200 square feet 	1 space per unit 
Office uses 	2.9 spaces per 1,000 square feet floor area 
Retail uses 	3.6 spaces per 1,000 square feet floor area 
Industrial uses 	2 spaces per 1,000 square feet floor area 
Industrial Uses 
Industrial manufacturing and processing uses, waterfront related industry, wholesaling, warehousing, and distribution 	1 space for each 1,000 square feet of floor area 
Industrial/building supplies and equipment, sales and rentals 	1 space per 800 square feet floor area 
Research and development 	1 space per 400 square feet of floor area 
Recycling facilities 	2 spaces per 1,000 square feet floor area 
Animal boarding/kennel 	1 space per 500 square feet floor area 
Trucking and transportation terminal 	2 spaces per 1,000 square feet floor area plus 1 space for every 2 fleet vehicles 
Institutional Uses 
Hospital or other inpatient medical institution 	1 space per 3 beds, excluding bassinets 
Civic, fraternal, community, and cultural facilities 	1 space per every 200 square feet of floor space open to the public plus 1 space per each 300 square feet of administrative office area 
Public/religious assembly, fraternal lodge or club, banquet fall/facilities, and similar establishments 	1 space for every 35 square feet of seating area 
Convention center 	1 space per 50 square feet floor area 
Child day care center, preschool, or nursery school 	2 spaces per 1,000 square feet floor area 
Schools, elementary and middle 	1.5 spaces per classroom plus area one space for each 300 square feet of office area 
Schools, high 	1 space per each 150 square feet of classroom area plus one space for each 300 square feet office area 
Schools, trade, college/university, business, adult education 	1 space per 40 square feet of classroom area plus 1 space per 300 square feet of office area 
Open Space/Agriculture 
Neighborhood and community farms 	Minimum 2 parking spaces, plus one additional space for every acre of garden site lot area over 2 acres. Each garden site that includes a farm stand shall provide 1 additional space for every 250 feet of floor area and outdoor display space. 
 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.45.060 - Westside specific area plan parking requirements. 
A.  Shared Parking for Mixed Use in MCR-1 and MCR-2 Zones. Shared parking may be considered where fifty percent of the parking may be shared between daytime uses (commercial and office) and nighttime uses (residential). 
B.  Joint Parking Arrangements. Joint parking arrangements may be developed on-site or within an off-site parking lot or parking structure located within five hundred feet of the property line of the development. 
C.  Tandem Parking. 
1.  Two-car tandem garages are permitted within the RS-4 zone. A two-car tandem garage shall measure a minimum of ten feet wide by thirty-eight feet long. A tandem parking space within a parking structure shall be a minimum of eight and one-half feet wide by thirty-six feet long. 
2.  A maximum of twenty-five percent of multi-family development may be provided with tandem parking spaces. 
3.  Tandem parking is permitted when a mechanical lift parking device is used. See Section 18.45.100.G. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.45.070 - Parking for commercial vehicles. 
In addition to the parking spaces required by Table 18.45.050, for owners, occupants, employees, customers, or visitors of structures and uses, one parking space shall be provided for each commercial vehicle used in connection with the operation of any structure or use. Parking spaces for accessory vehicles shall be provided within an open or enclosed parking facility on the same lot as the structure or use to which the vehicles are accessory. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.45.080 - Opportunities for reduced parking. 
A.  Transportation Demand Management Program (TDM). The planning commission, appealable to city council, may approve a reduction in off-street parking spaces otherwise required by the strict application of this section, subject to conditions it deems appropriate, when the applicant has demonstrated to the City's satisfaction that, due to the TDM program, that the spaces proposed to be eliminated for the subject development are unnecessary and that the reduction will not adversely affect the site or the adjacent area. A TDM program shall include, at a minimum, the following components: 
1.  A projected reduction in parking demand expressed as a percentage of overall parking demand and the basis for such reduction; 
2.  The TDM program actions to be taken by the applicant to reduce the parking demand; 
3.  A requirement by the applicant to periodically monitor whether the projected reductions are being achieved; and 
4.  A commitment and plan whereby the applicant shall provide additional parking spaces in an amount equivalent to the reduction should the TDM program not result in the projected reduction in parking demand. 
B.  Proximity to Transit. The planning commission, appealable to city council, may approve a reduction in off-street parking spaces otherwise required by the strict application of this section, subject to conditions that it deems appropriate, when the subject development is conveniently accessible to a transit station. The transit station must either exist or is programmed for completion within the same time frame as the completion of the subject development. In addition, the subject development shall be located within a quarter-mile radius (one thousand three hundred twenty feet) of the transit station. Such reduction may be approved when the applicant has proven that the parking spaces proposed to be eliminated are unnecessary based on the projected parking demand resulting from the proximity to the transit station and such reduction in parking spaces will not adversely affect the site or the adjacent area. Parking may be reduced to no more than two parking spaces per one thousand square feet of commercial floor area and multi-unit residential parking requirements may be reduced to no more than space for studio, one-bedroom, and two-bedroom units and two spaces for three-bedroom units. 
C.  Shared Parking. The planning commission, appealable to city council, encourages parking lots for different structures or uses, or for mixed-uses, to be shared. At the applicant's request, a reduction in off-street parking spaces otherwise required by the strict application of this section, subject to conditions it deems appropriate, when the applicant has demonstrated to the review authority's satisfaction that, due to the shared parking approach, that the spaces proposed to be eliminated for the subject development are unnecessary and that the reduction will not adversely affect the site or the adjacent area. Uses that are sharing the parking facility shall be a maximum of five hundred feet from the closest parking space in a lot providing the shared spaces. 
D.  Adjacent On-Street Parking. The planning commission, appealable to city council, may approve a reduction in off-street parking spaces otherwise required by the strict application of this section, subject to conditions it deems appropriate, when the applicant has demonstrated to the city's satisfaction that the spaces proposed to be eliminated for the subject development are unnecessary and that the reduction will not adversely affect the site or the adjacent area. A reduction in parking spaces will only be allowed for adjacent on-street parking when said spaces are located along the public street frontage shared with the building's façade. For example, if a building fronting a public street measures one hundred linear feet and four parking spaces are located adjacent to the one hundred linear feet of frontage, the parking reduction may be four spaces. Fractions of spaces will not be permitted to count towards the reduction allowance. 
E.  Car-Sharing. The planning commission, appealable to city council, may approve a reduction in off-street parking spaces otherwise required by the strict application of this section, subject to conditions it deems appropriate, when the applicant has demonstrated to the city's satisfaction that the spaces proposed to be eliminated for the subject development are unnecessary and that the reduction will not adversely affect the site or the adjacent area. A reduction of one parking space for each car sharing vehicle space leased by a car sharing program may be allowed for every sixty dwelling units in a multi-unit residential development. 
F.  Motorcycle Parking Spaces. Parking lots with forty or more spaces may replace regular spaces with motorcycle spaces. One regular space may be replaced for each forty required spaces. Motorcycle spaces shall be a minimum size of four feet by eight feet. Although more spaces may be provided, a maximum of two and one-half percent of the total parking space requirement based on the strict application of this section may be motorcycle parking spaces provided in lieu of automobile parking space. Motorcycle parking spaces shall be located within one hundred feet of a building entry. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.45.090 - Parking for disabled persons. 
A.  California Vehicle Code. Properly posted and identified off-street parking stalls reserved for disabled persons shall be provided pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 21107.8 et seq. or the most recently adopted Chapter 11 of the California Building Code. Such parking stalls shall be included in the minimum number of parking stalls required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.45.100 - Parking lot design standards. 
A.  Setbacks. 
1.  Parking facilities may occupy any portion of a lot, except and as provided by this section. 
2.  Parking facilities shall not extend into any required yard that adjoins a street lot line. 
3.  Where a parking facility is on a lot not in a residential zone but which adjoins a residential zone along the same street, the parking facility shall not be located closer to the street lot line than would be permitted on the adjoining residential zone lot or twenty feet, whichever is less. The street setback provided by this provision shall extend for a distance of at least fifty feet from the adjoining residential zone. 
4.  All required yards separating off-street parking areas from street lot lines shall be landscaped in accordance with this chapter, except multi-unit residential projects of eight units or less. 
5.  All parking stalls in an open parking facility shall be setback from any dwelling unit wall on the same lot if the wall contains doors or windows which are on the same or approximately the same level as the parking facility. The setback shall be at least ten feet in width, at least one-half the width of which shall be unpaved. 
B.  Minimum Dimensions. Stalls, Back-Up Areas, and Aisles. All parking stalls for a standard size car shall measure no less than nine feet wide and eighteen feet long. All two-way aisles providing access to parking stalls, including compact parking spaces, shall provide a minimum back-up and maneuvering distance of twelve feet for each space. In no instance may a two-way aisle measure less than eighteen feet in width. All one-way aisles providing access to parking stalls, including compact parking spaces, shall provide a minimum back-up and maneuvering distance of twelve feet for each space, but in no instance may a one-way aisle measure less than twelve feet width. The following diagrams illustrate the minimum layout of parking stalls, back-up space, and drive aisles. The minimum back-up area for two-way aisles is twenty-four feet. All aisles shall be adequate to provide safe and efficient access to and from parking spaces, based on minimum standards administered by the city traffic engineer. Two feet shall be added to the width of the stall for stalls abutting a building, fence, or other obstruction. 
Parking Lot Design Standards Dimensions 
 
C.  Parking Stalls—General Provisions. 
1.  Parking Stalls—Openings. All parking stalls shall open directly on a maneuvering or turnaround area, an access driveway, or an aisle leading to an access driveway, and shall be individually and continuously accessible. 
2.  Parking Stalls—Location. All parking stalls shall be so located and free of obstructions that parking can be accomplished in a continuous forward movement and unparking can be accomplished with not more than one backing movement and one forward movement. 
3.  Vertical Clearance. Each parking space shall have a vertical clearance of at least seven feet. 
D.  Driveways and Aisles—General Provisions. 
1.  Access to Streets or Alleys. 
a.  Access driveways shall be provided between each parking facility and a public street or alley. Lots should not have access from predominantly residential streets, except when the lot is serving a residential use. Residential driveways shall be permitted only on an arterial street where no other access to the property exists. 
b.  One-way driveways and driveways serving a single-family residence shall have a minimum width of twelve feet; except for driveways leading to a single car garage or parking space where the city manager or his/her designee may authorize a lesser width. 
c.  Two-way driveways between a street and private parking facilities shall have a minimum width of eighteen feet. Two-way driveways between a street and public parking facilities shall have a minimum width of twenty-four feet. Two-way driveways within a parking facility connecting separated areas of parking spaces shall have a minimum width of eighteen feet, or as otherwise required by this section. 
d.  Where access is available from any adjoining or abutting alley to any lot proposed for residential or mixed use development in the commercial zones, access to the required residential parking facility shall be from that alley when appropriate to avoid access to commercial collector or arterial streets. 
2.  Internal Circulation—Generally. All parking facilities, except those serving not more than two dwelling units, shall be arranged so that: 
a.  Any vehicle entering a public street can do so traveling in a forward motion; 
b.  A vehicle entering the parking facility shall not be required to enter a street to move from one location to any other location within the parking facility or premises. 
3.  Internal Circulation—Serving Not More than Two Dwelling Units. Parking facilities serving not more than two dwelling units shall be arranged so that any vehicle entering a street can do so traveling in a forward motion where: 
a.  The parking facility is served by a single access driveway that is less than twenty feet in width and more than one hundred feet in length; 
b.  The access driveway opens upon an arterial street. 
4.  Vehicle Maneuver Restrictions. All parking facilities, except those serving not more than two dwelling units, shall be arranged so that parking maneuvers can be accomplished without driving, maneuvering, or encroaching into or upon any public right-of-way, walkway, or unpaved landscaped area within or adjoining the parking facility. 
5.  Parking Facilities—Driveway Vertical Clearance. The minimum vertical clearance for driveways shall be thirteen feet six inches to allow for the passage of emergency vehicles, or as required by the city fire department, whichever is greater. 
6.  Parking Facilities—Aisles, Approach Lanes, and Maneuvering Areas for Two-Way Traffic. For two-way traffic within parking facilities, all aisles, approach lanes and maneuvering areas shall have a minimum width as specified in this section or as required by the city fire department for emergency access, whichever is greater. 
7.  Parking Facilities—One-Way Aisles—Width. One-way aisles shall have a minimum width of twelve feet or as specified in this section, whichever is greater. 
8.  Parking Facilities—One-Way Aisles—Directional Markings. One-way aisles shall have directional markings to indicate one-way circulation. 
9.  Parking Facilities—Entrances and Exits. 
a.  The location and design of all street or alley entrances and exits for off-street parking facilities shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer, to insure traffic safety. 
b.  Each exit to a parking lot shall be constructed and maintained so that any vehicle leaving the parking lot shall be clearly visible to a person reaching a point ten feet from the edge of the approach to the driveway nearest to him, when the vehicle is at a point distant ten feet from the property line within the parking lot. Exits from parking lots shall be clearly posted with stop signs. Appropriate bumper guards, entrance and exit signs, and directional signs shall be maintained where needed. Upon a finding that parking facilities cause imminent hazard upon adjoining public streets, the city engineer may order the placement and maintenance of such guards and signs. Failure to comply with any such order may be grounds for a finding of a public nuisance. 
10.  Vertical Clearance. The minimum vertical clearance for driveways shall be thirteen feet six inches to allow for the passage of emergency vehicles, or as required by the city fire department, whichever is greater. 
E.  Compact Car Parking. 
1.  In the industrial, institutional zones, commercial, and mixed-use zones (except retail uses) twenty-five percent of the parking stalls required by the schedules set out in this section may be allocated to compact car spaces. No compact parking spaces shall be permitted for retail uses and guest and visitor parking. 
2.  For residential multifamily use, one parking space may be compact in size for every ten parking spaces required. 
3.  All parking spaces provided in excess of the number required by Table 18.45.050 set out in this section may be allocated to compact car spaces. 
4.  All parking facilities constructed, installed or modified to incorporate compact car spaces shall comply with the provisions of this section. Design features subject to review shall include, but are not limited to, specific findings of good circulation, adaptability to balance of parking lot, easy identification and adequate signs and pavement markings. The design of such signs and markings shall be subject to approval of the planning division. 
5.  Maintenance of parking facilities pursuant to this section shall also include maintenance of all special compact car signs and pavement markings shown on approved site plans or otherwise required by this section. 
6.  The dimensions of compact car parking stalls, back-up areas, and drive aisles shall be as indicated in the diagrams in Section 18.45.100(B). 
F.  Dimensions for Garage or Carport Areas and Openings. 
1.  A one-car garage or carport shall contain an unobstructed interior parking area of a minimum of eleven feet wide by nineteen feet deep. A two-car garage or carport shall contain an unobstructed interior parking area of a minimum of twenty feet wide by nineteen feet deep. 
2.  A garage for more than two cars shall contain a minimum area of nine feet by 18 feet for each additional car. 
3.  A single-car garage door or opening to a single space carport shall be a minimum of eight feet wide; a two-car garage door or opening to a two-space carport shall be a minimum of sixteen feet wide. For larger parking garages or carports serving multifamily residential or nonresidential development, openings shall be increased in width by at least one foot if a column, post, or similar obstruction is located within at least three and one-half feet of the opening to the stall. 
G.  Mechanical Lift Parking. Mechanical lifts for vertical storage of vehicles are permitted in the Downtown and Westside Specific Plan areas. Each vertically stacked space shall count as one space. Mechanical lifts shall be completely enclosed or fully screened from street view and adjacent residential zones. Vertically stacked vehicles are exempt from the seven-foot vertical clearance requirement. All mechanical parking equipment must be designed, installed, constructed, and maintained so as to be reasonably safe to life, limb, and adjoining property and must be reviewed by the city manager or his/her designee prior to installation or construction. 
H.  Motorcycle Parking. Each motorcycle parking space shall measure at least four feet wide and thirty-two square feet in total area. Motorcycle parking spaces shall be located within one hundred feet of a building entry. 
I.  Pedestrian Walkways. 
1.  All parking facilities shall have safe, unobstructed, convenient, well-drained pedestrian access by provision of walks, steps or stepped ramps, so constructed as to assure reasonable durability and economy of maintenance. 
2.  Pedestrian walkways shall be a minimum of five feet in width. Pedestrian walkways located immediately adjacent to and perpendicular to a parking stall shall be a minimum of six feet. 
3.  The preferred gradient for pedestrian walkways is no greater than five percent. Pedestrian walkways shall not exceed a gradient of twelve percent. Pedestrian walkways between five percent and twelve percent gradients shall be provided with handrails. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.45.110 - Loading requirements. 
A.  General Provisions. 
1.  On the same premises with every building, structure or part erected and occupied in the commercial or industrial zones, there shall be provided and maintained, on the lot, adequate space for standing, loading and unloading services, in order to avoid undue interference with public use of the streets or alleys. 
2.  Such space, unless otherwise adequately provided for, shall include one twelve-foot by fifty-foot loading space with a fourteen-foot height clearance for every twenty thousand square feet or fraction thereof of building floor area, or for every twenty thousand square feet or fraction thereof of land use. 
3.  All loading facilities shall be improved in accordance with the requirements established for parking facilities by this section. 
4.  Required loading facilities shall be used exclusively for the loading and unloading of vehicles concerned with the transportation of goods or materials. Loading facilities shall not be used to satisfy the stall requirements for parking facilities, nor shall they be used for the sale, display, rental or repair of motor vehicles. 
5.  Loading facilities shall be screened as provided in this section except that all loading berths exceeding twenty-five feet in length which are located within fifty feet of a residential zone shall be enclosed or screened from the residential zone by a solid masonry wall not less than six feet nor more than eight feet in height. 
6.  No interior landscaping of loading areas shall be required. 
7.  All loading facilities shall be arranged so that any vehicle utilizing the facility may enter a street traveling in a forward motion. 
8.  Each loading berth shall open directly upon a maneuvering or turnaround area, an access driveway, an aisle leading to an access driveway, or an alley, and shall be easily accessible. 
9.  All access driveways serving loading facilities shall conform to the requirements established in this section for parking facility access driveways, but in addition shall be located so that any street entrance or exit to or from the loading facility is at a point at least fifty feet from the nearest point of intersection of any two streets and at least thirty feet from any lot in a residential district. 
B.  Number of Spaces Required. The following loading and unloading spaces shall be provided and maintained as specified below for the use to which the property is devoted. Fractional requirements are omitted. Encroachment of the loading space on a public right-of-way is not permitted. 
1.  Retail and wholesale markets, warehouses, hotels, hospitals, laundry and dry cleaning establishments and other places where large amounts of goods are received and shipped, no loading space is required for a building less than ten thousand square feet in gross floor area. 
2.  For such buildings with ten thousand to forty thousand square feet in gross floor area, one off-street loading space shall be required. 
3.  For such buildings with greater than forty thousand square feet in gross floor area, one off-street loading space is required for each forty thousand square feet in total gross floor area. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.45.120 - Bicycle parking. 
A.  Number of Spaces Required. The following minimum off-street bicycle parking facilities shall be required for all new or expanded developments. Calculation of bicycle parking facilities shall be based on the off-street vehicle parking spaces required prior to consideration of any vehicle parking reduction measures. Fractional requirements up to one-half shall be omitted. One-half or over shall require one space. Calculation of bicycle parking facilities for mixed use land uses shall be based on the individual use as identified in Table 18.45.120A, below. 
TABLE 18.45.120A 
Bicycle Parking Requirements by Land Use 
Use 	Required Number of Bicycle Parking Spaces 
Multi-family residential 	1 for every 10 vehicle parking spaces 
Senior housing 	1 space for every 20 dwelling units 
Health care facilities 	1 space for every 10 vehicle parking spaces 
Retail commercial, public and civic 	1 space for every 20 vehicle parking spaces 
Public assembly, health clubs, hotels, private clubs and lodges 	1 space for every 10 vehicle parking spaces 
Business, professional, and corporate office 	1 space for every 10 vehicle parking spaces 
Industrial 	1 space for every 10 vehicle parking spaces 
 
B.  Bicycle Parking Design. 
1.  Bicycle parking facilities shall be installed in a manner which allows adequate spacing for access to the bicycle and the locking device when the facilities are occupied. Space allowances shall be thirty inches wide and six feet long per bicycle and include a five -foot maneuvering space behind the bicycle. At least seven feet of vertical clearance is required. 
2.  The facilities shall be located on a hard dust-free surface, such as asphalt or a concrete slab. 
3.  Bicycle parking facilities shall be located in view of building entrances or in view of windows and/or security personnel stations. At least fifty percent of required bicycle parking must be located within fifty feet of a customer entrance, and the remainder must be located within one hundred feet of any entrance. 
4.  Bicycle spaces shall be separated from sidewalks, motor vehicle parking spaces or aisles by a fence, wall, or curb, or by at least five feet of open area, marked to prohibit motor vehicle parking. 
C.  Required Shower Facilities. All news buildings and additions to existing buildings that result in a total floor area as shown in the following table are encouraged to provide employee showers and dressing areas for each gender as shown in the following Table 18.45.120B. 
TABLE 18.45.120B 
Required Number of Showers 
Land Use 	Number of Showers Required for Specified Building Floor Area 
	1 Shower for Each Gender 	1 Additional Shower 
for Each Gender 
Office use (business, professional) 	50,000 to 149,000 square feet 	Each 100,000 square feet over 150,000 
Retail trade and services 	100,000 to 299,999 square feet 	Each 200,000 square feet over 300,000 
Industrial/manufacturing 	50,000 square feet or more 	N/A 
 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
Chapter 18.46 - OUTDOOR LIGHTING 
 
18.46.010 - Purpose. 
A.  Intent and Purpose of this Chapter. 
1.  To provide reasonable restrictions and limitations upon the use of lighting in or near the residential zones of the city so as to prevent lighting from creating a nuisance to residents within said residential zones. It is recognized that lighting is widely used in commercial or industrial zones for the purpose of advertising and security and that such lighting is essential to the conduct of many commercial or industrial enterprises. 
2.  The city acknowledges that protective security lighting in residential zones constitutes a deterrent to crime and an aid in law enforcement and contributes generally to the safety of those persons residing in such residential zones. It is further accepted that properly controlled lighting in residential areas used for landscaping and highlighting of architectural features of buildings and structures enhances and promotes the aesthetic condition of the property and the general welfare of the area. 
3.  It is equally recognized that lighting, by virtue of its intensity, brightness, direction, duration and hours of operation, can constitute a nuisance to adjacent residential dwellers. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish outdoor lighting standards that reduce the impacts of glare, light trespass, overlighting, skyglow, and poorly shielded or inappropriately directed lighting fixtures and that promote safety and energy conservation. 
4.  It is the intent of the city to adopt this section to encourage the continued and appropriate use of lighting for the purposes set forth in this section, but to require that said lighting be regulated and controlled in a manner so as to avoid the creation of a public nuisance in residential areas. All outdoor lighting in National City shall be regulated by this Land Use Code and by the State of California Title 24 Energy Efficiency Standards for outdoor lighting requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.46.020 - Applicability. 
A.  New Uses, Buildings, and Additions. Unless specifically exempted elsewhere in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all outdoor lighting for proposed new land uses, developments, buildings, structures, or building additions that require a permit. 
B.  Nonconforming Uses, Structures, or Lots. Whenever a nonconforming use, structure or lot is abandoned for a period of one year and then recommenced or changed to a new use, then any existing outdoor lighting shall be reviewed and brought into compliance with the provisions of this chapter as necessary for the entire building, structure or premises, to the maximum extent possible as determined by the planning division. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.46.030 - General standards. 
A.  Outdoor Lighting Fixtures. All outdoor lighting fixtures shall be designed, shielded, aimed, located, and maintained to shield adjacent properties and to not produce glare onto adjacent properties or roadways. Parking lot light fixtures and light fixtures on buildings shall be full cut-off fixtures. 
B.  Street Lighting. Street lighting shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the National City Standards Manual. 
C.  Prohibited Lighting. Flashing, revolving, intermittent exterior lighting or internally illuminated signs are prohibited. High intensity light beams, such as, but not limited to, outdoor searchlights, lasers, or strobe lights shall be prohibited. 
D.  Lighting for Safety. In all multiple family residential, commercial, or industrial developments, all sites shall be well lit so as to provide safe pedestrian and vehicular access and to eliminate dark areas. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.46.040 - Lighting plan requirements. 
A.  Exterior Lighting Plan. The applicant shall submit to the planning division sufficient information, in the form of an overall exterior lighting plan, to enable the director to determine that the applicable provisions will be satisfied. The exterior lighting plan shall include, at a minimum, the following information: 
1.  Manufacturer specification sheets, cut sheets or other manufacturer provided information for all proposed lighting fixtures. 
2.  The proposed location, mounting height, and aiming point of all exterior lighting fixtures. 
3.  If building elevations are proposed for illumination, drawings shall be provided for all relevant building elevations showing the fixtures, the portions of the elevations to be illuminated, the luminance levels of the elevations, and the aiming point for any remote light fixture. If only architectural lighting below five foot-candles is proposed, this section or any portion of it may be waived by the director. 
4.  A brief written narrative which describes the objectives of the lighting. 
5.  Photometric data, Color Rendering Index (CRI) of all lamps (bulbs), and other descriptive information of the fixtures, and, if applicable or required, designation as Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) "cut-off" fixtures. 
6.  A computer generated photometric grid showing foot-candle readings every ten feet within the property or site, and ten feet beyond the property lines at a scale specified by the director. Iso foot-candle contour line style plans may be substituted for the photometric grid. 
7.  For exterior lighting installations within fifty feet of upper level living units, horizontal and vertical projection of photometric data is required. 
8.  If needed to review proposed exterior lighting installations, the director may require additional information following the initial lighting plan submittal, including but not limited to: 
a.  Landscaping information that indicates mature tree size; 
b.  Shrubbery and other vegetation in order to evaluate the long-term and seasonal effectiveness of lighting or screening of lighting. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.46.050 - Security lighting. 
A.  Defined. For the purposes of this section, security lighting is defined to include the following: lighting intended to reduce the risk (real or perceived) of personal attack and lighting intended to discourage intruders, vandals, or burglars, and to protect property. 
B.  Shielded and Aimed. All security lighting fixtures shall be shielded and aimed so that illumination is directed only within the owner's property boundaries and not cast on other areas. In no case shall lighting be directed above a horizontal plane through the top of the lighting fixture, and the fixture shall include shields that prevent the light source or lens from being visible from adjacent properties and roadways. The use of general floodlighting fixtures shall be prohibited unless it meets the shielding requirements of this section. 
C.  Vertical Surfaces. Security lighting may illuminate vertical surfaces (e.g. building facades and walls) up to a level eight feet above grade or eight feet above the bottoms of doorways or entries, whichever is greater. 
D.  Pole-Mounted. Security lighting fixtures may be mounted on poles located no less than ten feet from the perimeter of the property boundary. 
E.  Site Perimeters. Security lights intended to illuminate a perimeter (such as a fence line) shall include motion sensors and be designed to be off unless triggered by an intruder located within five feet of the perimeter. The zone of activation sensors must be within the property boundaries of the property wishing to be illuminated. 
F.  Timers and Photocells. Security lights shall combine timers with dusk-to-dawn photocells to ensure lights are on only when it is dark. 
G.  Requirements. In addition to the application materials set forth in the general provisions of this section, applications for security lighting installations shall include a written description of the need for and purposes of the security lighting, a site plan showing the area to be secured and the location of all security lighting fixtures, specifications of all fixtures, the horizontal and vertical angles in which light will be directed, and adequate cross-sections showing how light will be directed only onto the area to be secured. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.46.060 - Accent lighting. 
Architectural features may be illuminated by uplighting, provided that the light is effectively contained by the structure, the lamps are low intensity to produce a subtle lighting effect, and no glare or light trespass is produced. For national flags, statues, public art, or other objects that cannot be illuminated with down lighting, upward lighting may only be used in the form of two narrow-cone spotlights that confine the illumination to the object of interest. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.46.070 - Lighting standards for uses within fifty feet of residential zones. 
A.  For Uses Within Fifty Feet of Residential Zones. 
1.  Lighting poles shall be no taller than twenty feet. 
2.  Lighting fixtures shall be aimed and shielded in a manner that shall not direct illumination on adjacent residential zones. Fixtures shall be of a type or adequately shielded to prevent glare from normal viewing angles. 
3.  At the discretion of the review authority and, where feasible, additional landscaping may be used to provide light screening between commercial zones and residential zones to help prevent light trespass. Where landscaping is used for light screening, the director shall take into consideration the applicable landscaping standards, the design standards, the creation of excessive shadows or dark spaces, and views into and out of a site. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.46.080 - Parking lot lighting. 
A.  Standards. 
1.  Parking lots shall comply with the standards of this chapter in addition to the other requirements of this title. 
2.  Parking lot lighting shall be designed to provide for uniform lighting throughout the facility with no dark patches or pockets. 
3.  Parking lot lighting shall be designed to provide sufficient lighting to identify parking features and provide pedestrian safety. 
4.  In order to direct light downward and minimize the amount of light spilled into the dark night sky, all lighting fixtures serving parking lots, shall be full cut-off fixtures as defined by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA). 
5.  The maximum permissible mounting height of all parking lot lighting shall be thirty feet unless otherwise specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.46.090 - Lighting of outdoor performance, sport and recreational facilities. 
A.  Events and Special Activities. 
1.  Lighting levels and pole heights for outdoor performance, sports, and recreation facilities shall not exceed by more than five percent of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America published standards for the proposed activity. 
2.  Where playing fields or other special activity areas are to be illuminated, lighting fixtures shall be specified, mounted, aimed and shielded so that their beams fall within the primary playing area and immediate surroundings, and so that no direct illumination is directed off the site. 
3.  The main lighting shall be turned off as soon as possible following the end of the event. The main lighting shall not remain on longer than thirty minutes following the end of the event. Where feasible, a low level lighting system shall be used to facilitate patrons leaving the facility, cleanup, nighttime maintenance and other closing activities. The low level lighting system shall provide a horizontal illumination level at grade of no more than four foot-candles. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.46.100 - Lighting for multi-unit attached residential projects. 
In all multi-unit attached residential developments, light fixtures for walks, steps, parking areas, driveways, on-site streets, and other facilities shall be provided in keeping with the type of development and at locations to assure safe and convenient nighttime use. Fixtures shall be designed in keeping with the project and shall be properly shaded to screen the windows of habitable rooms from the direct rays of light. All outdoor lighting shall be so shielded and adjusted that the light is directed to fall only on the same premises upon which the light source is located. All outdoor security and safety lighting shall be installed in accordance with the standards in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.46.110 - Standards for single-family residential uses. 
A.  Standards. 
1.  Protective security lighting, landscape lighting or architectural highlighting, properly directed and shielded, may be operated at all hours of the night. 
2.  Luminaires providing outdoor lighting and permanently mounted to a residential building or to other buildings on the same lot are allowed. 
3.  Motion sensors with integral photo-control area and high-efficacy dust-to-dawn lighting are encouraged. 
4.  Permanently installed luminaires in or around swimming pools, water features, or other locations subject to Article 680 of the California Electrical Code need not be high-efficacy luminaires. 
5.  Lighting for single-family residential uses shall be directed to fall only on the same premises upon which the light source is located. 
6.  Floodlighting is discouraged, and if used, must be shielded to prevent: 
a.  Disability glare for drivers or pedestrians; 
b.  Light trespass beyond the property line; and 
c.  Light above a horizontal plane. "Wallpack" type fixtures are not permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
Chapter 18.47 - SIGNS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY AND PUBLIC PROPERTY NOT OWNED BY THE CITY OR ITS AFFILIATED AGENCIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-2411, § 2, adopted April 5, 2016, amended Ch. 18.47, §§ 18.47.010—18.47.270 in its entirety, in effect repealing and replacing said chapter to read as herein set out. The former Ch. 18.47 pertained to signs and outdoor advertising displays and derived from Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012. 
 
18.47.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the Regulatory Sign Ordinance of the City of National City, California. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2411, § 2, 4-5-2016)  
18.47.020 - Authority, scope, intent, purposes. 
A.  Authority. This chapter is enacted pursuant to the city's general and police powers, California Constitution Article XI, Section 7; California Government Code Sections 65000 et seq. , 65850(b), 38774, and 38775; Business and Professions Code Sections 5200 et seq. , 5230, 5490 et seq. , 13530 et seq. and 13540; Penal Code Section 556 et seq. ; and other applicable state laws. 
B.  Scope. This chapter regulates signs, as defined herein, which are located within the corporate limits of the City of National City and over which the city has land use regulatory authority, but not on city owned land. Signs on city land are subject to Chapter 13.28. Signs used in conjunction with parades, protests, demonstrations and outdoor public assemblies are regulated as temporary uses under Chapter 15.60. 
C.  Intent. By adoption of this chapter, the city council intends to create and implement a comprehensive system for the regulation of signs within the scope of this chapter, with a regulation system that: 1) accommodates the expression rights of the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and the corollary provisions of the California Constitution; 2) comports with all applicable principles of federal and state constitutional, statutory and administrative law. 
D.  Purposes and Interests Served. The purposes of this chapter include, but are not limited to: 1) serving the governmental and public interests in controlling visual clutter, community esthetics, and safety of drivers, passengers, and pedestrians; 2) aiding in the identification of properties, land uses, enterprises and other establishments; 3) enhancing the general appearance and esthetics of the urban environment; and 4) protecting the natural beauty of the city's open space. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2411, § 2, 4-5-2016)  
18.47.030 - Basic principles. 
A.  Message Neutrality Policy. It is the policy of National City to regulate signs in a manner that does not favor commercial speech over noncommercial speech and does not regulate protected noncommercial speech by message content. 
B.  Message Substitution Policy. A constitutionally protected noncommercial message may be substituted, in whole or in part, for any allowed commercial message or any other protected noncommercial message, provided that the sign structure or mounting device is legal. Any substitution shall require the private property owner's consent. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial speech, or favoring of any particular protected noncommercial message over any other protected noncommercial message. The message substitution policy does not: 1) create a right to increase the total amount of sign display area on a site or parcel; 2) create a right to substitute an off-site commercial message in place of an onsite commercial message or in place of a noncommercial message; 3) affect the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device must be properly permitted; 4) authorize changing the physical method of image presentation (such as digital or neon) display without a permit; or 5) authorize a physical change to the sign structure without compliance with applicable building codes, safety codes, and neutrally-applicable rules for sign size, height, orientation, setback, separation or illumination. 
C.  Enforcement Authority. The director is authorized and directed to administer and enforce this chapter. 
D.  Administrative Interpretations. Interpretations of this chapter are to be made initially by the director in consultation with the city attorney. The director may refer an interpretation question to the planning commission. All interpretations of this chapter are to be exercised in light of the message neutrality and message substitution policies. Where a particular type of sign is proposed, and the type is neither expressly allowed nor prohibited by this chapter, or whenever a sign does not qualify as a "structure" as defined in the building code, as adopted by the city, then the planning commission or director, as applicable, shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application based on the most similar sign type, using physical and structural similarity, that is expressly regulated by this chapter. 
E.  Responsibility for Compliance. The responsibility for compliance with this chapter rests jointly and severally upon the sign owner, the permit holder, all parties holding the present right of possession and control of the property whereon a sign is located, mounted or installed, and the legal owner of the lot or parcel, even if the sign was mounted, installed, erected or displayed without the consent or knowledge of the owner and/or other parties holding the legal right to immediate possession and control. 
F.  Onsite-Offsite Distinction. Within this chapter, the distinction between onsite signs and offsite signs applies only to commercial messages. It does not apply to non-commercial messages. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2411, § 2, 4-5-2016)  
18.47.040 - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this chapter, and to other chapters when cross-referenced by such other chapters. 
"Banner" means any flexible material, such as cloth, plastic, vinyl, paper, cardboard or thin metal, with or without a message, attached outdoors to a building, structure or mounting device, or attached indoors to a building, structure or mounting device so as to be visible from the exterior of a building, or structure. The term "banner" includes a pennant, flag, or bunting. 
"Billboard" means a permanent sign structure in a fixed location which meets any one or more of the following criteria: (1) it is used for the display of off-site commercial messages; (2) the message display area, or any part thereof, is made available to message sponsors other than the owner(s) or operator(s) of the sign, typically for a fee or other consideration, i.e., it is general advertising for hire; (3) the sign is a principal or secondary use of the land, rather than appurtenant or accessory to some other principal use of the land. 
"Bunting" means a form of banner that is typically presented and displayed in a folded or gathered fashion or combination. It may include a display in combination with a flag or banner. Depending on the format of the display, the term may be synonymous with banner. 
"Changeable copy sign" means a sign displaying a message that is changed by means of moveable letters, slats, lights, light emitting diodes, or moveable background material. "Digital signs," "dynamic signs," and CEVMS (changeable electronic variable message signs) are all within this definition. 
"City" means the City of National City California. 
"City property" means any parcel of land or separately leasable space over which the city or any of its related entities, holds the present right of possession and control, regardless of who may hold legal fee title, or that is within the public right-of-way. 
"Commercial mascot" means a person or animal attired or decorated with commercial insignia, images, costumes, masks, or symbols, and/or holding signs displaying commercial messages, when a principal purpose is to draw attention to or advertise a commercial enterprise. This definition includes "sign twirlers," "sign clowns," "sign spinners," "sign twirlers," and "human sandwich board" signs. Also known as "living signs." 
"Commercial message" means a message that proposes a commercial transaction or pertains primarily to the economic and commercial interests of the message sponsor and/or the sign audience. 
"Construction site sign" means a sign that is displayed on the site of a construction development project during the period of time of actual construction. 
"Digital display" means display methods utilizing LED (light emitting diode), LCD (liquid crystal display), plasma display, projected images, or any functionally equivalent technology, and which is capable of automated, remote or computer control to change the image, either in a "slide show" manner (series of still images), or full motion animation, or any combination of them. 
"Director" means the city manager or designee. 
"Directional sign" is a sign used to provide directions to pedestrians and vehicular traffic. 
"Election period" means that period of time which begins sixty days before a special, general, or primary election in which at least some registered voters in the city are eligible to vote, and ends ten days after such election. 
"Establishment" means any legal use of land, other than long-term residential, which involves the use of structures subject to the building code. By way of example and not limitation, this definition includes businesses, factories, farms, schools, hospitals, hotels and motels, offices and libraries, but does not include single-family homes, mobile homes, residential apartments, residential care facilities, or residential condominiums. Multi-unit housing developments are considered establishments during the time of construction; individual units are not within the meaning of establishment once a certificate of occupancy has been issued or once a full-time residency begins. 
"Establishment premises" means a specific occupancy within a building or upon a parcel of land, typically having a specific address and discrete entrance(s) and exit(s) so as to maintain a specific identity and location. 
"Flag" means a piece of fabric or other flexible material, usually rectangular, of distinctive design, used as a symbol. 
"Freestanding sign" means a sign which is principally supported on the ground by one or more uprights, braces, poles, pylons or other similar structural components. This category includes both monument and pole signs. 
"Frontage" when used as a measurement reference of a building or establishment premises, shall refer to the distance between the two most distant corners of a building measured in a straight line along the building face bordering the adjoining street. See glossary pertaining to frontage when made applicable to a parcel of land. The term also refers to the elevation of a building that abuts or adjoins a private or public right-of-way or parking lot. 
"Garage sale sign" means a sign whose message concerns short-term rummage, estate, boutique, or garage sales of used or handmade common household items from a residential property. 
"General advertising," also known as "general advertising for hire," means the enterprise of advertising or promoting other businesses or causes using methods of advertising, in contrast to self-promotion or on-site advertising. 
"Height" means the distance measured vertically from grade to the highest point or portion of the object to be measured or height limited. 
"Illegal sign" means a sign that was installed without proper city or other required approvals and/or permits at the time it was initially installed, and which has not been legalized by later action. This definition also includes a sign that was erected in conformance with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations in effect at the time of installation, but which was subsequently altered so as to be out of compliance with applicable law, including the terms of permits which authorized construction. All signs described in Business and Professions Code Section 5499.1 and defined therein as an "illegal on-premises advertising display" are also within this definition. 
"Illuminated sign" means a sign whose message is made readable by internal or external lights or light emitting diodes (or functionally equivalent technology), typically (but not necessarily) during hours of darkness. 
"Install" or "installation" includes but is not limited to the act by which a sign is constructed or placed on land or a structure, or the act of attaching, painting, printing, producing, or reproducing, or using any other method or process by which a visual message is presented or placed upon a surface. 
"Legal nonconforming sign" means a sign that complied with all applicable laws, rules and policies at the time of installation, and which has not been expanded beyond the originally applicable rules, but which does not conform to currently applicable law and rules. 
"Mobile billboard" means a sign on a wheeled conveyance (whether motorized or not) or water craft, including those which carry, convey, pull or transport any sign used for general advertising for hire. The term does not include vehicles and vessels that display identification information concerning the usual business or regular work of the vehicle/vessel owner (not including general advertising). 
"Motor fuel price sign" means a sign of the type described and required by Business and Professions Code section 13530 et seq. 
"Monument sign" means a low-profile freestanding sign supported by a structural base or other solid structural features other than support poles, which may contain copy on more than one side. 
"Mural-type sign" means a sign painted on the exterior wall of a building consisting of graphics or images, either alone or in combination with letters. Mural-type signs shall be treated as any other sign subject to the signage area requirements. 
"Non-commercial message" means a constitutionally protected message that addresses topics of public concern or controversy such as, by way of example and not limitation, politics, religion, philosophy, science, art or social commentary. 
"Offsite sign" means a sign that advertises commercial products, accommodations, services, or activities not provided in or on the property or premises upon which it is located. The on-site/off-site distinction does not apply to non-commercial messages. 
"Onsite sign" means a sign that advertises the commercial business, accommodation, services, or activities provided on the premises on which the sign is located, or is expected to be provided in the near future, such as "coming soon" movie posters. In the case of developments subject to a master sign program, all establishments subject to the program are considered on-site whenever located within any location subject to the program. All establishments within a shopping center are on-site as to any sign(s) also located within that shopping center. The on-site/off-site distinction does not apply to non-commercial messages. 
"Outdoors" means a location on undeveloped property or the exterior of a building or structure. 
"Parcels" or "property" or similar references or descriptions mean parcels defined or delineated by assessor parcel numbers maintained by the County tax assessor or as defined in the glossary of this Code. 
"Pennant" is a banner with three sides, or swallow-tail form. 
"Permanent sign" means a sign that is solidly attached to a building, structure, or the ground by means of mounting brackets, bolts, welds, or other combination of attachment methods, thereby rendering the sign non-moveable or difficult to reposition without the use of machinery, cutting devices, or mechanical devices. See also "temporary sign." 
"Pole sign" means a permanently mounted, freestanding sign which is supported above the ground by one or more uprights, braces, poles, or other similar structural components. 
"Projecting sign" is any sign which projects beyond a building face and uses a wall or vertical element of a building as its main source of support. The term includes a double-faced sign that is installed more or less perpendicular to the face of a building so as to allow a message to be viewable from either side. The term does not include signs that are installed along the face of a building and that are completely attached to the face of a building. 
"Real estate sign" means any sign whose message concerns a proposed economic transaction involving real estate, including all signs described in Civil Code 713. 
"Residential sign" means a sign displayed on a legal, individual dwelling unit. The term does not apply to management offices of apartment complexes or mobile home parks, or to hotels, motels, inns or other places of transient occupancy. 
"Responsible party" means the permittee, property owner, or owner or person in charge of the sign. 
"Rooftop sign" or "roof-mounted sign" means a sign that extends above the ridgeline of the roof of a building or a sign attached to any portion of the roof of a building. 
"Safety codes" refers to the building, electrical, plumbing, grading, and similar codes which ensure safe construction. 
"Shopping center" shall mean a group of commercial buildings as defined in the glossary. 
"Sign" as used in this chapter, generally means the public display of any visually communicative image placed on public display and visible from the exterior of any portion of the public right-of-way or place open to passage by the public. Notwithstanding the generality of the foregoing, the term "sign" does not include: 
1.  Aerial banners towed behind aircraft; 
2.  Architectural features—Decorative or architectural features of buildings (not including lettering, trademarks or moving parts), which do not perform a communicative function (examples include color stripes around an office building or retail store); 
3.  Automated teller machines (ATMs), when not used for general advertising; 
4.  Cornerstones and foundation stones; 
5.  The legal use of fireworks, candles and artificial lighting not otherwise regulated by this chapter; 
6.  Grave markers, gravestones, headstones, mausoleums, shrines, and other markers of the deceased; 
7.  Historical monuments, plaques and tablets; 
8.  Holiday and cultural observance decorations displayed in season, including inflatable objects, on private residential property which are on display for not more than forty-five calendar days per year (cumulative, per dwelling unit) and which do not include commercial messages; 
9.  Inflatable gymnasiums associated with legal residential uses—Inflatable, temporary, moveable, gymnasium devices commonly used for children's birthday parties, and similar devices (also called "party jumps" or "bounce houses"); 
10.  Interior graphics—Visual communicative devices that are located entirely within a building or other enclosed structure and are not visible from the exterior thereof; 
11.  Manufacturers' marks—Marks on tangible products, which identify the maker, seller, provider or product, and which customarily remain attached to the product even after sale; 
12.  Mass transit graphics—Graphic images mounted on duly licensed and authorized mass transit vehicles that legally pass through the city; 
13.  News racks, newspaper vending devices and newsstands; 
14.  Personal appearance: makeup, masks, wigs, costumes, jewelry, apparel and the like, unless it constitutes a commercial mascot; 
15.  Safety warnings on motorized or electrified equipment; 
16.  Searchlights used as part of a search and rescue or other emergency service operation (this exclusion does not apply to searchlights used as attention attracting devices for commercial or special events); 
17.  Shopping carts, golf carts, horse drawn carriages, and similar devices (any motorized vehicle which may be legally operated upon a public right-of-way is not within this exclusion); 
18.  Symbols embedded in architecture—Symbols of non-commercial organizations or concepts including, but not limited to, religious or political symbols, when such are permanently integrated into the structure of a permanent building which is otherwise legal, by way of example and not limitation, such symbols include stained glass windows on churches, carved or bas relief doors or walls, bells and religious statuary; 
19.  Vehicle and vessel insignia—On street legal vehicles and properly licensed watercraft: license plates, license plate frames, registration insignia, non-commercial messages, messages relating to the business of which the vehicle or vessel is an instrument or tool (not including general advertising) and messages relating to the proposed sale, lease or exchange of the vehicle or vessel. 
20.  Vending machines, automated intake devices and product dispensing devices which do not display off-site commercial messages or general advertising messages; 
21.  Window displays—The display of merchandise in a store window, when such merchandise is immediately available for purchase. 
"Signage" is the collective noun for all signs on a given parcel, lot or location, or within a stated classification; 
"Sign area" means that portion of a sign which consists of visually communicative copy, including the advertising surface and any framing, trim, or molding but not including the supporting structure, measured one side only, provided that the angle between faces for two-sided signs does not exceed thirty degrees. 
"Sign copy" means the visually communicative elements, including but not limited to words, letters, numbers, designs, figures, or other symbolic presentation incorporated into a sign with the purpose of attracting attention to the subject matter or message. 
"Sign face" means the portion of a sign that is available for displaying sign copy, together with any frame, color, panel, ornamental molding, or condition which forms an integral part of the sign copy and which is used to differentiate such sign copy from any wall or background against which it may be placed. Those portions of the supports, uprights, or base of a sign that do not function as a sign shall not be considered as part of a sign face. 
"Sign height" means the vertical distance of a sign from the uppermost point used in measuring the sign area to the ground immediately below such point or to the level of the upper surface of the nearest curb of a street or alley (other than a structurally elevated roadway), whichever measurement permits the greater elevation of the sign. 
"Special event" means an activity or event that occurs rarely or irregularly, is open to the public, and is of a duration not exceeding seven days. Any event that is subject to a temporary use permit will be considered within this definition. By way of example and not limitation, special events include circus or carnival runs, 4 th of July Festival, Easter Egg Hunt, Relay for Life, Christmas Tree Lighting, parking lot sales at shopping centers and malls, holiday celebrations, Auto Heritage Day, etc. 
"Temporary message" means a message that pertains exclusively to an event which occurs on, or ends on, a particular day. 
"Temporary sign" means a sign that is constructed of lightweight or flimsy material, and is easily installed and removed using ordinary hand tools. Any sign that qualifies as a "structure" under the Building Code is not within this definition. 
"Visibility triangle" means at the intersection of any two or more streets, that area extending horizontally fifty feet from the corner of the intersection and vertically, from a height of three feet to a height of eight feet. 
"Visible to the exterior" refers to the placement of a sign or banner within the interior first eight feet of a commercial or industrial building or structure in such a manner so that it or its message is readily visible on an immediately contiguous public right-of-way, parking lot, or parcel. To be visible does not require that the message be understandable or readable. 
"Wall sign" means a sign that is attached to, erected against or painted on the wall of a building or other vertical structure. 
"Warning sign" means a sign that is posted to provide notice of danger, such as "Beware of Dog," "Railroad Crossing," "Danger High Voltage" or noting the location of underground utilities. 
"Window sign" means a sign that is painted or mounted on a window pane, or that is mounted within five feet of a window and oriented for viewing by exterior passersby. 
"Zone" refers both to the zone classifications given in Section 18.20.020, and to the specific areas or districts to which a given zoning classification applies. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2411, § 2, 4-5-2016; Ord. No. 2017-2440, § 6, 10-17-2017)  
18.47.050 - Sign permits, other sign-related decisions, appeals. 
A.  Sign Permit Generally Required. Unless exempted from the sign permit requirement, all signs regulated by this chapter may be installed, maintained, erected, or displayed only pursuant to sign permit pursuant to this chapter, and a finding of compliance is made by the planning division, using the design criteria identified in this chapter and other applicable regulations. A sign permit may be approved subject to conditions, so long as those conditions are required by this chapter or some other applicable law, rule or regulation. 
B.  Compliance Required. No permit shall be issued for any sign or sign structure except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. A sign permit may be subject to compliance with permitting requirements imposed by other sources of law, including the safety codes for building, electrical, plumbing, grading, etc. Where there is a conflict between the provision of this chapter and other applicable regulations, the more restrictive shall apply. 
C.  Right to Permit or Display. When any sign permit application is complete and fully complies with all applicable provisions of this chapter, and all other applicable laws, rules and regulations, the permit shall be approved and issued within the required time. In the case of signs which are exempt from the sign permit requirement, there is a right to erect, display, and maintain such signs as are authorized by this chapter, subject to the applicable rules. This "right to permit" provision does not apply when the relevant city law is under active consideration for amendment at the time the application for a sign permit is submitted, or when the rules or regulations relevant to the application are changed prior to the expiration of the time for decision. 
D.  Legally Existing Signs; Alterations. Signs legally existing prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be exempt from the sign permit requirement unless a structural alteration is made, the sign area or any other point of nonconformity is enlarged or expanded, or there is some other change in the structural elements of the sign. Structural alterations and expansions require a sign permit. 
E.  Review. All sign permit applications shall be initially reviewed by the director. In the case of any discretionary permit in which signage is included, such as a master sign program, a specific plan including signs, a variance, or an appeal, the director shall prepare a report for the body which shall hear the matter, the planning commission or city council. The report may, but is not required, to include recommendations. 
F.  Application for a Sign Permit. Any person seeking a sign permit for a sign shall submit to the director a written application for such. The director shall prepare a sign permit application form and provide it to any person on request, along with such other materials and information as applicants need to submit for a permit. The same form may be used for both the application and the decision thereon. A single form may be used for multiple signs on the same site; however, the director may make separate decisions as to each sign. A sign permit application is complete only when it is accompanied by the appropriate application fee, in an amount set by resolution of the city council. 
G.  Application Contents. The sign permit application form may call for the following information: 
1.  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant and, if applicable, the name, address, and telephone number; when the applicant is not the holder of legal title to the property, consent to the installation of the sign by the person(s) or entities who hold legal title and the present right of possession and control of the property; when the sign is proposed to be installed by a sign contractor, the name, address, contact information, and the license number, if any, of the contractor; 
2.  As to the proposed location for the sign, multiple sets of a fully dimensioned site plan (drawn to scale) indicating the street address, assessor's parcel number, zone classification, all property lines, public and private street lines (including center lines), structures, easements, utility poles and wires, and the location and size (in square feet) of all existing and proposed signs; 
3.  As to existing signs already on parcel, information as to whether each is permitted or exempt from permitting; 
4.  Accurate and scaled building elevation showing existing and proposed building signs; including existing and proposed sign area of each individual sign and the combined area of all signs (including those already existing or previously permitted) in relation to the maximum allowed sign area; 
5.  A statement as to whether the sign is intended to be used in whole or in part for off-site commercial messages, advertising for hire or general advertising; 
6.  A statement or graphical description as to whether the proposed sign, or any part of it, is proposed to utilize any of the following physical methods of message presentation: sound; odor, smoke, fumes or steam; rotating, moving or animated elements; activation by wind or forced air; neon or other fluorescing gases; fluorescent or day-glow type colors; flashing or strobe lighting; light emitting diodes, liquid crystal displays or other video-like methods; digital display technology; use of live animals or living persons as part of the display; mannequins or statuary; 
7.  A statement as to whether the property or parcel on which the sign is proposed to be erected or displayed, or any currently existing sign thereon, is the subject of any outstanding notice of zoning violation or notice to correct, including whether any such deficiencies are to be remedied by the proposed application; 
8.  Photographs of the existing property, parcel and/or building on which the sign is proposed to be erected or displayed; 
9.  In the case of any proposed sign which is subject to a discretionary process, such as a variance, conditional use permit, or sign program, all information required by such process(es); 
10.  The director is authorized to modify the list of information to be provided on a sign permit application; however, additions may be made only after thirty days public notice. The director is also authorized to request, require, or accept application materials, in whole or in part, in electronic form, and to specify the acceptable computer formats for such submissions. 
H.  Completeness. As the first step in processing a sign permit application, the director shall determine whether the application is complete. If the application is not complete, the applicant shall be so notified in person or in writing initially within thirty days of the date of receipt of the application; the notice of incompleteness shall state the points of deficiency and identify any additional information necessary. The applicant shall then have thirty calendar days, to submit additional information to render the application complete. 
I.  Disqualification. No sign permit application will be approved if: 
1.  The applicant has installed a sign in violation of the provisions of this chapter and, at the time of submission of the application, each illegal or non-permitted sign has not been legalized, removed or a cure included in the application; 
2.  There is any other existing Code violation located on the site of the proposed sign(s) (other than an illegal or nonconforming sign that is not owned or controlled by the applicant and is located at a different establishment) which has not been cured at the time of the application, unless the noncompliance is proposed to be cured as part of the application; 
3.  The sign application is substantially the same as an application previously denied, unless: (i) twelve months have elapsed since the date of the last application, or (ii) new evidence or proof of changed conditions is furnished in the new application; 
4.  The applicant has not obtained any applicable required use permit or conditional use permit. However, applications for such permits may be processed simultaneously with a sign permit application. 
J.  Applications for Multiple Signs. When an application proposes two or more signs, the application may be granted either in whole or in part, with separate decisions as to each proposed sign. When a multiple sign application is denied in whole or in part, the director's written notice of determination shall specify the grounds for such denial. 
K.  Discretion. When discretion is authorized for a master sign program or site plan review, that discretion may be exercised only as to location, structural and safety factors, and not as to message content, graphic design or artistic merit. Permissible factors for consideration include: style or character of existing improvements upon the site and lots adjacent to the site; construction materials; number and spacing of signs in the area; the sign's height, design, and location in relation to its proposed use; form, proportion, scale, overall sign size; potential effect of the proposed sign on driver and pedestrian safety; potential blocking of view (whole or partial) of a structure or facade or public view of historical or architectural significance; potential obstruction of views of users of adjacent buildings. 
L.  Master Sign Programs. Permit applications for master sign programs as part of planned commercial, office-professional and industrial development shall include the above information as part of a site development plan or specific plan. When approval is sought for a development that includes one or more signs, then the sign aspects of the proposed development must satisfy the applicable provisions of this chapter. In addition, when a development project will have six or more leased spaces, it must also comply with the master sign program requirements set forth in Section 18.47.130. Such proposals may be reviewed by the director and shall be decided by the planning commission. In preparing a report for the planning commission, the director may, but is not required to, make recommendations. 
M.  Revocation or Cancellation. The director may revoke any approval or permit upon refusal or failure of the permittee to comply with the provisions of the permit and the requirements of this chapter, after written notice of noncompliance and at least fifteen calendar days opportunity to cure. However, opportunity to cure does not apply when a sign, by virtue of its physical condition, constitutes an immediate and significant threat to public safety. 
N.  Permits Issued in Error. Any approval or permit issued in error may be summarily revoked by the director upon written notice to the permittee, stating the reason for the revocation. "Issued in error" means that the permit should not have been issued in the first place and includes but is not limited to omissions, errors or misrepresentations in the application materials, and oversights or errors in the processing thereof. 
O.  Inspections. All signs subject to one or more safety permits (building, plumbing, electrical, grading, etc.) require final inspection and approval by the Building Official. 
P.  Sign-Related Decisions. Challenges or objections to sign-related decisions, notices and orders, other than approval or denial of a sign permit, do not require a particular form, but must be in writing, signed by the applicant or challenger, and particularly state the matter challenged and the grounds therefore. Challenges shall be made to the director within thirty days of the date of the decision, notice, and/or order. Challenges and objections to sign-related decisions not made in accordance with these procedures shall not be eligible for appeal. 
Q.  Levels of Review; Order of Review. Except for signs subject to initial review by the planning commission, initial review and decisions on all sign permit applications shall be by the director unless otherwise stated herein; appeal is first to the planning commission and then to city council. 
R.  Safety Codes. When a proposed sign, by virtue of its physical, structural, location, and other non-message factors, is subject to any permits or requirements under the safety codes, then satisfaction of such requirements shall be a condition of the sign permit. 
S.  Permit Denial. When a sign permit application is denied, the denial shall be in writing and sent or delivered to the address shown on the applicant's application form, and shall specifically state the grounds for denial. 
T.  Timely Decision. At each level of review or appeal, the decision shall be rendered in writing within thirty calendar days. The time period begins running when an appeal, challenge, or objection is received, the application is complete (or is deemed complete because no notice of incompleteness has been given), an amendment is received, or the notice of appeal has been filed, whichever applies. The timely decision requirement may be waived by the applicant or appellant. If a decision is not rendered within the required time, then the application or appeal shall be deemed denied; in the case of an appeal, the lower level decision shall be deemed affirmed. 
U.  Appeal. Any decision regarding a sign permit application or other sign-related decision may be appealed by any affected person. Notices of appeal and challenges and objections to sign-related decisions must be filed with the city clerk within thirty calendar days of the decision; if city offices are not open on the thirtieth day, then the time period is extended to the next day city offices are open to the public. Appeals shall be heard by the planning commission. The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council pursuant to Section 18.12.060, as augmented by this chapter. The appeal right arises at the earliest of: a) the date of the written decision that is delivered to the applicant, or b) the time for decision has run without a written decision. The notice of appeal, objection, or challenge must state specifically the matter appealed from and the grounds for appeal. Notices of appeal must be signed by the appellant or their authorized agent, representative, or attorney. 
V.  Status Quo. During the pendency of review or appeal, the status quo of the subject sign(s) shall be maintained. This does not apply whenever a sign, by virtue of its physical condition, constitutes an immediate threat to public safety. 
W.  Judicial Review. Following final decision by the city council, any affected person may seek judicial review of the final decision on a sign permit application or other sign-related decision pursuant to the applicable provisions of the California Code of Civil Procedure. 
X.  Notices. Written notices by the city, required within this chapter, shall be deemed given on the earliest of the following: when personally delivered, when publicly posted, or on the day of mailing. Notices are deemed effective when sent to the last known address of the addressee. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2411, § 2, 4-5-2016)  
18.47.060 - Signs exempt from sign permit requirement. 
The signs listed in this section are exempt from the requirement of prior approval (either by sign permit or site plan review), but still subject to the rules stated in this chapter. When any residential sign meets the definition of "structure" in the building code, or is electrified, then compliance with all safety codes (building permits, electrical permits, etc.) is required. Signs may also be exempted from the sign permit requirement by other sections of this chapter, other chapters of this Code, or other bodies of law. 
A.  Residential Signs. All legal residential dwelling units are allowed a defined maximum cumulative display area, which is available at all times, subject to: 
1.  Physical types: residential signs may be free standing or mounted on doors, walls, or fences; flag poles not exceeding twenty-five feet cumulative of linear footage; roof-mounted signs are prohibited; 
2.  Permissible message types: any variety or combination of constitutionally protected noncommercial speech (including but not limited to political/election signs); real estate signs (must be removed not more than five days after the proposed economic transaction is completed, or the property goes off the market); garage sale signs compliant with the other provisions in the Municipal Code addressing garage sales which is currently set forth at Section 7.21.060; construction site signs; 
3.  Prohibited message types: commercial messages other than those specified in the preceding subsection; general advertising for hire; any message whose public display is illegal; 
4.  Maximum display area: sixteen square feet per parcel per frontage at all times; except that during the election period, when there shall be no limit on the maximum display area. The maximum display area is the cumulative total of all signs that are subject to the area limit. Not included within with the cumulative total: indicators of street address and occupants' name(s), visual images mounted on the ground (i.e., door mats); 
5.  Maximum sign size: six square feet per sign at all times. The maximum sign size is the maximum square footage allowed for an individual sign. 
6.  Illumination: special illumination of residential signs is prohibited; residential signs may be illuminated only by natural and legal ambient lighting; 
B.  Construction Site Signs, subject to: 
1.  On single-family residential properties, construction site signs shall be no larger than twenty square feet per street frontage; 
2.  For all other construction projects: maximum display area for signs shall be no greater than fifty square feet per frontage; 
3.  Construction site signs must be removed prior to final inspection or before issuance of a certificate of completion or certificate of occupancy, as applicable; 
4.  Illumination: prohibited. 
C.  Signs required or authorized by other bodies of law or court orders; 
D.  Signs required by the fire department to designate fire lanes; 
E.  Nameplate identification signs and combination name plates and address signs with letters that do not exceed three inches in height, are not illuminated, and do not exceed four square feet in area; 
F.  Window signs that do not exceed fifteen percent of the area of a window or twelve square feet, whichever is less; 
G.  Warning signs such as "no parking," "watch dogs," "private property," and "security service" that are not illuminated, do not exceed one square foot in area each, and do not project over a public right-of-way. No more than three of these signs shall be allowed per premises; 
H.  Bulletin boards, provided they do not exceed sixteen square feet in area, do not project over a public right-of-way, and are not illuminated. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2411, § 2, 4-5-2016)  
18.47.070 - Prohibited signs. 
The signs listed in this section are prohibited in all zones and at all times unless explicitly authorized or allowed by another provision of this chapter, another chapter of the Code, or other applicable law. 
1.  New billboards, conversion of existing billboards to digital or dynamic or tri-vision display, expansion of the display face of any existing billboard (except as authorized by state law), and the installation of an additional display face to an existing billboard structure; 
2.  Mobile billboards, but not including taxis or shuttle vehicles or public transportation vehicles that legally pass through the city; 
3.  Signs mounted on roofs, water towers, radio, television, or cell phone towers; 
4.  Signs mounted on fences; 
5.  Signs mounted on trees, bushes, or vegetation; 
6.  Signs placed on property (public or private) without consent of the property owner or other party holding the present right of possession and control; 
7.  Signs that obstruct any window, door, gate or opening used or required as a means of regular ingress or egress, legal light or ventilation, as a fire escape or other emergency access or escape; 
8.  Signs displayed on vacant or undeveloped lots; 
9.  Signs whose intensity of illumination or size, shape or location interferes with the safe operation of a vehicle or creates distraction to the operator of a wheeled vehicle on adjoining public streets; 
10.  Signs mounted in such a manner as to obstruct the free flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic; 
11.  Signs that are confusingly similar to authorized, official traffic and pedestrian control signs, even though they are in fact not traffic control signs; 
12.  Signs using animation, flashing, blinking, or intermittent light exceeding any of these operational parameters: 
a.  Illumination equivalent to incandescent light bulbs of sixty watts maximum per bulb; 
b.  Flashes or blinks more than fifteen times per minute; 
c.  Chaser lights; 
d.  High intensity neon lights, tubes and flashing lights are prohibited on animated and flashing signs; 
e.  Rotating beacon lighting elements. 
13.  Advertising or attention-getting devices that are inflatable, float in air or water, or are activated by wind or forced air; 
14.  Temporary signs displaying off-site commercial messages or used for general advertising for hire, unless required by state law; 
15.  Signs placed in the public right-of-way, unless explicitly allowed by Chapter 13.28. 
16.  Signs mounted on motor vehicles parked in the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2411, § 2, 4-5-2016)  
18.47.080 - Permanent signs. 
Unless specifically exempted herein, all permanent signs require a sign permit. The following three types of signs are categorically exempt from this sign permit requirement: 1) signs installed and displayed pursuant to court order, statutory requirement or authorization; 2) signs on residential properties; 3) signs posted by any governmental entity in the execution of its official duties. 
A.  Signs less than six square feet. The display on any non-residential parcel of any single sign or banner that is less than six square feet in area is allowed and is exempt from obtaining a sign permit. 
B.  Directional Signs. Directional signs that do not exceed a total of three square feet in size per sign, and total area combined does not exceed nine square feet per parcel, are allowed, and are exempt from obtaining a sign permit. 
C.  Freestanding Signs. A maximum of two freestanding or monument signs, not to exceed a total of one hundred square feet, are allowed, subject to a sign permit, for single-family subdivisions, multi-family developments, and mobile home parks. 
D.  Flags. On residential land uses, a total of twenty-four square feet of flag area may be displayed at any and all times; on non-residential land uses, there shall be no limit to the allowable flag area that may be displayed at any and all times. On residential lots, the number of flag poles is limited to a cumulative linear footage of twenty-five feet; on non-residential lots, the cumulative linear footage shall be limited to the maximum height allowed in the zone in which the property is located. Flag poles intended for permanent use are subject to appropriate building permits. 
E.  Permanent Signs in Commercial, Industrial, Mixed-Use, and Institutional Zones. Except in shopping centers (where special rules, stated in the next subsection, apply) and public assembly uses (to which special rules, stated below, apply), permanent signs may be installed on or along the face of a building in commercial zones and commercial uses in a mixed-use zone, and industrial or institutional zones, subject to the following: 
1.  Signs exceeding twenty-five square feet in display area: 
a.  Maximum number: one sign per establishment premises per frontage along a street, freeway, or parking lot; 
b.  Sign area on the primary frontage shall not exceed thirty percent of the area of the building face or four square feet of sign for each linear foot of building face along that frontage, whichever is greater; 
c.  Sign area on a secondary frontage shall not exceed fifteen percent of the area of the building face or two square feet per linear foot of secondary frontage, whichever is greater; 
d.  The sign face shall not be located, such as by a cabinet, deep lettering, or architectural feature, more than eighteen inches from a building face. 
2.  Permanent signs with twenty-five square feet or less of display area in commercial, industrial, institutional, mixed-use and multi-family zones: 
a.  Location: only in windows or along the face of a building; 
b.  Maximum total cumulative area: not exceeding ten percent of the wall or elevation on which the sign is placed; 
F.  Permanent Signs in Shopping Centers. Permanent signs for establishments within a shopping center shall be limited to one per establishment premises per frontage on a common walkway, parking lot, driveway, alleyway, street, or freeway. The size and placement of these signs shall conform with the standards specified for permanent signs in commercial, industrial, mixed-use and institutional zones (Subsection 18.47.080(E)) as well as standards that may be applied through any required city council or planning commission approval, including but not limited to a conditional use permit, planned development permit, specific plan, or variance. 
G.  Public Assembly Uses. On property used for public assembly, with periodically changing programs, the following signs may be installed and displayed, subject to a sign permit: 
1.  Wall sign: one wall mounted sign not to exceed twenty square feet in area per street frontage or parking lot frontage; and 
2.  One freestanding changeable copy directory sign not to exceed six feet in height and twelve square feet in area per street frontage or parking lot frontage shall be allowed; 
3.  Provided, however, that the signs shall be architecturally related to the structure to which they are appurtenant; 
4.  Number Limit: No more than two wall-mounted signs plus no more than two freestanding signs. 
H.  Pole or Monument Signs in Commercial, Industrial, Mixed-Use, and Institutional Zones. Pole-mounted or freestanding signs are allowed subject to a sign permit in the commercial and industrial zones and non-residential uses in a mixed-use zone, subject to: 
1.  Number Limit: Pole signs or monument signs shall be limited to one sign per frontage on street, freeway, or parking lot, and may include a cluster sign identifying individual businesses on the parcel(s); 
2.  Display Area Limit: 
a.  The total area of any sign installed along the primary frontage shall not exceed four square feet per lineal foot of property on the primary frontage; 
b.  The total area of any sign installed along each secondary frontage shall not exceed two square feet per lineal foot of property on the secondary frontage; 
3.  Location: Sign structures shall not be placed within the required setback area applicable to that zone, except that projecting signs may protrude into or overhang a maximum distance of one-half of the setback. 
4.  Height Limit: Pole signs may be one-half feet high for each one foot away from the centerline of the street on which the sign is located, but in no case exceeding: 
a.  MXC 1 and MXD 1 zones—Fifty feet; 
b.  MXC 2 and MXD 2 zones—Fifty feet. Signs exceeding fifty feet may be allowed if located near a freeway and approved by the Planning Commission as compatible with the other uses near the site; 
c.  CA and CS zones—Fifty feet. Signs exceeding fifty feet may be allowed, up to a maximum of seventy-five feet, if located near a freeway and approved by the Planning Commission as compatible with the other uses near the site; 
d.  Industrial zones—Seventy feet. 
e.  Institutional zones—Fifty feet. 
I.  Rotating Signs in Commercial and Industrial Zones. Signs that rotate are restricted to no more than eight revolutions per minute. Rotating signs are allowable only in commercial and industrial zones. 
J.  Projecting Signs in Commercial, Industrial, Mixed-Use, and Institutional Zones. Projecting signs may be installed and displayed, subject to a sign permit, in all commercial, industrial, mixed-use, and institutional zones, subject to: 
1.  Projecting signs shall not project over any public right-of-way, including streets or alleys, except as provided in Subsection D, below; 
2.  The maximum height of any projecting sign shall be twelve feet, and may project above any eave or parapet of less than twelve feet in height, but may not project inward over any such eave or parapet. 
3.  Maximum display area for all sides: thirty-two square feet. 
4.  Projecting signs may project over street parkways and required setback areas a maximum of one-half of the street parkway or setback width. For the purpose of this section, "street parkway" is defined as that part of the public street right-of-way lying between the front property line and the edge of the roadway. 
5.  Number limit: No more than one projecting sign shall be placed on each street frontage per business premises. 
6.  Qualification: A projecting sign shall be permitted only in lieu of a freestanding or marquee sign, and may not be utilized in addition to a freestanding or marquee sign. 
7.  Design: Projecting signs shall be supported so as to appear to be an architectural and integral part of the building. The sign shall be free of any extra bracing, angle iron, guy wires, or cables. 
K.  Digital Display Signs. Signs using digital display are allowed in the following zones: industrial, commercial, and mixed-use districts, subject to a sign permit, and subject to: 
1.  Maximum height: the same rule that would apply to the same sign if it were not using digital display; 
2.  Minimum requirement: digital display must be part of a master sign program; 
3.  Maximum display area: 
a.  For properties that front on arterial roadways, the digital display portion of the sign structure shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the allowable display area; 
b.  For properties that front on highways, the digital display portion of a sign shall not exceed fifty percent of the allowable display area; 
c.  Maximum Number: No more than one sign using digital display may be permitted on a site. The electronic message display may be single-faced or double-faced. 
d.  Signs using digital display may not project moving images or images that appear to move; each still image must be on display a minimum of eight seconds; transitions between still images shall not exceed one second. 
e.  Light Intensity: each sign using digital display shall include a photometric sensor that will adjust the intensity of the sign for daytime and nighttime viewing. The nighttime intensity shall be limited to 0.3 foot-candles (over ambient levels) as measured at a preset distance as established by the Lewin Report as prepared for the Outdoor Advertising Association of America (OAAA). The city may modify or further restrict the intensity of any DAD display should the lighting create a distraction to drivers or an adverse effect on nearby residential property. 
f.  Operational Hours: the digital display portion of any sign shall not be operated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
g.  Signs using digital display shall be shielded or the light intensity reduced as necessary to prevent annoying glare impacting surrounding properties. 
h.  All new signs using digital display, which are not attached to a building, shall be mounted on one support column only. 
i.  Signs using digital display may be located on the wall of a building, provided the sign does not obscure any of the building's windows, architectural features, or other architectural details. 
j.  No sign using digital display may be placed within one mile of another sign using digital display on the same side of a highway. No sign using digital display may be placed within one thousand feet of another digital display on any street. 
k.  Signs using digital display are limited to noncommercial messages and onsite commercial messages; such signs may not be used as billboards or for purposes of general advertising for hire. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2411, § 2, 4-5-2016)  
18.47.090 - Temporary signs. 
All temporary signs must have attached to them contact information for the persons and/or entities placing the signs on public display. Such information must include, at a minimum, the name of the person(s) and/or entities, and currently valid contact information such as phone number, mailing address, or email address. The purpose of this requirement is to give the city a way to contact persons who exceeded the time limit or other rules regarding display of certain signs, and give them an opportunity to cure the violation. The contact information must be in an easily readable, common typeface, such as Times New Roman, Garamond, Helvetica, Arial, or similar. Type size much be at least ten point. 
A.  Construction Site Signs. Temporary signs may be installed and displayed on construction sites without permit, subject to: 
1.  The maximum total area for signs at single-family residential construction projects shall be twenty square feet per street frontage; 
2.  The maximum area of signage at other construction projects shall be 50 square feet per street frontage; 
3.  For any request for square-footage exceeding the limits set forth in Subsections A.1. and A.2., a temporary use permit is required, the granting or denial of which shall be based solely on objective criteria such as time, location, and size; 
4.  All signs must be removed prior to and as a condition of the final inspection and approval of the project. 
B.  Temporary Signs Regarding Real Property Offered For Sale or Lease. Temporary signs may be installed and displayed on real property that is currently offered for sale or lease, or otherwise pursuant to Civil Code 713, without a sign permit, subject to: 
1.  A maximum of two temporary signs may be installed on developed or undeveloped property, with the following requirements and specifications for the sign: 
a.  The maximum area of signage allowed by this section per parcel per street frontage in commercial, industrial, mixed-use, multi-family, or institutional zones shall be fifty square feet; 
b.  These signs shall not be specially illuminated; 
c.  Such signs shall be removed within ten days following the lease or sale of the premises on which the sign is displayed. 
C.  Temporary Signs for Special Events. Temporary signs may be installed and displayed when related to and for the duration of thirty days prior and five days after a special event, subject to: 
1.  Special Event Signs in Commercial, Industrial, Multi-family, Mixed-use and Institutional zones. 
a.  Temporary signs which do not cumulatively exceed thirty-two square feet in display area per street frontage, are allowed subject to a special event permit; 
b.  Temporary signs, except flags and banners, shall not be fastened directly to the exterior wall or face of any building. Temporary signs may be displayed in windows or on display boards, provided the combined total area of all signs does not exceed ten percent of the area of the building face upon which the signs are mounted. (See Section 18.47.120 for restrictions on flags and banners.) 
D.  Temporary Signs in Residential Zones. Refer to Section 18.47.060 for signs in residential zones. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2411, § 2, 4-5-2016)  
18.47.100 - Vehicle signs. 
Buses and taxis that legally traverse the public streets may display advertising; however, mobile billboards are prohibited on public streets and parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2411, § 2, 4-5-2016)  
18.47.110 - Mural-type signs. 
Mural-type signs shall be treated as any other sign subject to signage area requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2411, § 2, 4-5-2016; Ord. No. 2017-2440, § 7, 10-17-2017)  
18.47.120 - Flags, banners, and pennants. 
Permit required: All banners require the approval of the planning division. In order to obtain approval, see application and drawings required at the city planning division. 
A.  Auto Sales Lots. These provisions apply to all motor vehicle sales. Flags, banners, and pennants may be displayed on automobile sales lots without time limitation or site plan review, provided that: 
1.  The displays are properly maintained; 
2.  Displays are limited to the perimeter of the lot; 
3.  Displays do not exceed a height of twenty-five feet above the ground; 
4.  Displays may not be used in place of a permanent sign. 
B.  Other Commercial and Industrial Uses. Flags, banners, and pennants may be displayed on other commercial and industrial uses for a cumulative period of sixty days within each calendar year. The time limit commences when a banner permit is issued by the planning director. The sixty-day period may be divided into two occasions per calendar year, provided the total display time does not exceed sixty days per calendar year. A banner permit fee and an administrative fee in an amount representing the anticipated city enforcement costs in causing the applicant to remove flags or banners shall be paid to the city treasurer at the time of application for site plan review. The administrative fee shall be refunded upon the verified removal of the flag or banner by the specified deadline. 
C.  The following shall apply to all displays of commercial flags, banners, and pennants, except for displays on auto sales lots: 
1.  Must be removed by the owner or occupant within fifteen days after a determination by the city manager or that the display is improperly maintained or the flag, banner or pennant is tattered or worn; 
2.  Shall not be larger than forty square feet (cumulative of all visible copy/image areas); 
3.  Shall not be displayed in lieu of a permanent sign; 
4.  Shall not be placed on a roof, placed in required yard areas, or landscaped areas; 
5.  Must be compatible with the primary building's appearance; 
6.  Violation of the time limits shall render the site ineligible for issuance of a permit for display of a flag, banner or pennant for a period of one year from the date that the violation is abated; 
7.  The restrictions of this section shall also apply to signs and banners located within the first eight feet of the interior of commercial or industrial premises when such sign or banner is visible to the exterior. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2411, § 2, 4-5-2016)  
18.47.130 - Master Sign Programs. 
Purpose and Applicability. The purpose of the master sign program provisions is to provide a coordinated approach to signage for National City's business districts, which include but not limited to the Harbor District, Downtown, Mile of Cars, and Plaza Bonita. Whenever a development project will have six or more separately leased spaces, then a master sign program is required. 
A.  Approval. A master sign program shall require the approval of the planning commission and the city council, after considering the proposed design standards. 
B.  Design Standards. Master sign programs shall feature a unified and coordinated approach to the materials, color, size, type, placement, and general design of signs proposed for a project or property. 
C.  Effect of Master Sign Program. All subsequent signs proposed for a development or property subject to an approved master sign program shall comply with the standards and specifications included in the master sign program. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2411, § 2, 4-5-2016)  
18.47.140 - Nonconforming signs; abandoned uses. 
Signs that were legal when first installed, and which have not been modified or expanded in a manner that was illegal at the time of modification or expansion, may continue in use, so long as there is no modification or expansion which violates the regulations of this chapter. If the size or configuration of a parcel or building is changed by the subdivision or splitting of the property or alterations to the building or parcel, property identification signs and outdoor advertising signs on the resulting properties shall be required to conform to the sign regulations applicable to the newly created parcel or parcels, at the time such change becomes effective. 
Nonconforming signs shall be removed or made conforming when the business or property changes occupancy or ownership. 
A.  Change of Land Use/Nonconforming Signs. When there is a change in the use of land upon which are located signs that do not conform to this chapter, then all signs on the parcel, lot, or leasable space must be brought into conformance with this chapter and all other applicable laws, rules, regulations and policies. 
B.  Abandoned Site or Building. When the use of any parcel or building is vacated, terminated, or abandoned for any reason for a period of more than ninety consecutive days, the owner or person in possession of the property shall be responsible for the physical removal of all signs on the property, building or wall(s), and for painting over the surface so as to obliterate any painted or printed signs on the building so that the copy is not visible, within thirty days following notice from the city. Removal, painting out, or obliteration shall be performed in a manner that does not create a blighting influence. Any sign that relates or pertains to an establishment that is not actually operating on the same site for a period of ninety or more consecutive calendar days shall be considered abandoned. Legal nonconforming use rights are extinguished when a sign qualifies as abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2411, § 2, 4-5-2016)  
18.47.150 - Safety, maintenance, and refacing. 
A.  Safety Codes—Compliance Required. All signs must comply with the applicable Uniform Building, Mechanical, Electrical Codes, and other safety codes adopted by the city. Safety Code permits for installation shall be obtained, when required, prior to any installation, from the director of building and safety. 
B.  Maintenance. All signs and their supporting structures and components shall be maintained in a state of safe condition and good repair. Signs shall be "face washed" at least once a year. Electrically energized components must bear the seal of approval of an approved testing laboratory. Broken faces and burned-out lamps, bulbs, or tubes must be replaced within thirty days from the date of notification from the city. All permanent signs shall be "face washed" at least once a year. Electrically energized components must bear the seal of approval of an approved testing laboratory. Broken faces and burned-out lamps, bulbs, or tubes must be replaced within fifteen days from the date of notification from the city. 
C.  Refacing. Changing the copy or refacing of a sign shall require a sign reface permit. No consideration of message content shall occur. The purpose is to maintain an inventory of signs. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2411, § 2, 4-5-2016)  
18.47.160 - Enforcement and removal. 
A.  Public Nuisance. All violations of this chapter are declared to constitute public nuisances which may be abated by any method provided by law. 
B.  Enforcement. Each day of violation or non-compliance with these regulations shall be deemed as a separate offense and subject to all remedies available at law. Legal procedures and penalties shall be in accordance with the enforcement procedures established by the municipal Code or state law. 
C.  Illegal Signs. Illegal signs may be abated by the city in accordance with its Municipal Code, state law, including but not limited to Business and Professions Code 5499.1 et seq., or state law on abatement of public nuisances, or as otherwise provided by law. 
D.  Summary Abatement—Safety Hazards. If any sign is an immediate threat to the public health and safety by virtue of the physical condition of the sign structure, said sign may be immediately and summarily removed with the cost of such removal charged to the property owner in accordance with this chapter. 
E.  Notice of Violation. Whenever any sign or part thereof, other than those causing an immediate threat to the public health and safety, constitutes an illegal sign and/or is erected or maintained in violation of this chapter, the director shall give written notice to all responsible parties to remove the sign or to bring it into compliance. The notice shall specify the nature of the violation, and give directions for a cure, which may include complete removal or replacement by a specific date. The notice shall advise the permittee, owner, or person in charge of the sign of the hearing rights established by this chapter. The date for removal specified in the written notice shall not be less than ten days from the date of the mailing of the notice for permanent signs; and, the date for removal specified in the written notice for temporary signs shall not be less than seven days from date of the mailing of the notice. The responsible party receiving notice may request a hearing as detailed in Section 18.47.050. 
F.  Removal of Uncured Violations. Whenever the responsible parties fail to comply with an order of the director made pursuant to this section, and the time for cure has elapsed without the cure being effected, the director may remove the sign, or order it removed, either by the city's own force or by a private party under contract. The expense of the removal may be charged, jointly and severally, to any and all responsible parties. Such amount shall constitute a debt owed to the city. No permit shall thereafter be issued to any permittee, owner, or person in charge of a sign who fails to pay such costs. Any costs, including attorney's fees, incurred by the city in collection of the costs shall be added to the amount of the debt. 
G.  Cumulative Remedies. The provisions of this section are alternative and additional remedies for the enforcement of this chapter. Nothing in this section shall preclude the city from enforcing the provisions of this chapter by any other criminal, civil, or administrative proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2411, § 2, 4-5-2016)  
18.47.170 - Severability. 
The city council declares that the judicial invalidity of any subsection or portion of this chapter shall not affect the validity of any other remaining section or portion; that the city council would have adopted each of those remaining portions, notwithstanding any later declared invalidity. If any provision determined invalid under the preceding sentence can either be judicially severed or interpreted in a way that could harmonize it with the remaining provisions, then it may be severed or interpreted and applied so as to give full purpose, meaning, and effect to the remaining provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-2411, § 2, 4-5-2016)  
Chapter 18.48 - RESIDENTIAL DENSITY BONUS AND AFFORDABLE HOUSING INCENTIVES 
 
18.48.0.010 - Purpose. 
A.  Intent and Purposes of Section. The intent and purposes of this chapter are to: 
1.  Implement the policies of the General Plan's Housing Element for developing affordable housing for households with very low, low, and moderate incomes. 
2.  Encourage affordable housing units to be developed citywide and designed to be consistent with the surrounding neighborhood. 
3.  Implement the provisions of State Government Code Section 65915. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.48.020 - Definitions. 
A.  Section Definitions. Within this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
1.  "Additional incentives" means any regulatory concessions or incentives which would result in identifiable cost avoidance or reductions that are offered in addition to a density bonus, as also specified in California Government Code Subsections 65915. 
2.  "Density bonus" means a density increase of up to thirty-five percent over the otherwise maximum residential density allowable by the applicable zoning designation, pursuant to State Government Code Section 65915, as amended from time to time. 
3.  "Density bonus units" means those residential units granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter that exceed the otherwise allowable maximum residential density for the development site. 
4.  "Development standard" shall have the meaning given that term by Government Code Section 65915. 
5.  "Financial pro forma" means a financial report for density bonus projects that shall include identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions achieved through any requested incentives or concessions, as well as evidence that the cost reduction allows the developer to provide affordable rents or affordable sales prices. 
6.  "Housing development" for the purpose of this chapter means construction projects consisting of five or more residential units, including single-family, multi-family, and mobile homes for sale or rent. 
7.  "Lower income household" means households whose income is no more than eighty percent of the area median income of San Diego County, as established and amended time to time by Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, pursuant to Section 50079.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
8.  "Maximum residential density" means the maximum number of residential units permitted by the city's General Plan Land Use Element and Land Use Code at the time of application, excluding the provisions of this chapter. In calculating the required number of dwelling units affordable to moderate, lower, or very low income households, any decimal fraction resulting from the applicable percent of the total units shall be rounded to the next larger whole number. 
9.  "Moderate income household" means households whose income does not exceed one hundred twenty percent of the area median income of San Diego County, as established and amended time to time by Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, pursuant to Section 50093 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
10.  "Non-restricted unit" means all units within a housing development as defined in this section, excluding the target units. 
11.  "Target unit" means a dwelling unit within a housing development that will be reserved for sale to or rent to, and affordable to, very low, or moderate income households, or qualifying residents. 
12.  "Very low income household" means households whose income is no more than fifty percent of the area median income of San Diego County, as established and amended time to time by Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, pursuant to Section 50105 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.48.030 - Density bonus. 
A.  In applications for projects meeting the minimum threshold of five units or more, the density bonus provisions set forth in Government Code Section 65915, as amended from time to time, shall apply. 
B.  It is the intent of this chapter to ensure that all projects applying for the concessions and incentives of this chapter provide for affordable housing units that are comparable in size, design, and quality to the market units in the same project. The city manager or his/her designee, unless otherwise specified, shall have the discretion and authority to enforce this provision during the application process. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.48.040 - Concessions, incentives, and development standards. 
A.  Requests for Incentives and Concessions. In applications for projects meeting the minimum threshold of five units or more, concessions and incentives including reductions in site development standards, modifications of zoning code or architectural design requirements, and other incentives or concessions defined in Government Code Section 65915(1) may be requested, consistent with the parameters enumerated below. 
B.  Financial Pro Forma. The applicant shall provide a financial pro forma demonstrating to the city that the requested concession or incentive results in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions to the project pursuant to California Government Code Section 65915(l)(1). 
C.  Development Standards. Applicants may seek a waiver or modification of development standards that will have the effect of precluding the construction of a residential development meeting the criteria of Government Code Section 65915 at the densities or with the incentives or concessions permitted by that section. 
D.  Financial Incentives. Nothing in this section requires the city to provide direct financial incentives for the residential development, including but not limited to the provision of publicly owned land, waiver of fees, off-site improvements, or dedication requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.48.050 - Application requirements and review. 
A.  Application Conference. Prior to submitting an application, an applicant proposing a housing development pursuant to this section shall schedule a pre-application conference with appropriate planning and/or housing division staff. The applicant should provide the following information: 
1.  A brief description of the proposed development, including at a minimum the total number of units, total number of target units, and total number of density bonus units proposed. 
2.  The combined general plan/zoning designations and assessor parcel number(s) of the project site. 
3.  A vicinity map and preliminary site plan, drawn to scale, including building footprints, driveway and parking layout. 
4.  If an additional incentive(s) is requested, the application should describe why the additional incentive(s) is necessary to ensure affordability of the target units and density bonus units proposed! 
5.  The developer/applicant should also submit the project pro-forma, outlining revenue sources, expenses, and projected profit. 
B.  Application/Processing. Requests for a density bonus and/or additional incentive(s) pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the planning division and processed pursuant to procedures in Division 1 for approval of a conditional use permit and concurrently with any other application(s) required for the development. In addition, applications shall include the following: 
1.  A description of any requested density bonuses, incentives, concessions, waivers or modifications of development standards, or modified parking standards. 
2.  Identification of all affordable units qualifying for the project for a density bonus, and level of affordability of all affordable units. 
3.  For all incentives and concessions, a financial pro forma demonstrating that the requested incentives and concessions result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions is required. 
4.  For waivers or modifications of development standards: evidence that the imposition of the development standards for which a waiver is requested will have the effect of precluding the construction of the residential development at the densities or with the incentives or concessions permitted by Government Code Section 65915. 
5.  Any financial pro forma submitted to comply with this section may not include the lost opportunity cost of any affordable units (i.e., the revenue that would have been generated had the units been rented or sold at market rate) and may include as an additional cost only those additional expenses that are required solely because of the proposed construction of the affordable units. The pro forma shall also include: 
a.  The actual cost reduction achieved through the incentive or concession; and 
b.  Evidence that the cost reduction allows the developer to provide affordable rents or affordable sales prices. 
6.  The city may retain a consultant to review the financial report (pro forma). The cost of the consultant shall be borne by the applicant with the following exception: if the applicant is a non profit organization, the cost of the consultant may be paid by the city upon prior approval of the city council. 
C.  Findings for Approval. Before any density bonus and/or additional incentive is granted, the approving authority shall make the following findings: 
1.  The residential development is eligible for a density bonus and any concessions, incentives, waivers, modifications, or reduced parking standards requested. 
2.  The residential development conforms to all standards for affordability included in this chapter. 
3.  Any requested incentive or concession will result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions based upon appropriate financial analysis and documentation if required by conditional use permit. 
4.  If a waiver or modification is requested, the applicant has shown that the imposition of the development standards sought to be waived or modified will have the effect of physically precluding the construction of the development at the densities or with the incentives or concessions otherwise permitted by this chapter. 
D.  Findings for Denial—Concessions, Incentives, Waivers, Modifications. 
1.  Concessions or Incentives. The city may deny one or more requested concessions or incentives if, based on substantial evidence, the city makes either of the following findings: 
a.  The concession or incentive is not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs, as defined in Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code, or for rents for the targeted units to be set as specified in Section 65915(c); or 
b.  The concession or incentive would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in Government Code Section 65598.5(d)(2), upon public health and safety or the physical environment, or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources, and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rending the development unaffordable to very low, low, and moderate income households. 
2.  Waivers and Modifications. The city may deny one or more requested waivers or modifications if the city makes either of the following findings: 
a.  The waiver or modification would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in Government Code Section 65598.5(d)(2), upon public health and safety, or the physical environment, and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact; or 
b.  The waiver or modification would have a specific adverse impact on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources. 
E.  Deed Covenant. Approval of a density bonus and/or additional incentive(s) pursuant to this section shall require the recordation of a deed covenant recorded against the property to ensure the target unit(s) is maintained for affordability for the time period required prior to final map recordation or prior to the issuance of a building permit, if no subdivision of property is involved. 
F.  Appeal Procedure. The decision of the planning commission to approve or deny a request for a density bonus, additional incentive(s), and/or waivers or modifications of development standards pursuant to this section may be appealed to the city council pursuant to procedures for appeal of other discretionary permit applications that are concurrently considered, or if no other discretionary permit applications are concurrently considered, the decision of the planning commission may be appealed pursuant to procedures specified in Section 18.12.110 (Conditional Use Permits) of the Land Use Code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
18.48.060 - Density bonus housing agreement. 
A.  Agreement with the City. Applicants/developers requesting a density bonus shall enter into a density bonus housing agreement with the city. The terms of the draft agreement shall be approved by the executive director of the community development commission of the City of National City or his designee. 
B.  Recordation. Following execution of the agreement by all parties, the completed density bonus housing agreement, or memorandum thereof, shall be recorded with the County of San Diego Recorders Office, and the conditions therefore filed and recorded on the parcel or parcels designated for construction of target units and a copy of the recorded document shall be provided to the city. Recordation of the agreement shall occur prior to recordation of a final map or prior to issuance of building permits, whichever occurs first. The density bonus housing agreement shall be binding to all future owners and successors in interest during the term of the agreement, unless rescinded by the city upon completion of terms of the agreement. 
C.  Provisions of Agreement. The density bonus housing agreement shall include at least the following: 
1.  The total number of units approved for the housing development, including the number of target units. 
2.  A description of the household income group to be accommodated by the housing development, as outlined in Section 18.47.050 of this chapter, and the standards for determining the corresponding affordable rent or affordable sales price and housing cost. 
3.  The location, unit sizes (square feet), and number of bedrooms of target units. 
4.  Tenure of use restrictions for target units of at least ten or thirty years, in accordance with Section 18.47.050 of this chapter. 
5.  A schedule for completion and occupancy of target units. 
6.  A description of the density bonus, additional incentive(s) or equivalent financial incentives being provided by the city. 
7.  A requirement to submit to the executive director of the community development commission of the City of National City or his designee for review and approval of an affirmative marketing plan, which details the actions the developer/applicant shall take to provide information and otherwise attract eligible persons to the available housing units without regard to race, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, familial status, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, handicap, age, or any other category which may be defined by law now or in the future. 
8.  A description of remedies for breach of the agreement by either party. The city may identify tenants or qualified purchasers as third party beneficiaries under the agreement. 
9.  Other provisions to ensure implementation and compliance with this section. 
10.  Provision allowing payment of fee by applicant to the city to recover their administrative expenses. 
D.  For-Sale Housing Developments. In the case of for-sale housing developments, the density bonus housing agreement shall provide for the following conditions governing the initial sale and use of target units during the applicable use restriction period: 
1.  Target units shall, upon initial sale, be sold to eligible very low, low, or moderate income households at an affordable sales price and housing cost, or to qualified residents (i.e., maintained as senior citizen housing) as defined by this chapter. 
2.  Target units shall be initially owner-occupied by eligible very low, low, or moderate households, or by qualified residents in the case of senior citizen housing. 
3.  Target units, if later rented by the owner, shall be made available to eligible very low, low, or moderate income households at an affordable rent or to qualified residents (i.e., senior citizens) as defined by this chapter. 
4.  The initial purchaser of each target unit shall execute an instrument or agreement approved by the city restricting the sale or rental of the target unit in accordance with this title during the applicable use restriction period. Such instrument or agreement shall be recorded against the parcel containing the target unit and shall contain such provisions as the city may require to ensure continued compliance with this chapter and the state density bonus law. 
E.  Rental Housing Developments. In the case of rental housing developments, the density bonus housing agreement shall provide for the following conditions governing the use of target units during the use restriction period: 
1.  The rules and procedures for qualifying tenants, establishing affordable rent, filling vacancies, and maintaining target units for qualified tenants; 
2.  Property owners shall be required to verify tenant incomes on an annual basis and maintain books and records to demonstrate compliance with this chapter. 
3.  Property owners shall be required to submit an annual report to the city, which includes the name, address, household size, and income of each household occupying target units, and which identifies the bedroom size and monthly rent or cost of each target unit. 
4.  Property owners shall be required to allow a city representative to inspect each unit annually at a minimum to ensure that units are being maintained to local Code and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Housing Quality Standards. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012)  
DIVISION 5. - GLOSSARY  
Chapter 18.50 - GLOSSARY 
 
[18.50.010] - Generally. 
For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this title, the words, phrases, and terms included herein shall be deemed to have the meaning ascribed to them in this chapter. 
Abut or abutting. "Abut" or "abutting" means the same as "adjoining" and "contiguous." 
Access. "Access" means the place or way by which pedestrians and vehicles shall have safe, adequate and suitable ingress and egress to a property or use as required by this title. 
Accessory building or structure. "Accessory building or structure" means a subordinate building or structure, the use of which is incidental to that of and separate from the main building or primary structure and is located on the same lot. 
Administrative services. "Offices, administrative, clerical or public contact services that deal directly with the citizen, together with incidental storage and maintenance of necessary vehicles. Typical uses include federal, state county and city offices." 
Accessory use. "Accessory use" is a use conducted on the same lot as the principal use or structure to which it is related, except that where specifically provided in the parking and loading regulations, accessory off-street parking or loading need not be located on the same lot; and, a use which is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with such principal use, and which is either in the same ownership as such principal use or is maintained and operated on the same lot substantially for the benefit or convenience of the owners, occupants, employees, customers, or visitors of the principal use. 
Addition. "Addition" means the result of any work that increases the volume of an existing structure or replaces a demolished portion. Compare "alteration" and "structural alteration." 
Adjacent. "Adjacent" refers to two or more lots or parcels of land separated only by an alley, or located in close proximity to each other; or two or more objects that lie near or close to each other. Compare "adjoining." 
Adjoining. "Adjoining" refers to two or more lots or parcels of land sharing a common boundary line, or two or more objects in contact with each other. Synonyms are "contiguous" or "abutting." 
Adult day health care center. "Adult day health care center" means a facility for seniors which provides care, protection and activities on a less than twenty-four-hour basis under the supervision of professional staff. The establishment shall be licensed by the state and conducted in accordance with state requirements. 
Advertising. For definitions relating to advertising, see sign-related definitions. 
Agent of owner. "Agent of owner" means any person who can show certified written proof that he is acting for the property owner. 
Agricultural or agriculture. "Agricultural" or "agriculture" means the use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for handling, treating or storing the produces; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory use shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural activity. 
Air contaminant. "Air contaminant" means particulate matter, dust, fumes, gas, mist, smoke, vapor, or any combination thereof having or tending to have a deleterious effect on human beings, vegetation, animals or property. 
Alley. "Alley" means a public or private right-of-way, other than a street or highway, permanently reserved as a means of providing secondary vehicular access to abutting properties. 
Alteration. "Alteration" means any work on a structure that does not result in any addition to the structure. Compare "addition" and "structural alteration." 
Amendment. "Amendment" means a change in the wording, context or substance of this title, or a change in the zoning maps, which are part of this title when adopted by ordinance of the city council in the manner prescribed by law. 
Anchor. "Anchor" means a large store, such as a department store or supermarket, that is prominently located in a shopping mall to attract customers who are then expected to patronize the other shops in the mall. See also "large format retail." 
Animal boarding/kennel, small. The provision of temporary shelter and care for small animals on a commercial basis. Small animals include domesticated animals or household pets commonly maintained in residence with humans. 
Animal hospital. For a definition of "animal hospital," see "veterinary hospital." 
Animal husbandry. "Animal husbandry" is the care and breeding of domestic agricultural animals such as chickens and other fowl and horses. 
Arcade. A covered walkway composed of a succession of arches supported by columns. 
Architectural projection. For this definition, see "projection, architectural." 
Area. "Area" means the same as "net area," unless otherwise specified. 
Area, net. "Net area" means that area of a lot or parcel of land exclusive of public alleys, highways or streets; or proposed public facilities such as alleys, highways, or streets or other necessary public sites when included within a proposed development project; or other public or private easements where the owner of the servient tenement does not have the right to use the entire surface of the land. 
Articulation. "Articulation." The degree or manner in which a building wall or roofline is made up to distinct parts or elements. A highly articulated wall will appear to be composed of a number of different planes, usually made distinct by their change in direction (projections and recesses) and/or changes in materials, colors, or textures. 
Assembly building. "Assembly building" means a building or a portion of a building used for gathering for such purposes as deliberation, worship, auditorium, church or chapel, dance floor, lodge rooms, conference rooms, dining rooms, drinking establishments, exhibit rooms, or lounges. 
Assembly and light manufacturing/processing. Assembly, light manufacturing, and processing uses have no objectionable environmental influences by reason of the emission of odor, heat, smoke, noise, and vibration and do not use explosive or petroleum materials. Such uses may include manufacturing, printing, assembling, processing, repairing, bottling, or packaging of products from previously prepared materials (excluding the assembly of large equipment and machinery); manufacturing of electrical and electronic instruments, devices and components, furniture, tools, clothing and shoes, toys and novelties, renewable energy infrastructure; artist studios;, dyeing and cleaning plants, except large-scale operations; and any other limited manufactured/processing use which is determined by the city to be of the same general character as the uses listed here. 
Assisted living facility. "Assisted living facility" means a complex that is designed to accommodate primarily the elderly but may accommodate others, with staff personnel and programs to assist residents with many activities of daily living. Units may or may not have kitchens, but meals are provided in a central location. Units usually rent on a monthly basis. 
Auto body uses. A building or portions of a building where painting and interior and body modifications or repairs are performed on motor vehicles and trailers, including associated floor space used for offices, parking or showrooms. This includes shops that specialize in collision repair work; customization work on the body and interior of vehicles for aesthetic purposes or for the physically disabled, or other customers with special requirements; painting for post-collision, refurbishment or customization; and restoration of classic and antique vehicles. 
Automobile, abandoned. "Abandoned automobile" means any motor vehicle which is required to be registered by the California Vehicle Code when operated upon a highway and whose registration has been expired for a period of six months or more. However, a motor vehicle stored within a permitted building or structure shall not be considered to be an abandoned automobile. 
Automobile and trailer sales area. "Automobile and trailer sales area" means an open area, other than a street, used for the display, sale or rental of new or used automobiles or trailers and where no repair work is done except minor incidental repairs of automobiles or trailers to be displayed, sold or rented on the premises. 
Automobile dismantling yard or automobile wrecking yard. "Automobile dismantling yard" or "automobile wrecking yard" means any premises used for the dismantling or wrecking of vehicles required to be registered under the California Vehicle Code, including the buying, selling or dealing of such vehicles or the integral parts or component materials thereof, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, partly dismantled or wrecked inoperative vehicles. "Automobile dismantling" shall not include the incidental storage of inoperative or disabled vehicles in connection with a legal operation of an automobile repair garage, automobile body and fender repair shop, or automobile impound yard. See "scrap metal processing." 
Automobile impounding yard. "Automobile impounding yard" means facilities maintained by a permittee, on contract with the city, for the temporary storage of vehicles legally removed or impounded by a peace officer from public or private property as prescribed by law. 
Automobile parking. For definitions relating to automobile parking, see "parking lot" and parking-related definitions. 
Automobile repair, major. "Major automobile repair" means repair involving removal of heads, pans, transmissions; repairing, replacing, or overhauling of engines, motor transmissions; repairing or replacing driving mechanisms, steering mechanisms, differential assemblies; and repairing or replacing any other major automotive part or parts. 
Automobile repair, minor. "Minor automobile repair" means the sale, installation, and servicing of tires, batteries, automotive accessories and replacement items, engine tuneup, replacing points and plugs, carburetor overhaul; brake replacement and drum turning; alignment work, wheel balancing; replacing shock absorbers; air conditioning service; washing and lubricating services; steam cleaning; and supplying other incidental customer services and products. 
Automobile service station. "Automobile service station" means a retail place of business engaged in the sale of motor fuels and in supplying goods and services generally required in the operation and maintenance of automotive vehicles and the fulfilling of motorist needs. These shall include free restroom facilities for service station customers, and may include any of the items included under "major automobile repair" or "minor automobile repair." 
Automobile wrecking. For a definition of "automobile wrecking," see "automobile dismantling, or wrecking yard." 
Awning. "Awning" means a temporary shelter supported by an exterior wall of a building and of a type which can be retracted, folded or collapsed against the face of the supporting building. 
Balcony. "Balcony" means an unroofed platform enclosed by a railing or parapet projecting from the wall of a building for the private use of tenants or for exterior access to the above-grade living units. When a balcony is roofed and enclosed with operating windows, it is considered part of the room it serves. 
Bar/nightclub. "Bar/nightclub" includes restaurants with dancing after dinner hours, cocktail lounges, bars, establishments that provide live entertainment, and similar uses. 
Basement. or a definition of "basement," see the Uniform Building Code. 
Batching plant. "Batching plant" means a plant for the manufacture or mixing of concrete, cement, and concrete and cement products, including any apparatus and uses incident to such manufacturing and mixing. 
Bed and breakfast inn. "Bed and breakfast inn" means a residential building containing a specified number of guest rooms occupied by a specific number of persons, which provides living units and limited refreshments for transient guests, and which is managed and occupied by the owner of the property. 
Bedroom. "Bedroom" means a private room intended for or capable of being used for sleeping, separated from other rooms by a door, having a window and closet/storage nook, and accessible to a bathroom without crossing another bedroom. 
Beginning of construction. "Beginning of construction" means demolition, elimination and removal of an existing structure preparatory to new construction, or the incorporation of labor and materials in the foundation of a building or buildings. 
Billboard or outdoor advertising structure. For definitions relating to billboards or outdoor advertising structures, see sign-related definitions in Chapter 18.47. 
Block. "Block" means the land adjoining one side of a street between two consecutive junctions of said street with streets, railways, rights-of-way, or waterways crossing or meeting said side of said street. 
Body piercing. "Body piercing" means penetrating the skin to make a hole, mark, or scar that is generally permanent in nature to place jewelry or objects of metal or plastic on any area for cosmetic purposes. "Body piercing" does not include practices that are considered medical procedures or the puncturing of the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear using a pre-sterilized, single-use stud and clasp ear piercing system. 
Bona fide public eating place. "Bona fide public eating place" means a place which is regularly and in a bona fide manner, used and kept open for the serving of meals to guests for compensation and which has suitable kitchen facilities connected therewith, containing conveniences for cooking an assortment of foods which may be required for ordinary meals, the kitchen of which must be kept in a sanitary condition with the proper amount of refrigeration for keeping of food on said premises and must comply with all the regulations of the local department of health. "Meals" mean the usual assortment of foods commonly ordered at various hours of the day; the service of such food and victuals only as sandwiches or salads shall not be deemed a compliance with this requirement. "Guests" mean persons who, during the hours when meals are regularly served therein, come to a bona fide public eating place for the purpose of obtaining, and actually order and obtain at such time, in good faith, a meal therein. Nothing in this section, however, shall be construed to require that any food be sold or purchased with any beverage. 
Breweries, small. "Small breweries" are those breweries producing 60,000 barrels a year or less. 
Breweries, large. "Large breweries" are those breweries producing more than 60,000 barrels a year. 
Brewery. "Brewery" means an establishment which is licensed by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control under a Type 1 or Type 23 to manufacture and sell alcoholic beverages on the premises for on-site or off-site consumption. Minors are allowed on the premises (per ABC Type 1 and Type 23 license regulations). 
Brewery tasting room. "Brewery tasting room" means an establishment which is licensed by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control under a Type 1 or Type 23 (Beer Manufacturer or Small Beer Manufacturer respectively) duplicate license to sell malt beverages the licensee produces for on-site and off-site consumption; including sales of sealed containers (commonly known as growlers) for off-site consumption. Only beer produced by the master licensee may be sold and/or consumed at the location. Minors are allowed on the premises (per ABC Type 1 and Type 23 license regulations). 
Buildable area. "Buildable area" means the same as "net area." 
Building. For a definition of "building," see the Uniform Building Code. 
Building bulk. "Building bulk" means the size of buildings or other structures and their relationships to each other and to open areas and lot lines. Regulations controlling bulk include maximum height, maximum lot coverage, maximum floor area ratio, minimum size of yards and setbacks, shape of buildings or other structures, the area of the lot upon which a residential building is located, and the number of dwelling units or rooms within such building in relation to the area of the lot. 
Building height. For a definition of "building height," see the Uniform Building Code. 
Building line. "Building line" means a line established by law or agreement usually parallel to the property line beyond which a structure may not extend. 
Building lot coverage. See "lot coverage." 
Building, main or primary. "Main building" means any building in which is conducted the principal use of the building site on which it is situated. In any residential zone, any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building on the building site on which it is located. 
Building site. "Building site" means: 
1.  The ground area of one lot; or 
2.  The ground area of two or more lots when used in combination for a building or permitted group of buildings, together with all open spaces as required by this title. See "lot." 
Bulk distributing station, hazardous materials. "Hazardous materials bulk distributing station" means any distributing station for hazardous materials where there is located a loading rack and which is not an integral part of a refinery, natural gasoline plant, or crude petroleum producing or pipeline operation. 
Cabaret. "Cabaret" means a cafe, restaurant, bar or other public establishment that serves food or alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverages, or both, where entertainment is regularly provided by paid or unpaid performers or musicians, or dancing is regularly allowed to the accompaniment of recorded or live music or rhythmic sound. 
Camper. For a definition of "camper," see "recreational vehicle." Compare "mobile home." 
Camp, tourist. For this definition, see "tourist camp." 
Camp, youth. For this definition, see "youth camp." 
Canopy. "Canopy" means a roof-like projection extending horizontally from a structure, usually made of metal, over a sidewalk or driveway for protection from sun or rain. 
Car. For definitions relating to cars, see "motor vehicle," "vehicle," and other automobile-related definitions. 
Carport. "Carport" means an accessory structure or portion of a principal structure, consisting of a roof and supporting members such as columns or beams, unenclosed from the ground to the roof on at least two sides, and designed or used for the parking or temporary storage of motor vehicles of owners or occupants of the structure to which it is accessory. 
Car wash, automatic. An "automatic car wash" means a building or portion thereof containing facilities for washing vehicles, using conveyorized and/or mechanized equipment where the washing of the vehicle is performed by the equipment. 
Car wash, full service. A "full service car wash" means a building or portion thereof containing facilities for washing vehicles, using conveyorized and/or mechanized equipment where the washing of the vehicle is performed by the equipment and an employee or employees of the facility assist in performing other services such as cleaning, drying, vacuuming, waxing, detailing, or similar services on the vehicle. 
Car wash, manual. A "manual car wash" means a building or portion thereof containing self-service facilities where the washing of the vehicle is performed by the customer. 
Cellar. For a definition of "cellar," see the Uniform Building Code. 
Cemetery. "Cemetery" means land used or intended to be used for the burial or interment of the dead and dedicated for such purposes, including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery. 
Certificate of occupancy. "Certificate of occupancy" means a required document issued by the department of building and housing prior to the occupation or use of vacant land, except for agricultural uses, or prior to occupation or use of buildings erected or structurally altered. 
Child day care center. "Child care center" means any child care facility of any capacity, other than a child day care home, in which less than twenty-four-hour per day nonmedical care and supervision are provided to children in a group setting. 
Circus and/or carnival. "Circus" and/or "Carnival" means a temporary outdoor amusement center, bazaar or fair, either involving use of special purpose equipment or conducted by professional operators, or both, and where activities include such things as rides, exhibitions, food service, sales, or small-scale games. 
City council. See Chapter 2.04. 
City manager. See Chapter 2.01. 
Civic, fraternal, community, and cultural facilities. "Civic, fraternal, community, and cultural facilities" means a facility operated entirely on a public or nonprofit basis for the purpose of providing education, information, training, and/or entertainment of a civic or cultural nature. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, libraries, museums, and community centers. 
Clinic. "Clinic" means any facility used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, active, infirm or injured persons and those who are in need of medical, dental or surgical attention, but who are not provided with board or room, or kept overnight on the premises. "Clinic" includes dental clinic, health clinic, medical clinic and doctors' offices, and may include laboratory facilities in conjunction with normal clinic services. 
Club, country. "County club" means a private club organized and operated for social purposes and possessing outdoor recreational facilities, such as golf courses, tennis courts or polo grounds. 
Club. A "club" means any building or premises used by an association of two or more people united by a common interest or goal, whether incorporated or unincorporated, organized for some common purpose, but not including a group organized solely or primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise. 
College and university facilities. "College and university facilities" means educational institutions of higher learning which offer a course of study designed to culminate in the issuance of a degree. 
Colonnade. "Colonnade." See arcade. 
Commencement, land use activity. "Commencement" of any land use activity as provided for by this title is the date of beginning of such activity after all required city permits and approvals have been given. Where a use or premises require an occupancy permit, commencement shall not be recognized before that permit is issued. Any land use activities begun prior to commencement as defined above are, for the purposes of this title, not commenced. 
Commercial. "Commercial" refers to any activity on or use of land which involves the buying, selling, processing, or improving of things not produced on the land and having financial gain as the primary aim of the activity or use, whether or not such activity or use is for hire or on account of the buyer, seller, processor, or improver. 
Commercial recreation (indoor). "Commercial recreation (indoor)" refers to indoor recreational facilities that are operated as a business and open to the general public for a fee. Such uses may include, but are not limited to, gyms/health clubs, bowling alleys, martial arts, dance and exercise studios, skating rinks, batting cages, indoor swimming pools, boxing studios, indoor climbing walls, and similar uses. 
Commercial recreation (outdoor). "Commercial recreation (outdoor)" refers to outdoor recreational facilities that are operated as a business and open to the general public for a fee. Such uses may include, but are not limited to, sports fields, golf courses/driving ranges, miniature golf, outdoor swimming pools, skate parks, court games, and similar uses. 
Communication equipment building or use. "Communication equipment building or use" means a building or lot housing electrical and mechanical equipment necessary for the conduct of a public communications business with or without necessary personnel. 
Community center. "Community center" means a neighborhood building for social, recreational, and cultural activities. 
Community farm. "Community farm" means an area of land larger than one acre managed and maintained by an individual or group of individuals to grow and harvest food and horticultural products for shareholder consumption or for sale or donation. Shareholders may arrange to work on the farm in exchange for a share of the crops and/or pay for a portion of the crop in advance. A community farm may be a principal or accessory use. 
Conditional use. "Conditional use" means a use which requires a special degree of control because of characteristics peculiar to it, or because of size, technological processes or type of equipment, or because of the exact location with reference to surroundings, streets and existing improvements or demands upon public facilities. Such control is to ensure that the particular use at the particular site on which such use is proposed to be located is compatible with other existing or permitted uses surrounding the site. 
Condominium development. "Condominium development" means a structure and appurtenant premises divided in ownership by the existence of condominiums as now or hereafter defined by state law, and includes instances where ownership is so divided following prior single ownership of the entire structure and premises, as well as new structures and premises so divided in ownership. 
Construction yard. "Construction yard" means an area on or immediately adjacent to a major construction or demolition site used on a temporary basis for the parking and storage of equipment used in the project, and the storage and preparation of materials and other items used in the project. Such yard may include construction offices and such shops as are necessary for work on the immediate project. 
Contiguous. "Contiguous" means the same as "adjoining." 
Convalescent services. "Convalescent services" means a use providing bed care and in-patient services for persons requiring regular medical attention, such as nursing homes, but excluding facilities providing surgical or emergency medical services, facilities providing care for alcoholism, drug addiction, mental disease or communicable disease. 
Convenience establishments. "Convenience establishments" means small establishments designed and intended to serve the daily or frequent trade or service needs of the surrounding population. Such establishments include grocery stores, variety stores, drugstores, coin-operated laundry and dry cleaning establishments, beauty shops, barber shops, and medical and dental offices. Specifically excluded are automobile service stations and repair garages, and drive-in eating and drinking establishments. 
Corner lot. For this definition, see "lot, corner." 
Cornice. "Cornice" means an ornamental molding that finishes or crowns the top of a building, wall, arch or similar structure. 
Court. "Court" means an area on the same lot with a building which is bounded on two or more sides by the exterior walls of a building or buildings on the same lot. 
Courtyard housing. "Courtyard housing" means a group of three or more detached or attached one-story dwellings located on a single lot, and having a common court or yard. Each dwelling unit will have a separate entrance on the ground floor. 
Coverage. See "lot coverage." 
Curb level. "Curb level" means the level of the established curb in front of the building measured at the center of such front. Where no curb level has been established, the city engineer shall establish such curb level or its equivalent. 
Dairy. "Dairy" means any premises where three or more cows or goats or any combination thereof equaling three or more animals are kept or maintained for the purpose of producing milk or milk products. 
Decibel. "Decibel" is a unit which describes the sound pressure level or intensity of sound. The sound pressure level in decibels is twenty times the logarithm, to the base ten, of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to a reference pressure of 0.0002 microbars. 
Density. "Density" means the number of dwelling units that may be constructed per acre or per square foot of lot area. 
Department store. "Department store" means a store or group of shops under unified management selling a variety of merchandise groups, normally including clothing, appliances, hardware, and furniture. 
Depth of lot. For this definition, see "lot depth." 
Development. "Development" means the design, construction and related use of real property in any manner requiring compliance with this code. 
Disposal facility. A "disposal facility" provides permanent containment or destruction of waste materials. Landfills and incinerators are examples of disposal facilities. 
Dock. "Dock" means a landing pier for boats; a wharf, a structure supported by piling or floats in such a manner as to allow free flow of water beneath said structure and in which any buildings constructed thereon are incidental to the use of said structure as a wharf or landing pier. 
Dormitory. "Dormitory" means a dormitory is a living facility accessory to a learning center designed to house students. A dormitory may be located on the same property as the learning center (college, university, boarding school, nursing school, or similar learning center) or may be located within one-quarter mile radius of the learning center. 
Drive-through restaurant or drive-through eating place. "Drive-through restaurant" or "drive-through eating place" means any commercial establishment serving food or drinks, making provisions encouraging consumption of food or beverages off-site. Drive-through restaurants or eating places may also provide areas for indoor consumption. 
Driveway. "Driveway" means a private road, the use of which is limited to persons residing, employed or otherwise using or visiting the parcel on which located. 
Dump. "Dump" means an area devoted to the disposal of refuse and salvage, including incineration, reduction, or the dumping of ashes, garbage, combustibles or non-combustibles, or offal. 
Duplex. "Duplex" means a building containing two dwelling units meant for residential occupancy which are attached by a common wall. 
Dwelling. "Dwelling" means a building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy. For the purposes of this title, dwellings do not include hotels, motels, roominghouses, nursing homes, rest homes, university-owned or university-leased housing or institutions. See also "residential building." 
Dwelling, group. "Group dwelling" means two or more single detached, single attached, or multiple- dwellings or apartments located on the same lot. 
Dwelling, mobile home. For a definition of "mobile home dwelling," see "mobile home." 
Dwelling, multiple. "Multiple dwelling" means the same as multi-unit residential dwelling. 
Dwelling, single detached. "Single detached dwelling" means a detached building containing one dwelling unit meant for residential occupancy. 
Dwelling, single attached. "Single attached dwelling" means a building containing two dwelling units meant for residential occupancy which are attached by a common wall. 
Dwelling unit. "Dwelling unit" means one or more rooms with private kitchen and bathroom facilities, designed for occupancy for living and sleeping purposes. 
Easement, private road. For this definition, see "private road easement" in the glossary. 
Educational institution. "Educational institution" means any elementary school, junior high school, high school, or college or university, either public or private, giving general academic instruction in the several branches of learning. 
Efficiency unit. For this definition, see "studio unit" in the glossary. 
Electric distribution substation. "Electric distribution substation" means the assembly of equipment which is part of a system for the transmission of electric power, which receives electric energy at a very high voltage from its source of generation, by means of a network of high voltage lines, and where, by means of transformers, said high voltage is transformed to a lower subtransmission voltage for the purpose of supplying electric power to large individual customers, or interconnections with other power-producing agencies or electric distribution substations for transformation to still lower voltage for distribution to smaller individual use. 
Emergency shelter. "Emergency shelter" is defined in Section 50801(e) of the Health and Safety Code and includes housing with minimal supportive services that is limited to occupancy of up to six months. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay. 
Essential services. "Essential services" means the erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police callboxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general welfare, but not including any buildings, electrical substations, or water storage tanks. 
Explosive material. "Explosive material" means any chemical compound mixture or device, the primary and common purpose of which is to function by explosion with substantially simultaneous release of gas and heat, the resulting pressure being capable of producing destructive effects. 
Façade. The exterior face of a building which is the architectural front, sometimes distinguished from other faces by elaboration of architectural or ornamental details. 
Family day care home, large. "Large family day care home" means a home that provides family day care for seven to fourteen children, inclusive, including children under the age of ten years who reside at the home, or as set forth in Section 1597.465 of the California Health and Safety Code and as defined in regulations. 
Family day care home, small. "Small family day care home" means a home that provides family day care for eight or fewer children, including children under the age of ten years who reside at the home, or as set forth in Section 1597.44 of the California Health and Safety Code and as defined in regulations. 
Family foster care home. "Family foster care home" means a family residence in which twenty-four-hour full-time care is provided for not more than six foster children (persons under eighteen years of age) and the dwelling unit is licensed by the state. 
Farm stand. A "farm stand" is a temporary or permanent structure used for the display and sale of agricultural products. 
Fast food eating place. "Fast food eating place" means any retail food establishment that primarily provides short order food services for on-site dining or take-out service, where such food and beverage is served on paper, plastic, or other disposable containers, and including drive in and drive through restaurants where ready-to-eat foods are served primarily to be consumed off the premises. This definition includes all self-service restaurants, except cafeterias, sit-down pizza parlors, and donut shops. 
Fence. "Fence" means a freestanding structure of metal, masonry, composition or wood, or any combination thereof, resting on or partially buried in the ground and rising above ground level, and used for confinement, privacy, protection, screening or partition purposes. 
Fenestration. "Fenestration" is the number, design, and arrangement of exterior windows. 
Final map. "Final map" means a map prepared in accordance with the land division regulations and with any applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, designed to be recorded with the county recorder. 
Fire protection. "Fire protection" means such fire hydrants and other protective devices as required by the chief of the fire department. 
Floor area. "Floor area" means the sum of the gross area of each floor of a building, excluding mechanical space, cellar space, elevators and stair bulkheads, open balconies, open porches, open breezeways, open terraces, and required parking. 
Floor area ratio. "Floor area ratio" means the total floor area on a lot divided by the lot area. For example, a building containing twenty thousand square feet of floor area on a zoning lot of ten thousand square feet has a floor area ratio of two. 
Free standing retail. "Free standing retail" means a single retail sales facility of up to twenty thousand square feet in size that is situated independently on a building lot and for which associated parking serves exclusively that facility. 
Freeway. "Freeway" means a divided highway for through traffic with full control of access and with grade separations at intersections, and declared to be such in compliance with the California Streets and Highways Code. 
Frequency. "Frequency" means the number of times that a displacement completely repeats itself in one second of time. Frequency may be designated in cycles per second or hertz (Hz). 
Frontage. "Frontage" means all property fronting on one side of a street between intersecting or intercepting streets, or between a street and right-of-way, waterway, end of dead-end street, or city boundary measured along the street line. An intercepting street shall determine only the boundary of the frontage on the side of the street which it intercepts. 
Frontage road. For this definition, see "service road" in the glossary. 
Front yard. For this definition, see "yard, front" in the glossary. 
Future street or alley. For this definition, see "street or alley, future" in the glossary. 
Games of skill or amusement. "Games of skill or amusement" means any machines, devices or apparatus, the operation or use of which is permitted, controlled, allowed or made possible by the deposit or placement of any currency, plate, disc, slug or key into any slot or crevice, for the purpose or use as a game or amusement of any description the use for the purpose of which is not prohibited by any law of the state. 
Garage, private. For a definition of "private garage," see "parking garage, private." 
Garage, public. For a definition of "public garage," see "parking garage, public." 
Garage, repair. "Repair garage" means a structure or portion thereof, other than a storage or parking garage, designed or used for repairing, equipping or servicing motor vehicles. Such garages may also be used for housing, storage or sale of motor vehicles. 
Garage, storage. "Storage garage" means a structure or portion thereof designed and used exclusively for the storage of motor vehicles, and within which temporary parking may also be permitted. 
General plan. "General plan" means a comprehensive declaration of purposes, policies and programs for the development of the city and including, where applicable, diagrams, maps and text setting forth objectives, principles, standards, and other features, and which have been adopted by the city council. 
Goods and services, retail. Retail goods include commercial establishments that provide physical goods, products or merchandise directly to the consumer, where such goods are typically available for immediate purchase and removal from the premises by the purchaser. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, apparel, household appliances, computers and electronics, books and stationary, gifts and souvenirs, paint and wallpaper, pets, plants, groceries and baked goods, hardware, hobby and crafts, sports equipment or similar products. Services include establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the provision of frequent or recurrent needed services of a personal nature. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, beauty shops, barbershops, nail salons, animal grooming establishments, shoe, jewelry, or watch repair, coin-operated laundromats, dry cleaners and tailors, travel agencies, insurance agencies, banks and credit unions, printing and copy businesses, photographic studios, or similar businesses. Retail goods and services do not include the sale and service of vehicles, industrial-type equipment, heavy machinery, or other similar uses. 
Government service agency. "Government service agency" means a government service facility providing direct services to the public wherein large aggregations of people are probable, especially those such as employment offices, public assistance offices, motor vehicle registration and licensing services and similar activities commonly accustomed to having sizeable assemblages of people queueing, tarrying, biding or waiting for service, whether pedestrian or vehicular. 
Grade. For a definition of "grade," see the Uniform Building Code. 
Gradient. "Gradient" means the rate of vertical change of a ground surface expressed as a percentage figure and determined by dividing the vertical distance by the horizontal distance. 
Guidance/social assistance services. "Guidance/social assistance services" means a use providing counseling, guidance, recuperative, or similar services for persons requiring rehabilitation assistance as a result of mental illness, alcoholism, detention, drug addiction, or similar conditions for only part of a twenty-four-hour day. 
Hazardous waste facility. "Hazardous waste facility" shall be defined as specified by the California Health and Safety Code and the San Diego County Hazardous Waste Management Plan. 
Health facility, long-term. "Long-term health facility" means an institution or premises licensed by the state and used for the housing and care of the ambulatory, aged or infirm, and offering or providing lodging, meals, nursing, dietary or other personal services, but not including the care and treatment of persons with contagious or communicable diseases or persons insane or addicted to narcotics or alcohol. There shall be no surgery, physical therapy, or other similar activities such as are customarily provided in hospitals. Also called rest homes; convalescent homes; homes for the aged; veterans' homes; institutions for the feebleminded, cerebral palsied and the like; plus other similar names signifying long-term care, which is personal and, at most, nursing help, rather than medical or surgical care. See also "hospital." (Note: A senior citizens' project or housing-for-the-elderly project is to be distinguished from a long-term health facility in that the senior citizens' project or housing is primarily of a residential character with only incidental nursing facilities while a nursing home is primarily designed and used for the care of convalescent or ill persons.) 
Heavy manufacturing/processing. "Heavy manufacturing/processing" includes uses that process or treat materials for the fabrication of large base-sector products. Assembly of large equipment and machines is included in this category as well as manufacturing uses that typically produce noise, dust, or other pollutants capable of harming or annoying adjacent uses. Such uses include manufacturing and processing of plastics and synthetic resins; rubber products; soaps, bleaching products, and other disinfectants; large scale laundry and dry cleaning facilities; industrial chemicals; paint and lacquer; fish, vinegar, and other food products with offensive odors (except slaughterhouses); steel mills; petroleum chemical sales; organic chemical research; and other uses that are found by the city to be of the same general character to those listed here. 
Helicopter. "Helicopter" means a rotary-wing aircraft which depends, for its support and motion in the air, principally upon the lift generated by one or more power-driven rotors that rotate on a substantially vertical axis. 
Heliport. "Heliport" means an area of land or water or a structural surface which is used or intended for use for the landing and takeoff of helicopters, and any appurtenant areas which are used or intended for use for heliport buildings and other heliport facilities. 
Helistop. "Helistop" means the same as a heliport, except that no refueling, maintenance, repairs or storage of helicopters is permitted. 
Highway. For definition, see "freeway." 
Home, convalescent. "Convalescent home" means the same as "long-term health facility." 
Home garden. "Home garden" means a garden maintained by one or more individuals who reside in a dwelling unit located on the subject property. Food and horticultural; products grown in the home garden may be used for personal consumption or for donation or sale on-site. A home garden is an accessory use to a principal residential use. 
Home occupation. "Home occupation" means an occupation carried on within the main building by the occupant of the dwelling as a secondary use, in connection with which there is no display, no stock in trade nor commodity sold upon the premises, no person employed, and no mechanical equipment used except that which is normally necessary for housekeeping purposes. 
Homeless shelter. "Homeless shelter" means the same as "emergency shelter." 
Hospice. "Hospice" means a program that provides care for clients in the last stages of a terminal illness within the client's home or a home-like facility. 
Hospital. "Hospital" means a facility providing medical, psychiatric or surgical service for sick or injured persons, primarily on an in-patient basis, and including ancillary facilities for out-patient and emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, research, administration and services to patients, employees, or visitors. 
Hospital, long-term convalescent, or nursing and convalescent. "Long-term convalescent hospital" or "nursing and convalescent hospital" means the same as "long-term health facility." 
Hospital, psychiatric. "Psychiatric hospital" means the same as "special hospital." 
Hotel. "Hotel" means a building in which lodging is provided and offered to the public for compensation, and which is open to transient guests for less than thirty days. No room rentals shall be provided on an hourly basis. The hotel may include facilities available to the general public, such as meeting and dining facilities and limited goods and services, provided these are an integral part of the hotel operations. 
Household pet. "Household pet" means any domesticated animal commonly maintained in residence with humans. 
Improvement, public. "Public improvement" means such street work and utilities as may be installed on land to be used for public or private streets, highways, alleys, pedestrian ways, ways, and easements, as are necessary for the general use and safety of the landowner and the public. Such street work and utilities may include necessary monuments, street name signs, guardrails, barricades, safety devices, fire hydrants, grading, retaining walls, storm drains and flood control channels and facilities, erosion control structures, sanitary sewers, street lights, street trees, traffic warning devices (other than traffic signals), and such other facilities as may be required by this title. 
Incidental use. "Incidental use" means the same as "accessory use." 
Industrial park. "Industrial park" means a special or exclusive type of industrial area designed or equipped to accommodate a community of industries, or approved under the procedure for planned development. 
Institution. An "institution" is a non-profit or quasi-public use, or institution such as a library, public or private school, hospital, or municipally owned or operated building, structure or land used for public purposes. 
Institution, health. For definitions relating to health institutions, see "clinic," "long-term health facility," and "hospital." 
Institution, philanthropic. For this definition, see "philanthropic institution." 
Inundation. "Inundation" means ponded water or water in motion of sufficient depth to damage property due to the presence of the water or due to deposits of silt. 
Junk or salvage yard. "Junk or salvage yard" means any premises used for the keeping or storage of junk, including but not limited to iron and scrap metals, paper, rags, glass, wood and similar materials, and includes the dismantling of machinery or the storage or keeping for sale of parts and equipment resulting from dismantling or wrecking operations on said property or elsewhere. "Junk or salvage yard" also includes the baling of cardboard, cardboard boxes, paper and paper cartons. Compare "automobile dismantling, or wrecking yard" and "scrap metal processing." 
Kennel. "Kennel" means any place where three or more dogs are kept for breeding purposes and where the pups are sold to any other person; or where dogs are received for care or for boarding by the day, week or month, or for longer periods of time. 
Kitchen. "Kitchen" means any room or space within a building designed, intended to be used, or used for the cooking or the preparation of food. 
Landscaping. "Landscaping" means the use of architectural and horticultural materials to provide control of erosion, dust, weeds, and accumulation of litter in a manner complementary to the purpose of adding natural environmental quality to the premises. "Landscaping" includes the planting and maintenance of some combination of trees, shrubs, groundcover, vines, flowers, lawns or other planting materials, other than weeds, providing shade, visual screening, aesthetic enhancement, soil conservation, and the removal or reduction of fire hazards, rodent harborages, vermin, and disease-bearing creatures. In addition, the combination or design may include natural features such as rock and stone, and structural features such as pools, art work, screens, walls, fences and benches. See also "fence" and "screening" as defined in the glossary. 
Landscaping maintenance. "Landscaping maintenance" includes sufficient irrigation, fertilization, pruning, trimming, training, and all other reasonable acts necessary to keep plants in a healthy vigorous condition. Maintenance also includes removal of weeds, dead materials and accumulated litter, rubble, or other foreign substances; and reseeding, and replacement of dead plants and planting where necessary to restore a landscaped area to the level of "coverage" required of a new installation. 
Large format retail. "Large format retail" is a single retail sales facility that has greater than twenty thousand square feet of gross floor area and is contained in a single building. 
Loading berth. "Loading berth" means a space within a loading facility, exclusive of driveways, aisles, maneuvering areas, ramps, columns, landscaping areas, office and work areas, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading goods or materials, and which abuts upon a street, alley, or other appropriate means of access. 
Loading facility. "Loading facility" means an area, either open or enclosed, or partially enclosed within a structure or portion thereof, designed or used for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading goods or materials. 
Lot. The following shall constitute a legal building site: 
1.  A parcel of land which is shown on a final subdivision map recorded in the office of the county recorder, pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act; or 
2.  A parcel of land, the dimensions or boundaries of which are defined by a duly recorded record of survey map; or 
3.  A parcel of land shown on the approved lot split map on file in the city engineering department; or 
4.  A parcel of land which is shown on an approved parcel map recorded in the office of the county recorder; or 
5.  A parcel of land not described as in subsections 1, 2, 3, and 4 of this definition and legally subdivided prior to the adoption of this National City Land Use Code. 
Lot area. "Lot area" means the total area, measured on a horizontal plane, included within the lot lines of a lot or parcel of land. 
Lot, corner. "Corner lot" means a lot or parcel of land situated at the intersection of two or more streets or highways, which streets or highways have an angle of intersection, measured within the lot or parcel of land, of not more than one hundred thirty-five degrees. 
Lot coverage. "Lot coverage" means that percentage of a lot which, when viewed directly from above, would be covered by a structure or structures, or any part thereof, excluding projecting roof eaves. 
Lot depth. "Lot depth" means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines. 
Lot frontage. For a definition of "lot frontage," see "frontage." 
Lot, interior. "Interior lot" means a lot other than a corner lot or reversed corner lot. 
Lot, key. "Key lot" means the first interior lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot and not separated by an alley. 
Lot line. "Lot line" means the property line bounding the lot. 
Lot line, front. "Front lot line" means a line separating an interior lot from a street or highway, or a line separating the narrower street frontage of a corner lot from the street or highway. In the case of a corner lot with equal frontages on intersecting streets, the front lot line shall be the continuation of the street line with the greatest number of lot frontages in the block. 
Lot line, rear. "Rear lot line" means a lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line and, in the case of an irregular, triangular, or gore-shaped lot, a line ten feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. 
Lot line, side. "Side lot line" means any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
Lot, reversed corner. "Reversed corner lot" means a corner lot, the side street line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear. 
Lot, through. "Through lot" means a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
Lot width. "Lot width" means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines. 
Maintenance and service facilities. "Maintenance and service facilities" means a facility supporting maintenance, repair, vehicular or equipment servicing, material storage, and similar activities, including corporation yards, equipment service centers and similar uses having characteristics of commercial services or contracting or industrial activities. 
Major highway. For definition, see "freeway." 
Maps. For definitions relating to maps, see "final map," "parcel map" "Subdivision Map Act," "tentative map," and "zoning map" in the glossary. 
Mass. "Mass" means three dimensional form; the visual impact of a building's height, depth, and length. 
"Massage". See Municipal Code Sections 10.79 and 18.30.370. 
Marquee. "Marquee" means a fixed shelter used only as a roof and extended over a building line, and which is entirely supported by the building to which it is attached. Compare "awning" and "canopy" in the glossary. 
Medical office/medical clinic. "Medical office/medical clinic" means a facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical services for sick or injured persons exclusively on an out-patient basis, including emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, administration and services to out-patients, employees or visitors. 
Medium manufacturing/processing. "Medium manufacturing/processing" includes uses that have moderately objectionable environmental influences by reason of the emission of odor, heat, smoke, noise, or vibration. Such uses include the manufacture of food products, drugs, pharmaceuticals and the like; wineries, distilleries, and large breweries; lumber yards and wood products; leather products; plastics; paper products and packaging material; floor coverings; stone, clay, glass, and concrete activities and products; manufacturing of textile products; metal fabrication and welding; vehicle manufacture, railroad equipment; and any other uses found by the city to be of the same general character of those listed here. 
Merchandise. "Merchandise" means any tangible object of nominal or value greater than one cent including, but not limited to, all manufactured products, food, goods and flowers, but excluding "newspapers." 
Microbrewery. "Microbrewery" means a pub or restaurant that also produces and sells beer on the premises. Generally, a microbrewery produces fewer than ten thousand barrels of beer and ale a year. 
Military installations. "Military installations" means military facilities of the federal and state governments. 
Mini-warehouse/self-storage. "Mini-warehouse" (also know as self storage facilities) means a building used for private rental of space for temporary storage of household goods and materials other than storage by commercial "household goods storage" businesses and except "warehouses." 
Mixed-use. The term "mixed-use" shall be defined as a combination of commercial and residential uses or structures, designed and built on a single lot or parcel, or as components of a single development. 
Mobile home. A "mobile home" is defined by Section 798.3 of the California Civil Code. 
Mobile home park. "Mobile home park" means an area of land where two or more mobile home sites are rented or leased, or offered for rent or lease, to accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation. 
Mobile home site. "Mobile home site" means that portion of a mobile home park set aside and designated for the occupancy of a mobile home and including the area set aside or used for parking or structures, including awnings, cabanas or ramadas which are accessory to the mobile home. 
Model home. "Model home" means a dwelling or residential building having all of the following characteristics: 
1.  Said dwelling is constructed upon a proposed lot previously designated as a model home site by the planning commission in a subdivision for which the commission has approved or conditionally approved a tentative map but for which a final map has not yet been recorded; 
2.  The proposed lot upon which the model home is constructed is recognized as a legal building site for the duration of the model home permit; 
3.  No certificate of occupancy for such dwelling has been issued by the director of building and housing; 
4.  Where applicable, temporary access to such dwelling is permitted over future streets previously restricted to public access; and, 
5.  Said dwelling is intended to be temporarily utilized as an example of the dwellings which have been built or which are proposed to be built in the same subdivision. 
Motel. "Motel" means any building or group of buildings containing guest rooms for overnight visitor accommodations and not more than thirty days. No room rentals shall be provided on an hourly basis. The motel may include facilities available to the general public, such as dining facilities, provided these are an integral part of the motel operations. 
Motor vehicle. "Motor vehicle" means a self-propelled device used or intended to be used for the transportation of freight or passengers upon a street or highway, excepting a device moved by human power or a device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. See also "recreational vehicles" and automobile-related definitions, plus "accessory vehicle," "commercial vehicle" and "vehicle." 
Multi-unit residential. "Multi-unit residential" is a residential structure containing three or more residential dwelling units. 
Mural. "Mural" means a painting, graphic design, or pictorial representation applied directly or attached to an exterior mounting surface or exterior wall that is visible from any point of any public right-of-way, including public street, sidewalk, or trail. Any representation which identifies a business or building by logo, product, service, trademark, message, or slogan shall be considered a sign. 
Neighborhood corner store. "Neighborhood corner store" means a small convenience store not more than three thousand square feet established in a residential zone pursuant to Section 18.30.260. 
Neighborhood garden. "Neighborhood garden" is an area of land, one acre or less, managed and maintained by an individual or group of individuals to grow and harvest food and horticultural products for personal or group consumption, for sale or donation. A neighborhood garden may be divided into separate garden plots for cultivation by one or more individuals or may be farmed collectively by members of the group. Neighborhood garden group members may or may not reside on the subject property. Sale and donation of food and horticultural products grown in the neighborhood garden may occur on-site. A neighborhood garden may be a principal or accessory use. 
Net area. For this definition, see "area, net." 
Nonconforming structure. "Nonconforming structure" means a structure which was lawfully erected prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title but which, under the provisions of this title, does not conform to the standards of coverage, yards, height of structures, or distances between structures prescribed in the regulations for the zone in which the structure is located. 
Nonconforming use. "Nonconforming use" means a use of a structure or land, which was lawfully established and maintained prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, but which, under the provisions of this title, does not conform with the use regulations for the zone in which it is located. 
Nursing home. "Nursing home" means the same as "long-term health facility." 
Office. "Office" means an establishment providing direct, "over-the-counter" services to consumers and office-type facilities occupied by businesses providing professional services and/or engaged in the production of intellectual property. This includes, but is not limited to such uses as accounting, auditing, and bookkeeping services, advertising agencies, travel reservation centers, architectural, engineering, planning, and surveying services, real estate and related services, legal services, art and design services, computer software and hardware design, counseling services, data processing services, detective agencies, insurance companies, telemarketing, management and public relation services, photography studios, writer and artist offices, postal facilities, administrative and clerical services, or public contact offices of a government agency, and banks and financial institutions. 
Open space, common usable. "Common usable open space" means recreational or leisure space for the shared use of residents of a multi-unit development with no dimension less than twenty feet and may include gardens, playgrounds, courtyards, swimming pools, sitting areas, court games, recreation rooms, exercise rooms or gyms, spas, community rooms, lawn/turf used for open play, ponds, fountains, atriums, picnic areas, rooftop gardens or green roofs, or similar uses or facilities. 
Open space, private usable. "Private usable open space" means an outdoor recreational or leisure space devoted to the exclusive use of a unit with no dimension less than five feet, including the following: patio, porch, and balcony. 
Open space, usable roof area. "Usable roof area open space" means that part of a roof which is usable by all residents of the building, is accessible to all residents by a passageway from the buildings, is enclosed by parapet or ground rails adequate for the safety of the occupants, has no dimension less than twenty feet, and is developed for active or passive recreational use. 
Outdoor advertising display. "Outdoor advertising display" means any card, paper, cloth, metal, glass, wooden or other display or device of any kind placed for outdoor advertising purposes on the ground or on any tree, wall, rock, structure, or other object. 
Outdoor advertising structure. For definitions relating to outdoor advertising structures, see sign-related definitions. 
Outdoor storage. "Outdoor storage" means storage of goods and materials outside of any building or structure, but not including storage of a temporary or emergency nature. 
Overlay zoning/overlay zone. "Overlay zoning is a regulatory tool that creates a special zoning district, placed over an existing base zone(s), which identifies special provisions in addition to those in the underlying base zone. The overlay district can share common boundaries with the base zone or cut across base zone boundaries. Regulations or incentives are attached to the overlay district to protect a specific resource or guide development within a special area." 
Pad, building. "Building pad" means the area occupied by a building or buildings on a building site, including the open area contiguous to and surrounding such buildings and having a slope not greater than ten percent. Building pads shall be exclusive of required front yards. 
Parapet. "Parapet" means the part of a wall which rises above the edge of a roof. 
Parcel. For a definition of "parcel," see "lot." 
Parcel map. "Parcel map" means a map showing the division of land, as described in the California Subdivision Map Act, and prepared in accordance with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act. 
Pergola. "Pergola" means an open framework over a walkway or path, which is usually designed to be covered in climbing plants; a walk framed by columns or posts and covered by cross members. 
Park (active recreation). "Park (active recreation)" means a piece of land that is not part of a residential development, which is developed with such uses as sports fields, court games, skate parks, swimming pools, and other recreational uses that have the potential to generate a lot of noise. 
Park (passive recreation). "Park (passive recreation)" means a piece of land that is not part of a residential development, which is generally kept in a natural state and contains sitting areas, picnic areas, trails, and other recreational activities that do not generate a significant amount of noise. 
Parking facility. "Parking facility" means an area other than a street or other public way, either open or enclosed within a structure or portion thereof, designed or used for the parking of motor vehicles. 
Parking facility, accessory. "Accessory parking facility" means a parking facility which is accessory to a structure or use on the same lot or another lot, and may include both required or permitted parking stalls. 
Parking garage, private, or carport, private. "Private parking garage" or "private carport" means a detached accessory building or portion of a main building assigned for the parking or temporary storage of automobiles of the occupants of the premises. 
Parking garage, public. "Public parking garage" means a structure or portion thereof designed or used for the parking of motor vehicles and some or all of whose parking stalls are nonaccessory. Commercial or public parking garages may include accessory off-street parking stalls limited to such stalls which are accessory to other structures or uses on the same lot. 
Parking lot. "Parking lot" means an open area, other than a street, used or designated to be used for temporary storage of vehicles, and which is available for either public or private use, whether free, for compensation, as an accommodation for clients or customers, or for private use. 
Parking lift, mechanical. A "mechanical parking lift" is an automated parking lift contained entirely within a parking lift rack structure for parking two or more vehicles. The parking lift rack structure is two or more tiers high and is erected indoors or outdoors. Parking spaces for a mechanical parking lift are considered tandem spaces. 
Parking space or stall. "Parking space" or parking stall" means a permanently surfaced space within a parking facility, exclusive of driveway, aisles, maneuvering or landscaped areas, ramps, columns, office and work areas, for the parking of one motor vehicle. 
Parkway. "Parkway" means the space located between the street curb and the property line. The parkway may include a sidewalk and a landscape strip, a sidewalk, or a sidewalk with a cut-off for a street tree. 
Patio structure. "Patio structure" means an attached roofed structure open on one or more sides, whose principal use shall be for indoor-outdoor living and recreation. 
Pawn shop. A "pawn shop" is a business that offers secured loans to people, with items of personal property used as collateral. 
Payday lender. "Payday lender" means an establishment that provides monetary loans to borrowers that must be paid in full, usually at a high interest rate, when the borrowers receive their next pay check. 
Pedestrian way. "Pedestrian way" means a right-of-way for pedestrians, free from vehicular traffic and including access ramps, stairs, and mechanical lifts and routes through buildings which are available for public use. 
Performance standards. For provisions regarding "performance standards," see Chapter 18.4, Title 7, and Title 12 and specific definitions dispersed throughout this title. 
Petroleum bulk plant. "Petroleum bulk plant" means any premises used for the wholesale distribution and storage of gasoline, oil or petroleum products, but not including the storage of liquid petroleum gas, a tank farm, or connection to a pipeline constituting, in effect, a petroleum terminal. 
Pet grooming. "Pet grooming" is a personal service establishment that, for a fee, trims, cleans or curries domestic pets such as dogs and cats and which may sell pet supplies. This term shall not include establishments which board pets or provide pet day care. 
Pet shop. "Pet shop" means any store, department of any store, or place of business where dogs, cats, monkeys, birds, reptiles, or any other animals are kept for sale, for hire, or are sold. 
Philanthropic institution. "Philanthropic institution" means a nonprofit, charitable institution devoted to the housing, training or care of children, or of aged, indigent, handicapped or underprivileged persons, but not including the following: office buildings, except as an accessory to and located on the same lot with an institutional activity, as listed above; hospitals, clinics or sanitariums, correctional institutions; institutions or homes for the insane or those of unsound mind; lodging houses or dormitories providing temporary quarters for transient unemployed persons; organizations devoted to collecting and salvaging new or used materials; or organizations devoted principally to distributing food, clothing or supplies on a charitable basis. 
Planning commission. For this definition, see Chapter 2.28. 
Planning division. The "planning division" is a unit of city government responsible for reviewing land development proposals, ensuring compliance with the city's General Plan, Land Use Code, Local Coastal Program Land Use Plan (PDF), Local Coastal Program Implementation (PDF), State Subdivision Map Act, California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), and other applicable local and state regulations. The planning division also provides staff support to the planning commission, and recommends and implements changes to the land use section of the Land Use Code. 
Postal facilities. "Postal facilities" means postal services, including post offices, bulk mail processing or sorting centers, operated by the United States Postal Service. 
Principal permitted use. "Principal permitted use" means the primary allowed land use. Where more than one use is located within a single place, the principal use is that activity to which the greatest amount of floor and/or ground space is devoted. All other activities are "accessory uses." An accessory use that is clearly subordinate and incidental to a permitted use is a component of that permitted use. 
Private road easement. "Private road easement" means a parcel of land not dedicated as a public street but intersecting or connecting with a public street, or another private street, for which a private easement for road purposes has been proposed or granted to the owners of property contiguous or adjacent thereto, and for which an instrument creating the easement has been duly recorded and filed with the county recorder. 
Projection, architectural. "Architectural projection" means anything attached to and extended outside the outer face of the exterior wall of a structure and not intended for shelter or occupancy. 
Property line. "Property line" means a line separating parcels of real property having separate legal descriptions, but not including a building line. 
Public assembly. "Public assembly" means an institution, such as a church or lodge, that people regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services, public meetings, or other similar activities. This term does not carry a secular connotation and includes the buildings or other locations in which the religious services of any denomination are held. 
Public safety facilities. "Public safety facilities" means facilities for conduct of public safety and emergency services, including police and fire protection services and emergency medical and ambulance services. 
Public utility service center. "Public utility service center" means any building or premises used for the administration of public utility repair, maintenance and installation crews, including parking for vehicles not to exceed one and one-half-ton rated capacity, but not including warehouses or storage yards. 
Public utility service yard. "Public utility service yard" means any building or premises used for the office, warehouse, storage yard, or maintenance garage of a public utility, including microwave repeater stations when incorporated as a part of the service yard use. See also "communication equipment building" and "telephone repeater station." 
Public way. "Public way" means any street, alley, pedestrian way, channel, viaduct, subway, tunnel, bridge, easement, right-of-way, or other way in which a public agency has a right of use. See also "street or public street" and "freeway." 
Quarry. "Quarry" means any place on a lot or parcel of land where dirt, soil, sand, gravel, rock, clay, decomposed granite, or other similar material is removed by excavation or otherwise. "Quarry" includes mining operations for the removal of ores, precious stones, or other solid minerals, but shall not include excavation and removal of materials from a lot or parcel of land preparatory to construction of a building for which a building permit has been issued and remains in full force and effect, provided that such excavation is confined to that necessary for such building construction, but in no event shall more than five thousand cubic yards of soil or other excavated materials be removed from the premises; or excavation, on a lot, parcel of land or subdivision, necessary to grading, building construction or operation on the premises, where a building permit is not in full force and effect, provided that such grading is necessary to prepare a site for a lawful use permitted thereon, but in no event shall more than five hundred cubic yards of soil or other excavated materials be removed from such premises. 
Railroad facilities. "Railroad facilities" means railroad yards, equipment servicing facilities and terminal facilities. 
Real estate sales office. "Real estate sales office" means a sales office established and maintained in one model home as approved by the planning commission, or in a single-family dwelling on a recorded lot previously designated as a model home site by the planning commission and serving temporarily as an example of houses in the same subdivision, and subject to the provisions of this title. 
Rear lot line. For this definition, see "lot line, rear." 
Rear yard. For this definition, see "yard, rear." 
Recreational vehicles: 
1.  "Recreational vehicles" include the following: 
a.  Boats and boat trailers, including boats, floats, and rafts, plus the normal equipment to transport the same on a highway; 
b.  Campers, which are structures designed primarily to be mounted upon a motor vehicle and with sufficient facilities to render same suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for camping travel, recreational and vacation purposes; 
c.  Full tent trailers, which are canvas folding structures mounted on wheels and designed for travel and vacation use; 
d.  Motorized homes, which are portable dwellings designed and constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle; 
e.  Travel trailers, which are vehicular portable structures built on a chassis and designed to be used as temporary dwellings for travel, recreational and vacation uses permanently identified as a travel trailer by the manufacturer. 
2.  See also "mobile home" and "motor vehicle." 
Recreation, commercial. "Commercial recreation" means recreation facilities operated as a business and open to the general public for a fee. 
Recreation, private, noncommercial. "Noncommercial private recreation" means clubs or recreation facilities operated by a nonprofit organization and open only to bona fide members of such nonprofit organization. 
Recreation, public. "Public recreation" means publicly owned or operated recreation facilities. 
Recreation room or building. "Recreation room or building" means a room, contained in either a main building or an accessory building, designed to be utilized primarily for games, the pursuit of hobbies, social gatherings, and such activities. Such a room may contain such plumbing fixtures as are utilized in a bar or for hobby activities. Such a room in a single-family or two-family dwelling, or in an accessory building appurtenant to a single-family or two-family dwelling, may not include facilities for the cooking and preparation of food. However, in a multiple residential use or in an accessory building appurtenant thereto, a recreation room which is for the common use of all the dwelling units therein may contain facilities for the cooking and preparation of food. 
Rectory. "Rectory" is the residence of one or more leaders of a religious institution of any denomination and may also function as the administrative offices of the religious institution. A rectory is also known as a presbytery, parsonage, or manse. 
Recyclables or recyclable materials. "Recyclables" or "recyclable materials" means plastic bottles, plastic containers, glass bottles, glass jars, newspapers, aluminum and/or metal cans, and any other material designated by the city as a recyclable material in Chapter 9.52. 
Renewable energy infrastructure. "Renewable energy infrastructure" is equipment used to generate electricity or heat from renewable or low-carbon sources. Renewable energy infrastructure includes, but may not be limited to, solar power, wind power, electric vehicle charging stations, and similar facilities and devices. 
Repair garage. For this definition, see "garage, repair." 
Research and development. "Research and development" means a laboratory facility that is primarily used for scientific research. This use can include the design, development, and testing of biological, chemical, electrical, magnetic, mechanical, and/or optical components in advance of product manufacturing. This use does not involve the fabrication, mass manufacture, or processing of the products. 
Residential building. "Residential building" means a building or portion thereof designed or used for human habitation. 
Residential care home. "Residential care home" means a state authorized, certified, or licensed home serving six or fewer mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped persons or dependent or neglected children, and providing care on a twenty-four-hour-a-day basis, as defined in Section 5116, California Welfare and Institutions Code. 
Residential density. "Residential density" means the average number of families living on one acre of land in a given area. Net residential density is determined by dividing the total number of families in a defined area by the total acreage of all parcels of land within the area that are used for residential and accessory purposes. Gross residential density is obtained by dividing all land in a defined area used for residences, streets, local schools, local parks, and local shopping facilities into the total number of families in said area. 
Rest home. "Rest home" means the same as "long-term health facility." 
Restoration is initiated. "Restoration is initiated" means that, at a minimum, a building permit application has been issued. 
Retail sales or retail store. "Retail sales" or "retail store" means the sale of goods, merchandise or commodities for consumption or use by the purchaser. 
Right-of-way. "Right-of-way" means an area of land reserved for public or private easements. 
Roadway. "Roadway" means that portion of a right-of-way for a street, highway or alley designed or used for accommodating the movement of vehicles. 
Rooming or boarding house. "Rooming or boarding house" means a private residence which is rented out to more than two paying guests. 
Rubbish. "Rubbish" means refuse and waste material, whether combustible or noncombustible, not included within the definition of garbage as herein defined, including but not limited to paper, rags, leaves, glass, cans, ashes, tree and vine trimmings. It shall not include plaster, rock sand, dirt, automobile frames or fenders, or waste material pertaining to building operations, construction or repair. It shall not mean discarded water heaters or furniture. 
Salvage yard. For this definition, see "yard, salvage." 
Satellite television antenna. "Satellite television antenna" means a device or instrument designed or used for the reception of television or other electronic communications signals broadcast or relayed from an earth satellite. It may be a solid, open-mesh or bar-configured structure, typically eight feet in diameter, in the shape of a shallow dish or parabola. 
Scale. "Scale" means the measurement of the relationship of one object to another object. The scale of a building or the scale of a building's components can be described in terms of its relationship to a human being. A building's scale can range from intimate or pedestrian-scale to monumental. Intimate or pedestrian-scale refers to the portions of a building that are around eight to ten feet in height above the ground plane. A monumental scale is used to present a feeling of grandeur. Building types which commonly use a monumental scale usually include banks, churches, and civic buildings. 
Soffit. "Soffit" means the finished underside of an eave. 
School, elementary and high. "Elementary school" and "high school" mean institutions of learning which offer instruction in the several branches of learning and study required to be taught to the public schools by the Education Code of the state. "High school" includes junior and senior high schools. 
School, trade, vocational, business or professional. "Trade school," "vocational school," "business school" or professional school" means an institution of learning which offers specialized instruction as preparation for entrance into, or as supplementary training in, a specific field or endeavor. Such institutions include, but are not limited to, secretarial schools, barber schools, modeling schools, language schools, electronics schools, dancing schools, and art schools. 
Scrap metal processing. "Scrap metal processing" means the recovery of metals from salvage for consumption by primary metals industries, using cutting, shredding, and melting processes. "Scrap metal processing" includes the preparation of such salvaged metals for reshipment. "Scrap metal processing" does not include wrecking yards, junkyards, or any similar use where metals are stored or sold as secondhand or used materials. Nonmetallic salvage or processing not clearly incidental to the principal use shall not be allowed. 
Screening. "Screening" means solid walls, solid fences, or dense living hedges for the purpose of concealing from view the area behind such structure or hedge. See also "fence" and "landscaping." 
Second unit. "Second unit" is a small, self-contained residential unit built on the same lot as an existing primary residence or built in conjunction with a primary residence. It provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. Second units are also referred to as "accessory dwelling units," "in-law apartments," "granny flats," "ancillary apartments" or "carriage houses." Second units may be attached to or detached from the primary residence. Refer to Section 18.21.050 for second unit regulations. 
Secondhand dealer. A "secondhand dealer" means and includes any person, co-partnership, firm, or corporation whose business includes buying, selling, trading, taking in pawn, accepting for sale on consignment, accepting for auctioning, or auctioning secondhand tangible personal property, as defined in this Glossary. 
Secondhand tangible personal property. "Secondhand tangible personal property" includes, but is not limited to, all secondhand tangible personal property that bears a serial number or personalized initials or inscription or which, at the time it is acquired by the secondhand dealer, bears evidence of having had a serial number or personalized initials or inscription, as defined by the California Business and Professions Code. In addition, secondhand tangible personal property also includes precious metals such as gold, silver, platinum, and jewelry. 
Senior citizens' housing. For this definition, see "senior housing." 
Senior housing. "Housing for the elderly" or "senior housing," also called "elderly housing and senior citizen housing" means a project specially designed for elderly persons and providing living unit accommodations. Senior housing may also include spaces for common use by the occupants in social and recreational activities and, when needed, incidental facilities and space for the project residents. 
Setback. "Setback" means a horizontal distance determining the location of a building with respect to a street, zone boundary line, or another use. Where the term "setback" is used in conjunction with a modifying word or words, such as "parking area," the setback shall, in its application, include but not be limited to building. 
Shared parking. "Shared parking" means parking spaces shared by more than one user or land use. 
Shopping center. "Shopping center" means a group of commercial establishments planned and developed, owned or managed as a unit, with off-street parking and loading provided on the property, and related in its location, size, and type of shops to the trade area which the unit serves. 
Sidewalk. "Sidewalk" means that portion of a thoroughfare, other than a roadway, set apart by curbs, barriers, markings or other delineations for pedestrian travel. 
Sidewalk café. "Sidewalk café" means the outdoor seating portion of an eating or drinking establishment such as a restaurant, coffeehouse, or café. Sidewalk cafes must conform to the regulations set forth in Section 18.30.200. 
Side yard. For this definition, see "yard, side." 
Sight visibility triangle. Refer to "traffic visibility triangle." 
Site, building. For this definition, see "building site." 
Skilled nursing facility. "Skilled nursing facility" means an institution, or part of an institution, that provides licensed, skilled nursing care and related services for patients who require twenty-four-hour medical, nursing or rehabilitative services. 
Sloping terrain. "Sloping terrain" means any ground surface having a rate of incline or decline of greater than a ten percent gradient. 
Solar array. A "solar array" is an electrical device consisting of a large array of connected solar cells 
Solar collector. A "solar collector" is any of several devices that absorb and accumulate solar radiation for use as a source of energy. 
Solar energy system: 
(1)  Any solar collector or other solar energy device, certified pursuant to state law, along with its ancillary equipment, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating. 
(2)  Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating. 
Specific plan. "Specific plan" means a definite statement, adopted by ordinance, of policies, standards, and regulations, together with a map or description defining the location where such policies, standards, and regulations are applicable. 
Stall, parking. For a definition of "parking stall." 
Storage, outdoor. For a definition of "outdoor storage." 
Story. For a definition of "story," see the Uniform Building Code. 
Street or public street. "Street" or "public street" means any public thoroughfare other than an alley or walk. Where a subdivision has been recorded containing lots which abut only on an alley or walk, the alley or walk may be considered to be a street. 
Street, collector. "Collector street" means a street (including the principal access streets of a subdivision) which carries traffic from local streets, either directly or by way of other existing or proposed collector streets, to a major or secondary highway. 
Street line. "Street line" means the boundary line between a street and the abutting property. 
Street, local. "Local street" means any street, other than a collector street, major or secondary highway or freeway, providing access to abutting property and serving local, as distinguished from through, traffic. 
Street or alley, future. "Future street or alley" means any real property which the owner thereof has offered for dedication to the city for street or alley purposes but which has been rejected by the city council subject to the right of the council to rescind its action and accept by resolution at any later date and without further action by the owner all or part of said property as a public street or alley. 
Street, private. "Private street" means a private road easement that the director determines to be adequate for access and which conforms to such dimensional and improvement standards as are adopted by the commission. 
Street, side. "Side street" means a street which is adjacent to a corner lot and which extends in the general direction of the line determining the depth of the lot. 
Structural alteration. "Structural alteration" means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams, floor or roof joists, girders, or rafters, or changes in roof or exterior lines. 
Structure. "Structure" means anything constructed or erected which is supported directly or indirectly on the earth, but not including any vehicle which conforms to the California State Vehicle Act. "Structure" includes any building or accessory building which can be used for the housing, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind, plus fences, walls, billboards, platforms, towers, panels and signs. 
Structure, accessory. For this definition, see "accessory structure." 
Subdivision Map Act. "Subdivision Map Act" means the Subdivision Map Act of the state. 
Studio or efficiency unit. "A studio or efficiency unit" means a dwelling that combines kitchen, living, and sleeping rooms into one room. 
Substantial conformance. "Substantial conformance" means a determination in which a revision to a development that was approved through a permit or tentative map complies with the objectives, standards, guidelines, and conditions, for that permit or tentative map. 
Supportive housing. Supportive housing is defined in Section 50675.14 of the Health and Safety Code and has no limit on the length of stay, is linked to on-site or off-site services, and is occupied by a target population as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 53260 (i.e., low income persons with mental disabilities, AIDS, substance abuse or chronic health conditions or persons whose disabilities originated before the person turned eighteen). Services typically include assistance designed to meet the needs of the target population in retaining housing, living and working in the community, and/or improving health and may include case management, mental health treatment, and life skills. 
Tandem parking. "Tandem parking" is where vehicles park nose-to-end or are stacked vertically. Tandem parking shall only be permitted in the Westside and Downtown Specific Plan areas. See definition for "parking lift, mechanical." 
Tattoo. The terms "tattoo refers to any method of placing designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under the skin of a human with ink or any other substance, resulting in the coloration of the skin by the aid of needles or any other instrument designed to touch or puncture the skin. 
Tattoo and body piercing establishment. A "tattoo and body piercing establishment" is an establishment that provides a service for tattoos and body piercing as defined in this section. See "tattoo" and "body piercing." 
Telecommunications facility/wireless telecommunications facility. "Telecommunications facility/wireless telecommunications facility" means a facility consisting of any commercial antenna, monopole, microwave dish, and/or other related equipment necessary for the transmission and/or reception of cellular, personal communication service, and/or data radio communications. 
Telephone repeater station. "Telephone repeater station" means a building used for housing amplifying equipment along aerial or underground telephone cable routes. See also "public utility service center" and "public utility service yard." 
Temporary use. For this definition, see "use, temporary." 
Tentative map. "Tentative map" means a map made for the purpose of showing the design of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around it, and need not be based upon an accurate or detailed final survey of the property. 
Tentative map, revised. "Revised tentative map" means a map involving a revised arrangement of the streets, alleys, easements or lots within property for which a tentative map has been previously approved, or a modification of the boundary of the property. 
Termination, land use activity. "Termination" or "cessation" of a land use activity occurs when premises are, from outward appearance, vacated, abandoned, inoperative or disused for a consecutive period of thirty days or more, or when electric service has been discontinued by the occupant or the premises are barricaded, padlocked or otherwise closed to all entry; or when the holder of city permits or licenses advises city agencies that a use has terminated or ceased. 
Texture. "Texture" means variations in the exterior façade described in terms of the roughness of the surface material and the patterns inherent in the material or the patterns in which the material is placed. 
Threshold concentration or threshold limit value. For definitions, see "odor threshold concentration" and "odor threshold limit value." 
Tideland. "Tideland(s)" means that area designated by the state legislature to be the jurisdiction of the San Diego Unified Port District. 
Tobacco specialty business. "Tobacco specialty business" means any business, the primary use of which is the use and/or sale of tobacco products or paraphernalia. A business shall be determined a tobacco specialty business when more than forty percent of its floor area is devoted to the use, display, and/or sales of tobacco products and/or paraphernalia. 
Townhouses or townhomes. "Townhouses" means attached buildings, each containing a single dwelling unit and each located or capable of being located on a separate lot. 
Trailer. For definitions relating to trailers, see "recreational vehicles." 
Trailer, utility. "Utility trailer" means a vehicle designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting cargo, but not including any recreational vehicle or mobile home. The vehicle shall not exceed two thousand pounds in weight. Compare "mobile home" and "recreational vehicles." 
Traffic visibility triangle. "Traffic visibility triangle" is a triangular area that defines a zone necessary for the clear view by the driver of a motor vehicle or a bicyclist of oncoming cross-street motor vehicle, bicycle or pedestrian traffic or of a traffic control device, and includes street intersection visibility triangles, alley intersection visibility triangles, and public access driveway visibility triangles for all land uses. A visibility triangle is the area encompassed by the triangle formed by projecting lines of a specified distance from the point of intersection of the front and side street edges of pavement and a straight line connecting the termini of said projected lines. Within the area comprising the triangle, no tree, fence, shrub, or other physical obstruction higher than three feet above the official grade lot line grade shall be permitted. 
Transient. "Transient" means any person who exercises temporary occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access or license under the provision of Civil Code Section 1940(b). 
Transitional housing. "Transitional housing" is defined in Section 50675.2 of the Health and Safety Code as rental housing for stays of at least six months but where the units are re-circulated to another program recipient after a set period. Transitional housing may be designated for a homeless individual or family transitioning to permanent housing. This housing can take several forms, including group housing or multifamily units, and may include supportive services to allow individuals to gain necessary life skills in support of independent living. 
Trash enclosure. A "trash enclosure" is a wall surrounding a trash bin or bins and accessible by a gate of sufficient width to allow the bin to be removed and which is constructed in a manner and of materials that blend architecturally and aesthetically with the main structure. A trash enclosure shall not be considered in the calculations for lot coverage. See also Title 7. 
Travel trailer. For this definition, see "recreational vehicles." 
Trucking and transportation terminal. A "trucking and transportation terminal" is an establishment which provides the movement of goods/products from one location to another, where trucks/tractors are dispatched from a central location to haul goods/products from one location to another or to many other locations. A transportation facility may also include parking, refueling, and accessory uses including but not limited to an office, convenience goods and services, maintenance, and repair of vehicles. 
Urban agriculture. "Urban agriculture" is the cultivation, processing, and distribution of edible vegetables, flowers, herbs, fruits, and other plants. 
Use. "Use" means the purpose for which land or structures are arranged, designed or intended, or for which either land or structures are, or may be, occupied or maintained. "Use" includes construction, establishment, maintenance, alteration, moving onto, enlargement, operation or occupancy. 
Use, accessory. For this definition, see accessory use." 
Use, conditional. For this definition, see "conditional use." For provisions regarding conditional use permits, see Chapter 18.12. 
Use, principal. "Principal use" means the main or primary purpose for which a structure or lot is designed, arranged or intended, or for which either may be used, occupied or maintained under this title. 
Use, temporary. "Temporary use" means a use of land or structures not intended to be of permanent duration and regulated by Chapter 15.60. 
Utility building. "Utility building" means a separate building on the same lot with the main building or a portion of an accessory building designed or intended for use as a washhouse, laundry room, or any similar purpose. Plumbing facilities are permitted but the building shall not be designed nor equipped for cooking or preparation of food. 
Utility facilities, major. "Utility facilities, major" means generating plants, electrical switching facilities and primary substations, refuse collection or disposal facilities, water and wastewater treatment plants and similar facilities. 
Utility facilities, minor. "Utility facilities, minor" means facilities which are necessary to support principal development and involve only minor structures such as lines and poles which are necessary to support principal development. 
Utility trailer. For this definition, see "trailer, utility." 
Variance. For a definition of "variance" and provisions regarding variances, see Chapter 18.12.120, variances. 
Vehicle. "Vehicle" means a device or craft that is designed or used to transport people or cargo. Vehicles include automobiles, trucks, boats and other watercraft, campers, motor homes and other recreational vehicles, trailers, and motorcycles. A semi-trailer truck and farm equipment shall not be included in the definition of a vehicle for the purpose of this Land Use Code. 
Vehicle, accessory. "Accessory vehicle" means any motor vehicle used in connection with the operation of any structure or use. 
Vehicle, commercial. "Commercial vehicle" means a vehicle which when operated upon a highway is required to be registered as a commercial vehicle by the California Vehicle Code, and which is used or maintained for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation, or profit, or designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
Vehicle, recreational. For definitions relating to recreational vehicles, see "recreational vehicles." 
Vehicle queuing. "Vehicle queuing" is the length of a drive aisle necessary to allow for the movement of vehicles within a parking lot to a drive-up window service or other drive-through services without impeding the flow of traffic on-site and off-site. 
Vehicle storage yard, commercial. "Commercial vehicle storage yard" means the storage, for compensation or consideration, of more than one motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, or unoccupied mobile home on a parcel of land for a period of time exceeding seventy-two hours. A commercial vehicle storage yard shall comply with the provisions of Section 18.40.040 (Automobile Impound and Storage Yards) and Section 18.40.070 (Outdoor Storage). Premises used for the sale, lease, or rental of motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, or mobile homes shall not be governed by this section. 
Vehicular access rights. "Vehicular access rights" means the right or easement for access of owners or occupants of abutting lands to a public way other than as pedestrians. 
Vending machine. A "vending machine" is a device which dispenses a product or service, either for sale or for free, and which is activated entirely by the receiver of the product or service, including ice machines; food and beverage vending machines; purified, distilled or spring water vending machines; movie vending machines; and, newspaper racks or similar. Vending machines do not include motor fuel pumps. 
Veterinary clinic. "Veterinary clinic" means a treatment center serving only those kinds of small domesticated animals or household pets commonly maintained in residence with man. 
Veterinary hospital. "Veterinary hospital" means an establishment where more than six domestic animals are kept for observation, diagnosis, and medical care. 
Walk. "Walk" means any right-of-way for pedestrians, including sidewalks and inner-block walks. 
Walkway. "Walkway" means any path or way, which is some manner, is specifically designated exclusively for pedestrian travel. 
Warehouse. A "warehouse" is a building used for storage of goods or materials other than stock in trade of businesses on the premises or for goods stored in conjunction with permitted distribution type businesses operated on the premises or goods or materials manufactured on the premises. Warehouse includes the storage of impounded goods and materials, dead storage, and storage of in-transit commodities. It does not include miniwarehouses or self storage facilities. 
Waterfront related industry. "Waterfront related industry" includes waterfront uses and activities including small boat marinas; ship berthing; supportive commercial and recreational businesses; boat and other water vehicle sales, leasing, rentals, and service/repair; freight handling; any use operated and maintained by the San Diego Unified Port District as part of the marine terminal; and any other use determined by the city to have the same general character as those uses listed here. 
Water supply. "Water supply" means such water system supply and distribution facilities as are necessary to provide a reliable and adequate water supply for private use and public fire protection services. 
Wholesale store or sales. "Wholesale store" or "wholesale sales" means a business establishment engaged in selling to retailers or jobbers, rather than consumers. 
Wind energy system. "Wind energy system" means equipment that converts and then stores or transfers energy from the wind into usable forms of energy and includes any base, blade, foundation, generator, nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer, turbine, vane, wire, or other component used in the system. 
Winery. "Winery" means an establishment that is licensed by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control ("ABC") under a Type 2 license to manufacture and sell alcoholic beverages on the premises for on-site or off-site consumption. Minors are allowed on the premises (per ABC license regulations). 
Winery tasting room. "Winery tasting room" means an establishment which is licensed by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) under a Type 2 duplicate license to sell wine products that the licensee produces for on-site and off-site consumption, including sales of sealed wine bottles for off-site consumption. Only wine produced by the master licensee may be sold and/or consumed at the location. Minors are allowed on the premises (per ABC Type 2 license regulations). 
Yard. "Yard" means an open space, other than a court, on a lot or parcel of land, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this title. 
Yard, front. "Front yard" means an open space extending the full width of the lot measured between the building closest to the front lot line, which open space is between a building and the front lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified elsewhere in this title. 
Yard, front, least depth: 
1.  "Front yard least depth" means the shortest distance, measured horizontally between any part of a building other than parts herein excepted, and the front lot line. 
2.  Such depth shall be measured from the front lot line; provided, however, that if the proposed location of the right-of-way line of such street as adopted by the city differs from that of the existing street, then the required front yard least depth shall be measured from the right-of-way line of such street as adopted; or said building shall comply with the official setback lines as adopted by the city. 
Yard, rear. "Rear yard" means an open space between a building and the rear lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward and extending across the full width of the lot, except as specified elsewhere in this title. 
Yard, rear, least depth. "Rear yard least depth" means the shortest distance, measured horizontally, between any part of a principal building other than parts hereinafter excepted, and the rear lot line. 
Yard, side. "Side yard" means an open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between a building and the nearest side lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as specified elsewhere in this title. A side yard on the street side of a corner lot shall be known as an exterior side yard. 
Yard, side, least width: 
1.  "Side yard least width" means the shortest distance, measured horizontally, between any part of a building other than parts herein excepted, and the nearest side lot line. 
2.  Such width shall be measured from the nearest side lot line and, in case the nearest side lot line is a side street lot line, from the right-of-way line of the existing street; provided, however, that if the proposed location of the right-of-way line of such street as adopted by the city differs from that of the existing street, then the required side yard least width shall be measured from the right-of-way of such street as adopted; or said building shall comply with any applicable official setback lines. 
Zone. "Zone" means a portion of the territory of the city within which certain uniform regulations and requirements or various combinations apply under the provisions of this title. 
Zoning map. "Zoning map" means the designated official map or maps which show the location and boundaries of the districts established by this title and which are referred to as the "zoning map" and incorporated as a part of this title. The zoning map, together with everything shown thereon and all amendments thereto, are as much a part of this title as if fully set forth and described in context. 
(Ord. No. 2012-2372, Exh. B-1, 2-7-2012; Ord. No. 2012-2377, § 3, 10-30-2012; Ord. No. 2017-2440, § 3, 10-17-2017; Ord. No. 2017-2444, § 5, 12-19-2017; Ord. No. 2018-2448, § 4, 7-17-2018; Ord. No. 2018-2451, § 4, 11-20-2018; Ord. No. 2019-2455, § 8, 1-22-2019) 
