ORLAND - MUNICIPAL CODE 1997 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances 
of the City of Orland, California 
____________ 
Beginning with Supplement 7, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
  
> 
PREFACE 
The Orland Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1997, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 7, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of Randy L. Johnsen, city administrator with assistance from Tom Andrews, deputy city attorney and Laura Blevins, city clerk. 
The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 7, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the code up to date through Ordinance No. 2019-03 , passed January 7, 2019. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title , then chapter , and ending with section . Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
Beginning with Supplement No. 7, a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
As of Supplement No. 7, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Beginning with Supplement No. 7, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 7, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE ;b2;;adv=2q;See also BUSINESS TAX;eol;Fee 5.04.030;eol;Required when 5.04.010 
The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement No. 7, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections: 
 
1.01.010 - Adoption. 
There is adopted the Orland Municipal Code, as compiled, edited and published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. 
(Ord. 97-03 § 1)  
1.01.020 - Title—Citation—Reference. 
This code shall be known as the Orland Municipal Code and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the Orland Municipal Code in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the Orland Municipal Code. References may be made to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the Orland Municipal Code and such references shall apply to those titles, chapters, sections or subsections as they appear in the code. 
(Ord. 97-03 § 2)  
1.01.030 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the Orland Municipal Code or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Orland, codified in this code, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 97-03 § 3)  
1.01.040 - Title, chapter and section headings. 
Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section in this code. 
(Ord. 97-03 § 4)  
1.01.050 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 97-03 § 5)  
1.01.060 - Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code. 
The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance No. 97-01, passed January 27, 1997. Ordinance No. 97-02, passed subsequent to Ordinance No. 97-01, but prior to adoption of this code, is adopted and made a part of this code. 
(Ord. 97-03 § 6)  
1.01.070 - Effect of code on past actions and obligations. 
The adoption of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of this code, does not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this code, and does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed or deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. 
(Ord. 97-03 § 7)  
1.01.080 - Constitutionality. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 
(Ord. 97-03 § 8)  
1.01.090 - References to prior code. 
References in city forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and sections of the former city code shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 97-03 § 9)  
1.01.100 - Effective date. 
This code shall become effective thirty (30) days after adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-03 § 10)  
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.04.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this code, certain words and phrases are defined and certain provisions shall be construed as in this section set out, unless it shall be apparent from their context that a different meaning is intended, or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases. 
"City" means the city of Orland. 
"Council" means the council of the city of Orland. 
"County" means the county of Glenn. 
"Oath" means and includes affirmation. 
"Owner," applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant in common, joint tenant, or the whole or a part of such building or land. 
"Person" means and includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, company or corporation. 
"Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. 
"State" means the state of California. 
"Street" means and includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in this city, which have been or may hereafter be, dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
"Tenant or occupant," applied to a building or land, means and includes any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
(Prior code §§ 1202, 1211—1220)  
1.04.020 - Interpretation of language. 
Words and phrases used in this code, and not specifically defined, shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language. 
(Prior code § 1201)  
1.04.030 - Grammatical interpretation. 
A.  Gender. Any gender includes the other genders. 
B.  Number. The singular number includes the plural; the plural number includes the singular. 
C.  Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, the future tense includes the present. 
(Prior code §§ 1208—1210)  
1.04.040 - Headings. 
Chapter, article and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any chapter, article or section of this code. 
(Prior code § 1203)  
1.04.050 - Reference applies to amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to any portion of this code, or to any ordinance of this city, the reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made. 
(Prior code § 1205)  
1.04.060 - Acts by agents. 
Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty imposed upon a public officer or employee, the power may be exercised or the duty performed, by a deputy of such officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance, unless this code expressly provides otherwise. 
(Prior code § 1204)  
1.04.070 - Construction of code. 
The provisions of this code and all proceedings under it are to be liberally construed, with a view to effect its objects and to promote justice. Such provisions, insofar as they are substantially the same as ordinances heretofore adopted by the city, shall be construed as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Prior code § 1200)  
1.04.080 - Notices. 
Whenever a notice is required to be given under this code, unless different provisions herein are otherwise specifically made, such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified, or by deposit in the United States mail, in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified, at such person's last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records of the city or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the United States mail. 
(Prior code § 1206)  
1.04.090 - Proof of notice. 
Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the city, or by affidavit of any person over the age of eighteen (18) years, which shows service in conformity with this code, or other provision of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. 
(Prior code § 1207)  
Chapter 1.08 - ANNEXATION AND DETACHMENT 
Sections: 
 
1.08.010 - Annexation. 
Annexation to the city will be processed pursuant to 56000 of the California Government Code. The application fee for annexation shall be two thousand three hundred seventy-five dollars ($2,375.00), which fee shall include a non-refundable deposit of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Such fee shall be in addition to all actual California State Board of Equalization fees, actual engineering costs, and actual Glenn County LAFCO fees. 
(Ord. 2004-09 § 3 (part): prior code § 12600)  
1.08.020 - Detachment. 
Detachment from the city will be processed pursuant to 56003.1 of the California Government Code. The application fee for detachment shall be two thousand three hundred seventy-five dollars ($2,375.00), which fee shall include a non-refundable deposit of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Such fee shall be in addition to all actual California State Board of Equalization fees, actual engineering costs, and actual Glenn County LAFCO fees. 
(Ord. 2004-09 § 3 (part): prior code § 12700)  
Chapter 1.12 - GENERAL PENALTY 
Sections: 
 
1.12.010 - General penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions, or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this code. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided, a violation of any of the provisions of this code is a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six months, or by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or both. 
B.  Alternatively, a violation of any of the provisions in this code may be charged as an infraction punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Prior code § 1300)  
1.12.020 - Penalties for designated infractions. 
Any violation declared to be an infraction by this code is punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Prior code § 1350)  
Chapter 1.13 - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.13.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The city council has determined that the enforcement of the Orland Municipal Code throughout the city is an important public service vital to the protection of the public's peace, health, safety and quality of life. The council has also determined that an administrative citation program is an appropriate method of enforcing violations of the municipal code. This chapter provides uniform procedures for issuing administrative citations and conducting administrative hearings, and is in addition to all other criminal, civil, or administrative remedies that may be pursued by the city to address any violation of the municipal code. Use of this chapter as a remedy shall be at the sole discretion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2, 1-22-2008)  
1.13.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Administrative citation" means a written notice of violation of a provision of the Orland Municipal Code, which may include the imposition of an administrative fine. 
"Citation costs" mean all costs incurred by the city from the first discovery of the violations through the appeal process and until compliance is achieved, including but not limited to, staff time in inspecting the property, sending notices, preparing and attending any appeal hearing, and fees paid to a hearing officer. 
"City manager" means the city of Orland's city manager, or duly authorized designee of the city manager. 
"Enforcement officer" means any city employee designated by municipal code or authorized by that designated employee, or any employee authorized by the city manager to have the authority to enforce any provision of the municipal code. 
"Hearing officer" means an individual that meets or exceeds minimum qualification criteria established by the city manager for training and experience in the subject matters of this chapter. Hearing officers assigned to conduct hearings under this chapter shall be selected by the city manager in a manner that does not create an appearance that the hearing officer could be rewarded with future remunerative employment for decisions favorable to the city. 
"Owner" means the owner or owners of any premises or real property. 
"Person" or "persons" means any individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, receiver, limited liability company, trust, estate, cooperative, association, or any other entity. 
"Responsible party" means any person in possession or control of the premises or location where the code violation exists as well as any person responsible for causing or maintaining the violation, and includes, but is not limited to, any of the following: 
1.  The person who owns the property where the violations exist; 
2.  The person in possession or control of the premises where the violation exists; 
3.  The person using the premises when the violation exists; 
4.  If any such person is a minor, the parent or guardians of such minor shall be the responsible party; 
5.  If the person is a corporation or limited liability company, any senior officer of that corporation or limited liability company shall be a responsible party; 
6.  If the person is a partnership, joint venture, cooperative, or association, any partner or member of the joint venture, cooperative, or association shall be a responsible party; 
7.  If the person is a trust, any trustee shall be a responsible party; 
8.  If the person is an estate, the administrator of the estate shall be a responsible party; or 
9.  If the person is a business entity, the manager or on-site supervisor where the violation exists shall be a responsible party. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2, 1-22-2008)  
1.13.030 - Violation of the municipal code. 
A.  Any person violating any provision of the municipal code may be subject to the issuance of an administrative citation pursuant to the administrative procedures provided in this chapter. 
B.  For the purposes of this chapter, each and every day a violation of any provision of the municipal code exists constitutes a separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2, 1-22-2008)  
1.13.040 - Alternative actions. 
The procedures provided in this chapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any other procedure or legal remedy provided for in the municipal code or by state law. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city from commencing alternative administrative, civil, or criminal proceedings to penalize or abate a nuisance under applicable civil, criminal, or municipal code provisions as an alternative to the proceedings set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2, 1-22-2008)  
1.13.050 - Authority to enter and inspect property. 
For the purposes of this chapter, any enforcement officer shall have the power to enter onto any public or private property within the city of Orland in order to determine the existence of a violation of any provision of the municipal code and to make any inspection, examination, or survey as may be necessary to perform enforcement duties. All entries, inspections, examinations, and surveys shall be done in a reasonable manner. If an owner, occupant, or agent refuses permission to enter or inspect, the enforcement officer may seek an administrative inspection warrant pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1822.50 through 1822.59, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2, 1-22-2008)  
1.13.060 - Opportunity to cure non-urgent violations. 
The administrative citation process set forth in this chapter may be utilized to enforce continuing violations of this Code; provided, however, that the person responsible for any such continuing violation shall be allowed a reasonable period of time to correct or otherwise remedy the violation prior to the city's issuance of an administrative citation. Nothing in this section, however, shall require the city to provide any such correction period concerning violations creating an immediate danger to health or safety, or to any building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning code violations which are transient and non-continuing in nature. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2, 1-22-2008)  
1.13.070 - Authority to issue administrative citation. 
Whenever an enforcement officer determines that a violation of any provision of the municipal code has occurred, the enforcement officer shall have the authority to issue an administrative citation to any applicable responsible party. If the enforcement officer determines that multiple code violations have occurred, the administrative citation shall address all such violations. Administrative citations shall be served in accordance with Section 1.13.210 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2, 1-22-2008)  
1.13.080 - Contents of administrative citation. 
Each administrative citation issued pursuant to this chapter shall contain the following information: 
A.  The date of the violation; 
B.  The address or a definite description of the location where the violation occurred; 
C.  The section of this code violated and a description of the violation; 
D.  The amount of the fine for the code violation; 
E.  A description of the fine payment process, including a description of the time within which and the place to which the fine shall be paid; 
F.  An order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the code violation described in the administrative citation; 
G.  A description of the administrative citation review process, including the time within which the administrative citation may be contested and the place to obtain a request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation; and 
H.  The name and signature of the citing enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2, 1-22-2008)  
1.13.090 - Amount of fines. 
A.  An administrative fine shall be directly assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by an enforcement officer. 
B.  The amounts of the fines for code violations imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth in the schedule of fines established by resolution of the city council. 
C.  The schedule of fines shall specify any increased fines for repeat violations of the same code provision. 
D.  The schedule of fines shall specify the amount of any late payment charges imposed for the payment of a fine after its due date. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2, 1-22-2008)  
1.13.100 - Payment of fines. 
A.  Any fine imposed under this chapter shall be made payable to the city of Orland, and shall be submitted to the city treasurer within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the administrative citation. 
B.  Payment of a fine under this chapter shall not excuse or discharge any continuation or repeated occurrence of the code violation that is the subject of the administrative citation. 
C.  Any payment of a fine shall be refunded upon the issuance of an administrative enforcement order finding that the person charged in the administrative citation was not responsible for the violation or that there was no violation as charged in the administrative citation. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2, 1-22-2008)  
1.13.110 - Request for a hearing. 
A.  Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation of the municipal code, or that he or she is the responsible party, by completing a request for hearing form and returning it to the enforcement officer within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the administrative citation. The request for hearing form must be accompanied by an advance deposit of the fine or notice that a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver has been filed pursuant to Section 1.13.120 of this chapter. 
B.  A request for hearing form may be obtained from the department specified on the administrative citation. This form shall require that the appealing party include a brief statement setting forth the interest that he or she has in the matter relating to the citation and a brief statement, in ordinary and concise language, of the material facts that he or she claims support any contention that no administrative fine should be imposed or that an administrative fine of a different amount is warranted. 
C.  Failure to timely remit the advance deposit or obtain an advance deposit hardship waiver shall terminate the request for a hearing on the administrative citation, and the amount of the fine shall become immediately due and payable. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2, 1-22-2008)  
1.13.120 - Advance deposit hardship waiver. 
A.  Any person who intends to request a hearing to contest an administrative citation, and who claims to be financially unable to make the advance deposit of the fine as required in Section 1.13.110A. of this chapter may request an advance deposit hardship waiver in accordance with this section. 
B.  A request that the city waive all or part of the advance deposit must be filed on an advance deposit hardship waiver application form. The request must be filed with the enforcement officer within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the administrative citation. The request must include a sworn declaration together with any supporting documentation or materials describing the cited person's financial inability to deposit the full amount of the fine in advance of the hearing. The cited person bears the burden of demonstrating to the city his or her inability to deposit the full amount of the fine in advance of the hearing. 
C.  The city may issue an advance deposit hardship waiver that waives the requirement of an advance deposit of the fine or requires a partial deposit of the fine, only if the person requesting the waiver has demonstrated an actual inability to deposit with the city the full amount of the fine in advance of the hearing. 
D.  If the city denies the request for an advance deposit hardship waiver, it shall issue a written determination listing the reasons for the denial. Such determination shall be final, and shall be served by mail on the person requesting waiver. 
E.  If the city denies the issuance of an advance deposit hardship waiver, the person requesting the waiver shall remit the advance deposit of the full fine amount to the city within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the denial or thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the administrative citation, whichever is later. 
F.  If the city determines that the person requesting the waiver is required to deposit only a specified part of the amount of the fine, that person shall remit the required amount to the city within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the decision or thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the administrative citation, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2, 1-22-2008)  
1.13.130 - Setting the hearing—Additional reports—Failure to appear. 
A.  Hearings contesting the issuance of an administrative citation shall be conducted by the hearing officer. 
B.  The administrative hearing officer has continuing jurisdiction over the subject matter of an administrative appeal hearing for the purposes of granting a continuance, ensuring compliance with an administrative citation, modifying an administrative order, or where extraordinary circumstances exist, granting a new hearing. 
C.  No hearing to contest an administrative citation before the hearing officer shall be held unless the fine has been deposited in advance in accordance with Section 1.13.110A. or an advance deposit hardship waiver has been issued in accordance with Section 1.13.120C. of this chapter. 
D.  If the enforcement officer submits an additional written report concerning the administrative citation to the hearing officer for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of this report also shall be served on the person requesting the hearing at least five calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. 
E.  The failure of the cited person to appear at the hearing to contest an administrative citation shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine and a failure to exhaust that person's administrative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2, 1-22-2008)  
1.13.140 - Reserved.  
1.13.150 - Hearings conducted by hearing officer. 
A.  Upon appointment by the city manager, the hearing officer shall set the date for a hearing to contest an administrative citation. The date shall be set not less than fifteen (15) calendar days and not more than sixty (60) calendar days from either the date that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with provisions of this chapter or the date of issuance of the advance deposit hardship waiver, whichever is later. 
B.  The city manager shall serve notice of the administrative citation hearing upon the cited person. Service shall be made pursuant to Section 1.13.210 of this chapter at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice of hearing shall contain the date, time and place at which the hearing will be conducted. 
C.  The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the following rules: 
1.  Administrative hearings are intended to be informal in nature. Formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. Irrelevant, immaterial, and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded, but all other evidence of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs shall be admissible, whether or not such evidence would be admissible in a trial in the courts of this state. Fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. The procedure and format of the administrative hearing shall follow the procedures promulgated by the city manager. 
2.  The alleged violator has the right to represent himself or herself, or to be represented by anyone of his or her choice. 
3.  Any party to the hearing shall be given the opportunity to testify, cross-examine witnesses, and present evidence as to the existence of the cited violation or as to whether or not the cited person is the responsible party. 
4.  The hearing officer may inquire of any witness testifying at the hearing. The alleged violator or his or her representative, if any, and the officer presenting the city's case before the hearing officer, shall be permitted to inquire of any witness testifying at the hearing. All parties to the hearing shall be permitted to present brief opening and closing statements. 
5.  Upon a showing of good cause by either party or on its own motion, the hearing officer shall have the authority to continue any hearing and to issue subpoenas for persons to appear and produce testimony and/or for persons to produce documents if the board believes that the information is relevant, material and necessary for the board to make a determination on the matter. The hearing officer may seek judicial validation of any subpoena which has not been complied with and it shall thereafter be unlawful, subject to prosecution as a misdemeanor, for any person to refuse to obey such a subpoena. 
6.  The city bears the burden of proof at an administrative enforcement hearing to establish the existence of a violation of the municipal code. 
7.  The standard of proof to be used by the hearing officer in deciding the issues at an administrative hearing is by a preponderance of the evidence. 
8.  Continuances for good cause may be granted on the motion of any party or upon the hearing officer's own motion. The hearing officer may request additional information from any party prior to issuing a written decision. 
9.  All hearings shall be recorded to audiotape or any other electronic format that ensures an accurate record of the meeting. The proceedings at the hearing may also be reported by a certified shorthand reporter if such reporter is provided by the responsible party at his or her own expense. 
10.  All hearings and proceedings shall be open to the public. 
D.  After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall prepare a written administrative enforcement order that meets the requirements of Section 1.13.170 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2, 1-22-2008)  
1.13.160 - Scope of hearing. 
A.  At a hearing conducted under this chapter, the hearing officer shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, including, but not limited to, the testimony of the responsible party, city personnel, neighbors, witnesses, or other interested parties, and may consider staff reports or other written materials, on any of the following issues: 
1.  Whether the responsible party caused or maintained a violation of the municipal code as stated in the administrative citation. 
2.  Whether the person or persons named in the administrative citation are responsible parties. 
3.  Whether the amount of the fine imposed is consistent with the schedule of fines established by resolution of the city council. 
B.  The administrative citation and any additional report submitted by the enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2, 1-22-2008)  
1.13.170 - Administrative enforcement order. 
A.  An administrative enforcement order shall address each contested violation in the administrative citation and contain findings of fact for each such violation. The findings shall be supported by evidence received at the hearing. 
B.  The administrative enforcement order may: 
1.  Affirm, reject, or modify any fine imposed by the administrative citation; 
2.  Impose conditions and deadlines to correct the violations set forth in the administrative citation; 
3.  Assess reasonable citation costs incurred by the city. 
C.  The administrative enforcement order shall be served on the parties to the hearing within fifteen (15) calendar days of the hearing in accordance with Section 1.13.210 of this chapter. 
D.  If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, then the fine amount on deposit with the city shall be retained by the city, less any reduction authorized by the order. 
E.  If the hearing officer determines that the violations set forth in the administrative citation should be upheld and the fine has not been deposited pursuant to an advance deposit hardship waiver, the hearing officer shall set forth in the order a payment schedule for payment of the fine. 
F.  If the hearing officer determines that any violations set forth in the administrative citation should be dismissed and the fine for those violations was deposited with the city, then the city shall promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine. 
G.  An administrative enforcement order constitutes the final decision of the hearing officer and the final decision of the city. Notwithstanding any other contrary provision in this municipal code, a final decision rendered in accordance with this section is not appealable to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2, 1-22-2008)  
1.13.180 - Late payment charges. 
Any person who fails to pay to the city any fine or any scheduled partial payment of such fine on or before the due date shall be liable for the payment of any applicable late payment charges set forth in the schedule of administrative citation fines established by resolution by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2, 1-22-2008)  
1.13.190 - Recovery of fines and costs. 
The city may use all available legal means to collect any past due administrative citation fines, late payment charges, and costs of collection. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2, 1-22-2008)  
1.13.200 - Right to judicial review. 
A.  Any person aggrieved by an order of the administrative hearing officer pursuant to this chapter may obtain judicial review of the order by filing a petition for review with the Glenn County Superior Court within twenty (20) calendar days of service of the administrative enforcement order, in accordance with the time lines and provisions set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4. 
B.  Enforcement of an administrative enforcement order shall be stayed during the pendency of a properly and timely filed appeal to the Glenn County Superior Court. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2, 1-22-2008)  
1.13.210 - Service of notices. 
A.  All written notices required under the provisions of this chapter shall be served in the following manner: 
1.  By personal delivery; or 
2.  By deposit in the United States Mail, in a sealed envelope postage prepaid, addressed to the person at his or her last-known business or residence address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll, or to any other reliable address known by the enforcement officer. Service by mail shall be deemed completed on the date of mailing. 
B.  Where personal service or service by mail upon a person cannot be made despite a diligent effort, a copy of the notice shall be conspicuously posted at the property where the violation has occurred. 
C.  Notwithstanding any provision in this section, service by regular mail may be made to any person at any address authorized or requested by such person. 
D.  The failure of any person to receive a notice required under this chapter, provided such notice was properly served, mailed or posted, shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2, 1-22-2008)  
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapters:  
Chapter 2.04 - CITY COUNCIL 
Sections: 
 
2.04.010 - Council meetings. 
The regular meetings of the Orland city council shall be held at seven p.m. on the first and third Monday in each month, in the Carnegie Community Center, in the city of Orland; provided, however, that when a first and third Monday falls on a legal holiday, then the regular meeting for that date shall be held on the next business day not a holiday, following such legal holiday. The city council may schedule closed session matters prior to or following that start time. 
(Ord. 2001-01: prior code § 2100) 
( Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2)  
2.04.015 - Compensation. 
A.  City Council. The compensation for city council members shall be two hundred forty dollars ($240.00) per month. 
B.  Mayor. The compensation for the Orland City mayor shall be two hundred sixty dollars ($260.00) per month. 
(Ord. 2006-03 § 3 (part): Ord. 80-4 §§ 1, 2)  
2.04.020 - Mayor—Selection and term of office. 
A.  The mayor's position on the council will be selected on an annual basis at the second scheduled meeting in November of each and every year. However, upon a meeting held to canvass election returns, the selection will take place on the same date set for canvassing the ballot. 
B.  The mayor's position will be changed every year; provided, however, that on a four-fifths council vote, a council person may serve as mayor for two consecutive terms. 
(Prior code § 2150(A), (B))  
2.04.030 - Vice-mayor—Selection and term of office. 
A.  The vice-mayor will be selected annually on the dates as provided in Section 2.04.020 for the mayor. 
B.  The vice-mayor will sit and act as mayor should the mayor be unavailable to be present. 
(Prior code § 2150(C), (D))  
2.04.040 - Numbering of ordinances. 
All ordinances shall be numbered consecutively in the order of the date of their passage. 
(Prior code § 2200)  
Chapter 2.08 - CITY OFFICERS GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
2.08.010 - City clerk. 
The office of city clerk shall be appointive. The salary of the city clerk shall be the sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per month. 
(Ord. 2006-03 § 3 (part): Ord. 2000-04 § 1: amended during 1997 codification; prior code § 2300) 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 )  
2.08.020 - Treasurer. 
The office of treasurer shall be appointive. The salary of the city treasurer shall be the sum of one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00) per month. 
(Ord. 2006-03 § 3 (part): Ord. 97-02 § 1: amended during 1997 codification; prior code § 2302) 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 )  
2.08.030 - Department heads. 
The following positions shall be designed as department heads: 
1.  Chief of police; 
2.  Fire chief (may be employee or volunteer); 
3.  Director of public works; 
4.  Recreation director; 
5.  City librarian; 
6.  Director of community development; 
7.  City engineer. 
Department head positions may be filled by employees or contractors. Department head positions may be funded or unfunded and vacant at any time. When vacant, the city manager may assume the title and function. 
(Ord. 98-03 § 1; prior code § 2304) 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 1)  
2.08.040 - City attorney. 
The city attorney shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The terms of appointment, including compensation, shall be determined by contract. 
(Prior code § 2305) 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2)  
2.08.050 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 2012-04, adopted Sept. 17, 2012, repealed § 2.08.050, which pertained to city engineer, and derived from the prior code § 2306.  
2.08.060 - Contracts of employment. 
A.  Contracts of employment shall be utilized for department heads, city officials and contract consultants not otherwise covered by a collective bargaining agreement. 
B.  Appointment pursuant to such contracts of employment shall be subject to city council approval. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 4)  
Chapter 2.12 - CITY MANAGER 
Sections: 
 
2.12.010 - Office established. 
The office of the city manager is created and established. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.020 - Appointment. 
The city manager shall be appointed by the city council wholly on the basis of his or her administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the city council. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.030 - Eligibility. 
No member of the city council shall be eligible for appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed after such council member shall have ceased to be a member of the city council. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.040 - Residence. 
Residency in the city at the time of appointment shall not be required as a condition of the appointment. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.050 - Nomenclature. 
Any place the term city administrator is found in the Orland Municipal Code, it shall be deemed to be city manager. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.060 - Bond. 
The city manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the city council in such sum as may be determined by the city council, and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the city manager as prescribed in this chapter. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the city. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.070 - Acting city manager. 
The city manager, by filing a written notice with the council and the city clerk, shall designate a qualified subordinate to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during his or her temporary absence or disability. Notwithstanding these provisions, in the event of the city manager's absence or disability, the council may appoint an acting city manager. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.080 - Compensation. 
The city manager shall receive such compensation as the city council shall from time to time determine. In addition, the city manager shall be reimbursed for all actual and necessary expenses incurred by him or her in the performance of his or her actual duties. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.090 - Powers—Duties. 
The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the city council except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The city manager shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his control. In addition to his general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his or her duty and he or she shall have the powers set forth in Section 2.12.100 through 2.12.210. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.100 - Law enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce all laws and ordinances of the city and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully observed. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.110 - Authority over employees. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager, and he or she shall have the authority to control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under his jurisdiction through their department heads. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.120 - Power to appoint and remove. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to appoint, remove, promote and demote any and all officers and employees of the city, subject to all applicable personnel ordinances, rules and regulations. Decisions to remove, demote or otherwise discipline a department head shall be appealable to the city council, to the extent that such appeal is consistent with applicable personnel ordinances, rules and regulations. 
This authority to appoint, promote, demote, evaluate, discipline, terminate and adjust compensation of all employees including department heads within the limits and provisions of the city personnel manual. City manager requires approval of city council to perform these functions outside the limits and provisions of the personnel manual. 
The city manager will keep the city council informed as to any negative personnel actions to be taken as to any department head, city official or contract consultants. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 5; Ord. No. 2018-04 )  
2.12.130 - Administrative organization of offices. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city manager to conduct studies andeffect such administration reorganization of offices, positions or units under his or her direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city's business. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.140 - Ordinances. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager and he or she shall recommend to the city council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he or she deems necessary. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.150 - Attendance at council meetings. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to attend all meetings of the city council unless at his or her request he or she is excused therefrom by the mayor individually or the city council, except when his removal is under consideration. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.160 - Financial reports. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.170 - Budget. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the city council for its approval. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.180 - Expenditure control—Purchasing. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to see that no expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the city council except on approval of the city manager or his authorized representative. The city manager, or his authorized representative, shall be responsible for the purchase of all supplies for all the departments or divisions of the city. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.190 - Investigations—Complaints. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof, and any contract or the proper performance of any obligations of the city. Further, it shall be the duty of the city manager to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in said city. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.200 - Public buildings—Supervision. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager and he or she shall exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, and all other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the city council. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.210 - Additional duties. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other official action of the city council. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.220 - Council—Manager relations. 
The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders or instructions to any subordinates of the city manager. The city manager shall take his or her orders and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly convened meeting of the city council and no individual councilman shall give any orders or instructions to the city manager. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.230 - Departmental cooperation. 
It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and the city clerk, city treasurer, and city attorney to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.240 - Commission meetings—Attendance. 
The city manager may attend any and all meetings of the planning commission, parks and recreation commission and any other commissions, boards or committees created by the city council, upon his or her own volition or upon direction of the city council. At such meetings which the city manager attends, he or she shall be heard by such commissions, board or committees as to all matters upon which he or she wishes to address the members thereof, and he shall inform said members as to the status of any matter being considered by the city council, and he or she shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, boards or committees appointed by the city council. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.250 - Removal. 
The removal of the city manager shall be effected only by a majority vote of the whole city council as then constituted, convened in a regular council meeting, subject, however, to the provisions of the next succeeding subsections. In case of his intended removal by the city council, the city manager shall be furnished with a written notice stating the council's intention to remove him or her, at least thirty (30) days before the effective date of his or her removal. If the city manager so requests, the city council shall provide in writing reasons for the intended removal, which shall be provided the city manager within seven days after the receipt of such request from the city manager, and at least fifteen (15) days prior to the effective date of such removal. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.260 - Hearing. 
Within seven days after the delivery to the city manager of such notice of intention to remove, he may by written notification to the city clerk, request a hearing before the city council. Thereafter the city council shall fix a time for the hearing which shall be held at its usual meeting place, but before the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, at which the city manager shall appear and be heard, with or without counsel. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.270 - Suspension pending hearing. 
After furnishing the city manager with a written notice of intended removal, the city council may suspend him or her from duty, but his or her compensation shall continue until his or her removal by action of the council passed subsequent to the aforesaid hearing. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.280 - Discretion of council. 
In removing the city manager, the city council shall use its uncontrolled discretion and its action shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearing, the purpose of which is to allow the city manager to present to said city council his or her grounds of opposition to his or her removal prior to its action. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.290 - Limitation on removal. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection hereinabove set forth, the city manager shall not be removed from office, other than for misconduct in office, during or within a period of ninety (90) days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the city at which a member of the city council is elected or when a new city councilman is appointed; the purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected or appointed member of the city council or a reorganized city council to observe the actions and ability of the city manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his or her office. After the expiration of said ninety (90) day period aforementioned, the provisions of Section 2.12.250 through 2.12.280 as to the removal of said city manager shall apply and be effective. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
2.12.300 - Agreements on employment. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the power or authority of the city council to enter into any supplemental agreement with the city manager delineating additional terms and conditions of employment not inconsistent with any provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 2.14 - FINANCE OFFICE 
Sections: 
 
2.14.010 - Office established. 
There is created and established a finance office. The office of the director of finance is created and established. 
(Ord. 98-03 § 2 (part))  
2.14.020 - City manager or designee as director. 
The director of finance shall be the city manager or such personnel to whom he/she may assign and delegate the duties and responsibilities of said office. 
(Ord. 98-03 § 2 (part))  
2.14.030 - Duties of director—Transfer of functions. 
In accordance with the provisions of Section 37209 and 40805.5 of the State Government Code, the fiscal and accounting duties imposed upon the city clerk are transferred to the director of finance. The director of finance shall execute a bond to the city in the same manner and amount as required of the city clerk by Government Code Section 36518. 
(Ord. 98-03 § 2 (part))  
2.14.040 - Same—Statutory. 
The director of finance shall be responsible for those duties imposed upon the city clerk by Sections 37201 through 37208 and by Section 40802 through 40805 of the State Government Code. 
(Ord. 98-03 § 2 (part))  
2.14.050 - Same—Additional. 
The director of finance shall further be vested and charged with the following duties and responsibilities: (1) to develop, maintain and operate the general accounting system of the city; (2) to perform such accounting functions in accordance with modern accounting practices; (3) to direct the preparation, auditing, and disbursement of claims and demands against the city, including payrolls; (4) to devise and maintain adequate billing and collection procedures for all accounts receivable; (5) to assume and perform all functions and duties relating to the collection and disbursement of all taxes, revenues, fees, fines, receipts and other moneys derived by the city in the conduct of its business; (6) to purchase, or direct the purchasing of, all supplies, services, goods, wares, merchandise, equipment and material which may be required by the city, in accordance with the city purchasing regulations; (7) to keep and maintain inventory records of all municipal properties; (8) to prepare the annual budget for the approval of the city council and to maintain budgetary control on the final budget as adopted by the city council; (9) to present to the city council reports in sufficient detail to describe the financial condition of the city, such reports shall relate to receipts, disbursements, and cash balance of the city funds on a quarterly basis or more frequently as may be desired. 
(Ord. 98-03 § 2 (part))  
Chapter 2.16 - CONFLICT OF INTEREST CODE 
Sections: 
 
2.16.010 - Adopted—Violation. 
In compliance with the Political Reform Act of 1974, California Government Code Section 81000, et seq., the city adopts this conflict of interest code, which shall be applicable to all designated employees of the city as specifically required by California Government Code Section 87300. This code has the force and effect of law. Designated employees violating this code are subject to the sanctions provided in Chapter II of the Political Reform Act, Government Code Section 91000, et seq. 
(Prior code § 2600)  
2.16.020 - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise indicated, the definitions contained in the Political Reform Act of 1974, Government Code Section 81000, et seq., the Regulation of the Fair Political Practices Commission adopted pursuant thereto, any amendments to the Act and Regulations are incorporated into this chapter. A copy of this code shall be on file with the Orland city clerk. 
(Prior code § 2610)  
2.16.030 - Designated employees. 
Government Code Section 87302(a) requires that persons who occupy positions within the city which involve the making, or participation in the making, of decisions which may foreseeably have a material effect on any financial interest shall be designated employees. All persons who hold the positions enumerated in Section 2.16.040 are designated employees and must disclose all economic interests set forth in such section. 
(Prior code § 2601)  
2.16.040 - Designated positions. 
The provisions of Title 2, Section 18730, of the California Code of Regulations, as amended by the Fair Political Practices Commission from time-to-time, together with (1) Appendix "A" set forth following this chapter of the designated positions, and (2) Appendix "B" set forth following this chapter of the disclosure categories, shall constitute the Conflict of Interest Code of the city. 
(Ord. 2004-12 § 3 (part): prior code § 2602) 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § 3, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 3, 10-4-2010; Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 3)  
2.16.050 - Initial statement. 
An initial statement shall be filed by each designated employee within ten (10) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter disclosing investments in business entities and interests in real property made reportable by Section 2.16.040. All new designated employees shall file statements not less than ten (10) days before assuming office or, if subject to confirmation, ten (10) days before being confirmed, unless an earlier assumption of office is required by the city. 
(Ord. 96-11 § 2; prior code § 2603)  
2.16.060 - Annual statements. 
All designated employees shall file annual statements of economic interest no later than February 28 of the annual reporting period. All other persons shall file annual statements of economic interest no later than April 1 of the annual reporting period. 
(Ord. 2004-12 § 3 (part): prior code § 2604) 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § 3, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 3, 10-4-2010; Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 3)  
2.16.070 - New positions. 
Designated employees appointed, promoted or transferred to designated positions within the city shall file initial statements disclosing reportable investments in business entities and interests in real property within thirty (30) days after assuming office. 
(Prior code § 2605)  
2.16.080 - Leaving office. 
Any designated employee whose employment with the city is terminated, voluntarily or involuntarily, shall, within thirty (30) days after termination, file a statement disclosing investments in business entities, interests in real property and income, covering the period between the closing date of the previous statement of economic interests and the termination date. 
(Prior code § 2606)  
2.16.090 - Filing with the agency. 
The statements shall be filed with the Orland city clerk. 
(Prior code § 2607)  
2.16.100 - Manner of reporting. 
The manner of reporting reportable interests shall be pursuant to Government Code Sections 87206 and 87207. 
(Prior code § 2608)  
2.16.110 - Disqualification. 
A designated employee must disqualify himself or herself from making or participating in the making of any decisions which will forseeably have a material financial effect, distinguishable from its effect on the public generally, on any reportable economic interest (except gifts of less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)) or upon any business entity in which the designated employee holds a position of management or is a director, officer, partner, sole owner, trustee or employee. No member shall be prevented from making or participating in the making of any decision to the extent his or her participation is legally required for the decision to be made. 
(Prior code § 2609) 
  
Position 	Disclosure Category 
	
City Manager/Finance Director 	Note 1 below 
City Attorney 	Note 1, below 
City Clerk 	Note 1, below 
City Treasurer 	Note 1, below 
Accounting Manager 	2, 3, 4 
Public Works Director 	2, 3, 4 
Community Services Director/Planner 	2, 3, 4 
Building Official 	3, 4 
Building Inspector 	3, 4 
City Engineer 	2, 3, 4 
Chief Waste Water Treatment Plant Operator 	2, 3, 4 
Police Chief 	2, 3 
Police Records/Communications Manager 	2, 3, 4 
Director of Parks and Recreation 	2, 3 
Deputy City Clerk 	1 
Library Director 	2, 3 
Fire Chief 	2 
City Council Members 	Note 1, below 
Planning Commissioners 	Note 1, below 
Arts Commissioners 	1 
Economic Development Commissioners 	1 
Public Works and Safety Commissioners 	1 
Recreation Commissioners 	1 
Consultants 	Note 2, below 
 
1. Although listed here, this position does not fall into the category of "designated employee" because it is a position identified in Government Code Section 87200 and the Government Code itself specifies the filing requirements for this position. 
2. Consultants shall be included in the lists of designated employees and shall disclose pursuant to the broadest disclosure category in the code subject to the following limitation: 
 The City Manager may determine in writing that a particular consultant, although a "designated position," is hired to perform a range of duties that is limited in scope and thus is not required to fully comply with the disclosure requirements described in this section. Such written determination shall include a description of the consultant's duties and, based upon that description, a statement of the extent of disclosure requirements. The City Manager's determination is a public record and shall be retained for public inspection in the same manner and location as this conflict of interest code. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § 3, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 3, 10-4-2010; Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 3) 
  
MASTER LIST OF DISCLOSURE CATEGORIES SPECIFICATION SHEET REPORTABLE INVESTMENTS, INTERESTS IN REAL PROPERTY, AND INCOME CONFLICT OF INTEREST CODE FOR THE CITY OF ORLAND 
Disclosure Category: 
1. All investments and business positions in business entities, sources of income, and interests in real property. 
2. Investments and business positions in business entities, and sources of income from entities providing supplies, services, equipment, or machinery of the type used by the designated employees unit. 
3. Investments and business positions in business entities, and income from sources engaged in construction, building, or material supply. 
4. Investments and business positions in, and income from sources engaged in, the construction of public works projects. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § 3, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 3, 10-4-2010; Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 3)  
Chapter 2.18 - ARTS COMMISSION 
Sections: 
 
2.18.010 - Created. 
There is established the arts commission of the city of Orland. 
(Ord. 2004-06 (part))  
2.18.020 - Functions generally. 
The functions of the arts commission shall include the following powers and duties: 
A.  To advise the city council on proposed funding for various community arts organizations; 
B.  To advise the city council on proposed funding for community art projects; 
C.  To assist in the site selection of community art projects; 
D.  To review and make recommendations on the technical and aesthetic aspects of proposed community artwork; 
E.  To organize competitions for artistic works in public places; 
F.  To implement the goals, objectives and policies of an arts master plan when adopted by the city council; and 
G.  To perform such other advisory duties pertaining to public art as the city council from time to time may require. 
(Ord. 2004-06 (part))  
2.18.030 - Composition. 
The arts commission shall consist of seven members, four of whom shall be individuals who work or are involved in the arts. Membership shall consist of a majority of members residing within the city limits of the city of Orland, and the remaining members to reside within the 95963 postal zip code area. 
(Ord. 2004-06 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 3, 12-7-2009)  
2.18.035 - Architectural review board liaison. 
In addition to the regular members, a current member of the architectural review board shall act as a liaison to the arts commission. Such liaison shall have the responsibility of attending commission meetings to discuss matters of mutual interest to the board and commission, but shall not vote. 
(Ord. 2004-06 (part))  
2.18.040 - Members' terms of office. 
Members of the arts commission shall be appointed to serve for a term of four years and until their respective successors are duly appointed and qualified. However, three of the original members of the arts commission appointed in 2004 shall have their terms end at seven-thirty p.m. on January 1, 2006, and four of the original members of the arts commission appointed in 2004 shall have their terms end at seven-thirty p.m. on January 1, 2008; all subsequent terms shall commence and end on the same day every four years thereafter. 
(Ord. 2004-06 (part))  
2.18.050 - Regular meetings—Time. 
Subsequent to the appointment of new commission members, the arts commission shall set a weekday and time for regular monthly meetings. Such regular meetings shall begin no earlier than six p.m. 
(Ord. 2004-06 (part))  
2.18.060 - Regular meetings—Place. 
Regular meetings and adjourned regular meetings shall be held by the arts commission in the Carnegie Community Center, city of Orland, or in such place to which any such meeting may be adjourned. 
(Ord. 2004-06 (part))  
2.18.070 - Public arts fund. 
A.  Creation. There is established a public arts fund into which shall be deposited all funds collected under this chapter of the Orland Municipal Code and such other funds as may be appropriated by the city council or donated to the city for expenditures in conjunction with the public arts program. 
B.  Accounting. This fund shall be maintained by the city treasurer, with accounting records established to sufficiently identify and control these funds. Expenditures shall be processed through the city's established warrant payment procedure. 
C.  Use of Fund. The funds shall be used solely for the acquisition, installation, improvement, maintenance and insurance of artwork to be displayed in the city and the administration of the public arts program. 
D.  Permissible Expenditures. 
1.  The cost of artwork and its installation; 
2.  The cost of purchase or lease of art sites; 
3.  Waterworks, landscaping, lighting and other objects which are commissioned from an artist as an integral aspect of a structure or site or which are necessary for the proper aesthetic presentation and structural placement of the artwork; 
4.  Frames, mats, pedestals and other objects which are necessary for the proper presentation of the artwork; 
5.  Expenditures for maintenance and repair of artworks; 
6.  Administrative expenses, including legal, to otherwise implement, uphold or carry out any provision of this chapter. 
E.  Ineligible Expenditures. 
1.  Reproductions of original work except limited editions; 
2.  Unlimited editions of original work; 
3.  Mass-produced art objects; 
4.  Works that are decorative, ornamental or functional landscape or architectural elements except when commissioned from an artist as an integral aspect of a structure or site; 
5.  Architectural rehabilitation or historical preservation of buildings. 
F.  Endowments. The public arts fund shall also be used as a depository for endowments, bequests, grants or donations. Such endowments, bequests, grants or donations may be expended as set forth in subsections C and D of this section and when approved by the commission: 
1.  Art exhibitions or displays; 
2.  Promotion of art education within the community, either separate from or complementary to art programs of schools, museums or other nonprofit organizations. 
G.  Replacement. For those artworks that have been purchased with moneys from the public arts fund or donated to the city, the city council may determine to sell or exchange existing artworks for replacement artworks. Any funds obtained from the sale of artwork shall be credited to the public arts fund. 
H.  Any expenditure of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more from the public arts fund of public artwork development fees collected pursuant to Section 2.10.100, or such other funds as may be appropriated by the city council pursuant to Section 2.18.070(A), requires prior approval by the city council. Any expenditure of funds donated into the public arts fund or funds deposited into the public arts fund from the sale of artwork and related items does not require prior approval by the city council. The city shall monitor the public arts fund for the purpose of administering this subsection. 
(Ord. 2005-08 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2013-03)  
2.18.080 - Projects subject to public arts program requirements. 
A.  Requirements. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, the requirements of this chapter shall apply to all works of construction and rehabilitation for which a building permit is required, including but not limited to: 
1.  New commercial and industrial construction; 
2.  Remodeling or reconstruction of existing commercial or industrial property; 
3.  New residential subdivisions or developments of two or more units, whether by detached single-family residential structures, condominiums, apartments, duplexes, townhouses or other dwelling units being built in the same tract by the same owner or developer; 
4.  New individual single-family residential units constructed on a lot located in an existing subdivision whose building permit valuation is over one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
B.  Exceptions. The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the following activities: 
1.  Public projects undertaken by any agency of the city, the state, county, school district or any other governmental entity; 
2.  Remodeling, repair or reconstruction of structures to comply with earthquake seismic safety code standards or which have been damaged by fire, flood, wind, earthquake or other calamity; 
3.  Remodeling, repair or reconstruction of residential units; 
4.  Nonprofit social service or cultural institution projects; 
5.  Low to moderate housing projects as defined by household income Health and Safety Code Section 50093; 
6.  Affordable housing developments receiving city, state or federal assistance; 
7.  Private educational institutions which provide general education equivalent to the public school system (kindergarten through high school or any part thereof); 
8.  Architectural rehabilitation or historical preservation of properties which are designated as historic sites by the city council. 
(Ord. 2005-08 § 3 (part))  
2.18.090 - Certificates of occupancy. 
A.  No final city approval, such as final inspection or a certificate of occupancy, for any project subject to this chapter shall be granted or issued unless and until full compliance with the public arts program is achieved, in one or more of the following ways: 
1.  The approved artwork has been placed in a manner satisfactory to the arts commission. 
2.  In-lieu art fees have been paid. 
3.  Financial security in an amount equal to the acquisition and installation costs of an approved artwork, in a form approved by the city attorney, have been posted. 
4.  An approved artwork has been donated and accepted by the arts commission. 
B.  Full compliance with the public arts program shall not be deemed to exist until the entire program allocation for the project, as defined in Section 2.18.100 of this chapter, has been provided. 
(Ord. 2005-08 § 3 (part))  
2.18.100 - Requirement to provide artwork or pay development fee. 
A.  The applicant shall be deemed to have satisfied his or her obligations under this chapter through the placement of artwork in a manner consistent with this chapter, valued at an amount equal to the program allocation. 
B.  In lieu of placement of an approved artwork, the applicant may, at his or her discretion, pay to the city for deposit into the public arts fund an amount equal to the program allocation set forth in subsection D of this section. 
C.  Fees are to be collected with respect to all projects prior to issuance of a building permit, except in the case of residential developments of more than one dwelling unit, where the fee shall be collected on a pro rata basis for each dwelling when it receives its final inspection or certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. 
D.  The program allocation, as used in this chapter, is the percentage of the building cost which is set aside for the city's public arts program. The total building valuation shall be computed using the latest building valuation data as set forth by the International Conference of Building Officials (ICBO) unless, in the opinion of the building official, a different valuation measure more accurately represents the value of the building. Excluding land acquisition and off-site improvement costs, the program allocation shall be an amount equal to the percentage of the total building valuation for an applicable project, as listed herein: 
1.  One-quarter of one percent for commercial and industrial construction, remodel or reconstruction; 
2.  One-quarter of one percent for new residential subdivisions or developments of two or more units, whether by detached single-family residential structures, condominiums, apartments, duplexes, townhouses or other dwelling units being built in the same tract by the same owner or developer. A project shall be considered a development of two or more units when two or more building permits are issued to the same person for development of new residential structures within a one-hundred-eighty-day period; 
3.  One-quarter of one percent for new individual single-family residential units constructed on a lot located in an existing subdivision for that portion of building permit valuation in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
4.  However, the program allocation as determined in subsections 1., 2. or 3., above, shall not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for any applicable project. 
5.  The arts assessment allocation shall be applied and exempted in accordance with the applications and exemptions as set forth in Orland Municipal Code Chapter 15.42 and supporting development impact fee resolutions. 
E.  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the applicant from placing an approved artwork with acquisition and installation costs in an amount less than the program allocation; provided that the applicant shall also pay to the public arts fund an amount equal to the difference between the program allocation and the costs of acquisition and installation of such artwork. 
F.  Nothing herein shall restrict the city council from waiving the requirements of this chapter, in whole or in part, with respect to any project otherwise subject to the provisions of this chapter, provided that the city council determines that the project applicant has entered into an agreement with the city providing for the applicant's acquisition and installation of artwork in connection with the development of the project which addresses the goals and aims of this chapter in a manner equally or more favorable to the city than would be achieved by strict compliance with this chapter. In such an event, the city council shall make findings to this effect on the basis of substantial evidence. 
(Ord. 2005-08 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2013-02; Ord. No. 2017-04 )  
2.18.110 - Art site acceptability. 
A.  Placement of Art by Applicant. The applicant shall place artwork in outdoor areas of the private property that are accessible and used by the public a minimum of eighteen (18) hours per day. Interior spaces, including lobbies, courtyards, malls, etc., may be eligible if they are accessible to the public a minimum of twelve (12) hours per day. 
B.  Art Purchased Through Public Arts Fund. When selecting the location for art purchased through the public arts fund, preference shall be given to publicly accessible public places. This would include libraries, parks, office buildings, sidewalks, traffic islands, etc. Lobbies, plazas, adjacent open spaces or exterior treatment of publicly owned buildings shall be potential sites, but the offices themselves of publicly owned buildings shall not be considered acceptable sites. 
(Ord. 2005-08 § 3 (part))  
2.18.120 - Criteria for artwork selection. 
A.  Eligible requirements for each project will be established by the arts commission. Specifically excluded are artworks done by students under the supervision of art instructors to satisfy course requirements and artists who are members of the arts commission. The following criteria shall be considered in the selection of artwork: 
1.  Quality of the artwork; 
2.  Media. All visual art forms may be considered, subject to limitations set by the selection jury or the arts commission; 
3.  Style. Artworks of all schools, styles, and tastes should be considered for the city collection; 
4.  Environment. Artworks and art places should be appropriate in scale, material, form and content for the immediate, general, social and physical environments with which they relate; 
5.  Permanence. Consideration should be given to structural and surface integrity, permanence, and protection against theft, vandalism, weathering, excessive maintenance, and repair costs; 
6.  Elements of Design. Consideration should take into account that public art, in addition to meeting aesthetic requirements, also may serve to establish focal points, terminate areas, modify, enhance, or define specific spaces, or establish identity; 
7.  Diversity. The public arts program should strive for diversity of style, scale, media, artists—including ethnicity and gender and equitable distribution of artworks and art places throughout the city. 
B.  The following methods may be used to select artwork: 
1.  Direct Purchase. A completed work of art may be purchased for a specific project or location. 
2.  Direct Commission. An artist may be chosen directly by an artist-selection jury and paid to submit a proposal. Artists will be selected on the basis of their qualifications for a particular project and its probability of successful completion. 
3.  Limited Competition. A small number of artists may be invited and paid by the selection jury to submit proposals. 
4.  Open Competition. Any artist may apply subject to limitations established by the selection jury. No proposal fee is paid to artists; however, a small number of finalists may be selected to submit details, models or plans for which a fee is paid. 
C.  In selecting an artwork, the arts commission may appoint a selection jury of qualified persons. The jury shall be subject to the provisions of the Brown Act. 
D.  Review by Director of Planning. The director of planning shall review the artwork and its placement and landscaping elements and may refer the artwork to the planning commission for approval pursuant to the relevant section of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. 2005-08 § 3 (part))  
2.18.130 - Maintenance of artwork on public and private property. 
A.  Public Artwork on Public Property. A maintenance fund shall be established as part of the public arts program. Procedures for custody, maintenance and conservation of artwork shall be established by the arts commission as well as a maintenance schedule. Specific instructions for care of each work shall be kept on file as part of the collection management. The arts commission will strive to include maintenance provisions in the artwork contracts that stipulate the length of time (typically one year) the artist will be responsible for repairs, that urge artists to provide a maintenance manual, and that allow the artist first-refusal on repair contracts within the fair market rate of remuneration. Regular inspection-for-condition reporting shall be conducted so that the collection is maintained in the best possible condition as supervised by designated city personnel. When necessary, a conservation plan will be established prioritizing the work which is to be done. 
B.  Private Artwork on Private Property. The obligation to provide all maintenance necessary to preserve the artwork in good condition shall remain with the owner of the site. Art installed on or integrated into a construction project pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be removed or altered without the approval of the arts commission. Artwork installed pursuant to this chapter shall be maintained as specified in the written agreement between the city and the private property owner with regard to that artwork. Maintenance of artwork, as used in this chapter, shall include without limitation, preservation of the artwork in good condition to the satisfaction of the city, protection of the artwork against physical defacement, mutilation or alteration, and securing and maintaining fire and extended coverage insurance against vandalism and other similar acts in an amount to be determined by the city attorney. Prior to placement of an approved artwork, applicant and the owner of the site shall execute and record a covenant in a form approved by the city for maintenance of the artwork. Failure to maintain the artwork as provided herein is declared to be a public nuisance. If the artwork is not maintained in the manner prescribed, or is removed or altered without approval of the arts commission, in addition to all other remedies provided by law, the city may, upon reasonable notice, perform all necessary repairs, maintenance, secure insurance, or take such legal or other action deemed necessary to have the artwork maintained and if necessary, restored, and the costs therefor shall become a lien against the real property. 
(Ord. 2005-08 § 3 (part))  
2.18.140 - Application procedures for placement of artwork on private property. 
Any artwork being placed on private property as part of the city's public arts program shall be a one-of-a-kind piece, or, in the case of a bronze sculpture, as part of a limited edition of said work. The city encourages applicants to submit an application prior to the development of the architect's schematic design. The requirements and procedures for the processing of a public arts program proposal application (an "arts application") shall be as follows: 
A.  Upon submission of a development project application for a project subject to the requirements of this chapter, the director of planning or his representative shall provide to the project applicant a copy of this chapter, an arts application form and the name and phone number of the city's arts administrator. 
B.  The project applicant shall submit to the arts administrator the completed arts application form, describing the manner in which the project applicant intends to comply with this chapter. 
C.  The arts application shall include: 
1.  Preliminary sketches, photographs or other documentation of sufficient descriptive clarity to indicate the nature of the proposed artwork; 
2.  An appraisal or other evidence of the value of the proposed artwork, including acquisition and installation costs; 
3.  Preliminary plans containing such detailed information as may be required by the arts commission to adequately evaluate the location of the artwork in relation to the proposed development, and its compatibility with the proposed development (the artwork shall be an integral part of the landscaping and/or architecture of the building), including compatibility with the character of adjacent conforming developed parcels and existing neighborhoods if necessary to evaluate the proposal; 
4.  A narrative statement to demonstrate that the artwork will be displayed in an area open and freely available to the general public, or otherwise provide public accessibility in an equivalent manner based on the characteristics of the artwork or its placement on the site; and 
5.  Maintenance factors required to insure its permanence. 
(Ord. 2005-08 § 3 (part))  
2.18.150 - Approval procedures for placement of artwork on private property. 
A.  The application for the proposed artwork and its placement will be considered at a monthly public meeting of the arts commission. The director of planning or his representative will also review the artwork and its placement and landscaping elements and may refer the application to the planning commission for approval pursuant to the zoning ordinance. Any changes, questions or recommendations shall be conveyed in writing to the applicant. The commission will determine when all issues have been addressed and accept or reject the artwork. The applicant will be notified in writing of the arts commission's decision. 
B.  If the applicant proposes or the planning commission or city council recommends significant revisions to the architecture or physical design and layout of the proposed project subsequent to the receipt of the arts commission's approval, the application shall, if legally permitted, be returned to the arts commission for further review and recommendation concerning the revised proposal prior to final approval unless the council otherwise directs. 
C.  A contract between the city and the applicant spelling out all requirements, including insurance and maintenance, shall be executed prior to the city's final acceptance of the applicant's art-in-lieu proposal. 
(Ord. 2005-08 § 3 (part))  
2.18.160 - Procedure for refund of public arts fee for artwork in lieu of fee. 
If in-lieu artwork has been placed subsequent to payment of a public arts fee, the applicant shall submit to the arts administrator a written request for refund of the amount spent on the artwork placed on the applicant's property. The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the amount that would have been paid into the public arts fund should the applicant have chosen to pay a fee instead of place artwork on the site. The request for reimbursement shall be submitted after the artwork is installed, approved by the arts commission and accepted by the city. 
(Ord. 2005-08 § 3 (part))  
2.18.170 - Ownership of artwork on private property. 
Artwork placed on the applicant's property by the applicant in satisfaction of the applicant's program requirement shall remain the property of the applicant. 
(Ord. 2005-08 § 3 (part))  
2.18.180 - Application procedure for donation of artwork to the city. 
The prospective donor shall submit to the arts administrator: 
A.  Sketches, photographs, or other documentation of sufficient descriptive clarity to indicate the nature of the proposed artwork to be donated; 
B.  Additional samples of artist's work other than the proposed donation; 
C.  Background information on artist who created the proposed donation; 
D.  Installation costs, if available; 
E.  Maintenance factors required to ensure its permanence. 
(Ord. 2005-08 § 3 (part))  
2.18.190 - Review and acceptance of artwork donated to the city. 
The proposed donation will be considered at a monthly public meeting of the arts commission. All details of the proposed donation, including the feasibility and expense of placing and caring for the work of art will be considered. The commission will review and discuss the donation and will direct the arts administrator as to any questions to be asked of the donor or artist. A personal appearance by artist may be requested. The commission will determine when all issues have been addressed and accept or reject the artwork. 
(Ord. 2005-08 § 3 (part))  
Chapter 2.20 - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 
Sections: 
 
2.20.010 - Established. 
An economic development commission is created to be known as the economic development commission of the city of Orland. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 4 (part); prior code § 4900)  
2.20.020 - Purpose. 
The commission shall advise the city council on issues related to: 
A.  Facilitating, acting upon and developing strategies and tactics to retain and expand existing business and attract new business; 
B.  Expressing a commitment to growth within the area of the city; 
C.  Recommending legislation that will implement and further the goals of the city; 
D.  Suggesting and recommending negotiations and implementing procedures including, but not limited to, waiving or reducing of hook-ups of required fees for the purpose of enticing business to the city. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 4 (part); prior code § 4910)  
2.20.030 - Economic development commission, membership and appointment. 
The commission shall consist of five members, who shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. All reasonable attempts shall be made to select at least one member from the Orland area chamber of commerce and one from the local financial community. Membership shall consist of a majority of members residing within the city limits of the city of Orland, and the remaining members to reside within the 95963 postal zip code area. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 4 (part); prior code § 4920) 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 3, 12-7-2009) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 2009-04, adopted Dec. 7, 2009, changed the title of § 2.20.030 from "Membership and appointment" to "Economic development commission, membership and appointment."  
2.20.040 - Term and filling of vacancies. 
Members shall be appointed to serve overlapping terms of two years with terms starting on January 1st and ending on December 31st. Members whose terms have expired shall continue to serve until their vacancy is filled by the city council. When a vacancy occurs, an appointment shall be made to fill the unexpired term by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 4 (part); prior code § 4930)  
2.20.050 - Removal from office. 
The city council reserves the right to remove any commissioner from office at any time for any reason. In addition, any commissioner missing three consecutive meetings shall be deemed to have resigned and be immediately terminated from such appointed office. The chairman of the commission shall immediately notify the mayor of such automatic termination and the mayor and city council shall proceed appropriately to appoint a replacement. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 4 (part); prior code § 4940)  
2.20.060 - Officers—Meetings—Secretary. 
The commission shall elect a chairperson, vice-chairperson, and such other officers as it deems appropriate annually at a January meeting. The commission shall designate the time, place and manner of its regular meetings. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson or by any three members. The city council shall designate a staff representative to act as secretary to the commission. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 4 (part); prior code § 4950)  
2.20.070 - Quorum and voting requirements. 
A majority of the appointed members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. In the event any member or members are present but disqualified and must be absent from deliberations or determination of any item, the member or members shall be counted as present for the purpose of establishing a quorum. Determination of any issue, except procedural matters, shall require the vote of at least three members. If a matter cannot be determined at a meeting due to the lack of three voting members, it shall be continued to the next available meeting. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 4 (part); prior code § 4960)  
2.20.080 - Minutes and rules for conduct of meetings. 
The staff representative designated to act as secretary to the commission shall provide for the taking of minutes which shall be reviewed and approved by the commission at its next regular meeting. The commission may from time to time adopt such rules and regulations for carrying on its business as it shall deem best, but in the absence of adopted rules to the contrary, Robert's Rules of Order shall be followed in the conduct of its meetings. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 4 (part); prior code § 4970)  
Chapter 2.24 - LIBRARY COMMISSION 
Sections: 
 
2.24.010 - Established. 
A library commission is created to be known as the library commission of the city. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 5 (part); prior code § 4500)  
2.24.020 - Purpose. 
The commission shall advise the city council on issues related to: 
A.  Preparing, reporting to and necessarily reflecting upon the operations of the Orland public library; 
B.  Recommending legislation that will implement and further the goals, necessities and purposes of the Orland public library; 
C.  Assisting the city librarian in preparing annual library budget; 
D.  Assisting the city librarian in developing and prioritizing library objectives; 
E.  Recommending and suggesting procedures for the orderly operation of the library. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 5 (part); prior code § 4510)  
2.24.030 - Library commission, membership and appointment. 
The commission shall consist of five members, who shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. Membership shall consist of a majority of members residing within the city limits of the city of Orland, and the remaining members to reside within the 95963 postal zip code area. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 5 (part); prior code § 4520) 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 3, 12-7-2009) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 2009-04, adopted Dec. 7, 2009, changed the title of § 2.24.030 from "Membership and appointment" to "Library commission, membership and appointment."  
2.24.040 - Term and filling of vacancies. 
Members shall be appointed to serve overlapping terms of two years with terms starting on January 1st and ending on December 31st. Members whose terms have expired shall continue to serve until their vacancy is filled by the city council. When a vacancy occurs, an appointment shall be made to fill the unexpired term by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 5 (part); prior code § 4530)  
2.24.050 - Removal from office. 
The city council reserves the right to remove any commissioner from office at any time for any reason. In addition, any commissioner missing three consecutive meetings shall be deemed to have resigned and be immediately terminated from such appointed office. The chairman of the commission shall immediately notify the mayor of such automatic termination and the mayor and city council shall proceed appropriately to appoint a replacement. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 5 (part); prior code § 4540)  
2.24.060 - Officers—Meetings—Secretary. 
The commission shall elect a chairperson, vice-chairperson, and such other officers as it deems appropriate annually at a January meeting. The commission shall designate the time, place and manner of its regular meetings. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson or by any three members. The city council shall designate a staff representative to act as secretary to the commission. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 5 (part); prior code § 4550)  
2.24.070 - Quorum and voting requirements. 
A majority of the appointed members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. In the event any member or members are present but disqualified and must be absent from deliberations or determination of any item, the member or members shall be counted as present for the purpose of establishing a quorum. Determination of any issue, except procedural matters, shall require the vote of at least three members. If a matter cannot be determined at a meeting due to the lack of three voting members, it shall be continued to the next available meeting. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 5 (part); prior code § 4560)  
2.24.080 - Minutes and rules for conduct of meetings. 
The staff representative designated to act as secretary to the commission shall provide for the taking of minutes which shall be reviewed and approved by the commission at its next regular meeting. The commission may from time to time adopt such rules and regulations for carrying on its business as it shall deem best, but in the absence of adopted rules to the contrary, Robert's Rules of Order shall be followed in the conduct of its meetings. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 5 (part); prior code § 4570)  
Chapter 2.28 - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION 
Sections: 
 
2.28.010 - Established. 
A parks and recreation commission is created to be known as the parks and recreation commission of the city of Orland. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 3 (part); prior code § 4400)  
2.28.020 - Purpose. 
The commission shall advise the city council on issues related to: 
A.  Planning, improving, supervising and maintaining present and proposed parks and playgrounds for the city; 
B.  Encouraging, fostering, facilitating, establishing and maintaining a systematized program of recreational activities to be made available to the residents and visitors of the city. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 3 (part); prior code § 4410)  
2.28.030 - Parks and recreation commission, membership and appointment. 
The commission shall consist of five members, who shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. Membership shall consist of a majority of members residing within the city limits of the city of Orland, and the remaining members to reside within the 95963 postal zip code area. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 3 (part); prior code § 4420) 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 3, 12-7-2009) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 2009-04, adopted Dec. 7, 2009, changed the title of § 2.28.030 from "Membership and appointment" to "Parks and recreation commission, membership and appointment."  
2.28.040 - Term and filling of vacancies. 
Members shall be appointed to serve overlapping terms of two years with terms starting on January 1st and ending on December 31st. Members whose terms have expired shall continue to serve until their vacancy is filled by the city council. When a vacancy occurs, an appointment shall be made to fill the unexpired term by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 3 (part); prior code § 4430)  
2.28.050 - Removal from office. 
The city council reserves the right to remove any commissioner from office at any time for any reason. In addition, any commissioner missing three consecutive meetings shall be deemed to have resigned and be immediately terminated from such appointed office. The chairman of the commission shall immediately notify the mayor of such automatic termination and the mayor and city council shall proceed appropriately to appoint a replacement. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 3 (part); prior code § 4440)  
2.28.060 - Officers—Meetings—Secretary. 
The commission shall elect a chairperson, vice-chairperson, and such other officers as it deems appropriate annually at a January meeting. The commission shall designate the time, place and manner of its regular meetings. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson or by any three members. The city council shall designate a staff representative to act as secretary to the commission. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 3 (part); prior code § 4450)  
2.28.070 - Quorum and voting requirements. 
A majority of the appointed members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. In the event any member or members are present but disqualified and must be absent from deliberations or determination of any item, the member or members shall be counted as present for the purpose of establishing a quorum. Determination of any issue, except procedural matters, shall require the vote of at least three members. If a matter cannot be determined at a meeting due to the lack of three voting members, it shall be continued to the next available meeting. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 3 (part); prior code § 4460)  
2.28.080 - Minutes and rules for conduct of meetings. 
The staff representative designated to act as secretary to the commission shall provide for the taking of minutes which shall be reviewed and approved by the commission at its next regular meeting. The commission may from time to time adopt such rules and regulations for carrying on its business as it shall deem best, but in the absence of adopted rules to the contrary, Robert's Rules of Order shall be followed in the conduct of its meetings. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 3 (part); prior code § 4470)  
Chapter 2.32 - PLANNING COMMISSION 
Sections: 
 
2.32.010 - Established. 
A planning commission is created to be known as the planning commission of the city of Orland. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 2 (part); prior code § 12400)  
2.32.020 - Purpose. 
A.  The commission shall advise the city council on issues related to: 
1.  Developing and maintaining a comprehensive long-term general plan that meets requirements of state law; 
2.  Developing and maintaining such specific and area plans as may be necessary or desirable to assist in implementing the general plan; 
3.  Administering the city's zoning and subdivision ordinances and recommending revisions when deemed desirable; 
4.  Street names for all proposed new streets and name changes for any existing streets. 
B.  The commission shall review and act on applications for development approval where provided in the city zoning and subdivision ordinances. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 2 (part); prior code § 12410)  
2.32.030 - Planning commission, membership and appointment. 
The applicants shall be interviewed by a panel consisting of the city manager, community services director, the city engineer, and a member of the city council and make a recommendation to the mayor and council. The commission shall consist of five members, who shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. Membership shall consist of a majority of members residing within the city limits of the city of Orland, and the remaining members to reside within the 95963 postal zip code area. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 2 (part); prior code § 12420) 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 3, 12-7-2009) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 2009-04, adopted Dec. 7, 2009, changed the title of § 2.32.030 from "Membership and appointment" to "Planning commission, membership and appointment."  
2.32.040 - Term and filling of vacancies. 
Members shall be appointed to serve overlapping terms of four years with terms starting on January 1st and ending on December 31st. Members whose terms have expired shall continue to serve until their vacancy is filled by the city council. When a vacancy occurs, an appointment shall be made to fill the unexpired term by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 2 (part); prior code § 12430)  
2.32.050 - Removal from office. 
The city council reserves the right to remove any commissioner from office at any time for any reason. In addition, any commissioner missing three consecutive meetings shall be deemed to have resigned and be immediately terminated from such appointed office. The chairman of the commission shall immediately notify the mayor of such automatic termination and the mayor and city council shall proceed appropriately to appoint a replacement. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 2 (part); prior code § 12440)  
2.32.060 - Officers—Meetings—Secretary. 
The commission shall elect a chairperson, vice-chairperson, and such other officers as it deems appropriate annually at a January meeting. The commission shall designate the time, place and manner of its regular meetings. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson or by any three members. The city council shall designate a staff representative to act as secretary to the commission. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 2 (part); prior code § 12450)  
2.32.070 - Quorum and voting requirements. 
A majority of the appointed members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. In the event any member or members are present but disqualified and must be absent from deliberations or determination of any item, the member or members shall be counted as present for the purpose of establishing a quorum. Determination of any issue, except procedural matters, shall require the vote of at least three members. If a matter cannot be determined at a meeting due to the lack of three voting members, it shall be continued to the next available meeting. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 2 (part); prior code § 12460)  
2.32.080 - Minutes and rules for conduct of meetings. 
The staff representative designated to act as secretary to the commission shall provide for the taking of minutes which shall be reviewed and approved by the commission at its next regular meeting. The commission may from time to time adopt such rules and regulations for carrying on its business as it shall deem best, but in the absence of adopted rules to the contrary, Robert's Rules of Order shall be followed in the conduct of its meetings. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 2 (part); prior code § 12470)  
Chapter 2.36 - PUBLIC SAFETY COMMISSION 
Sections: 
 
2.36.010 - Established. 
A public safety commission is created to be known as the public safety commission of the city of Orland. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 1 (part); prior code § 13150)  
2.36.020 - Purpose. 
The commission shall advise the city council on issues related to: 
A.  Various measures and actions which reflect upon public safety for city residents and visitors; 
B.  Various measures affecting and promoting safety programs; 
C.  Promoting the safety and welfare of the city. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 1 (part); prior code § 13151) 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 3, 4-6-2009)  
2.36.030 - Public safety commission, membership and appointment. 
The applicants shall be interviewed by a panel consisting of the fire chief, police chief, and EMS coordinator and make a recommendation to the mayor and council. The commission shall consist of five members, who shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. Membership shall consist of a majority of members residing within the city limits of the city of Orland, and the remaining members to reside within the 95963 postal zip code area. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 1 (part); prior code § 13152) 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 3, 4-6-2009; Ord. No. 2009-04, § 3, 12-7-2009) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 2009-04, adopted Dec. 7, 2009, changed the title of § 2.36.030 from "Membership and appointment" to "Public safety commission, membership and appointment."  
2.36.040 - Term and filling of vacancies. 
Members shall be appointed to serve overlapping terms of two years with terms starting on January 1st and ending on December 31st. Members whose terms have expired shall continue to serve until their vacancy is filled by the city council. When a vacancy occurs, an appointment shall be made to fill the unexpired term by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 1 (part); prior code § 13153)  
2.36.050 - Removal from office. 
The city council reserves the right to remove any commissioner from office at any time for any reason. In addition, any commissioner missing three consecutive meetings shall be deemed to have resigned and be immediately terminated from such appointed office. The chairperson of the commission shall immediately notify the mayor of such automatic termination and the mayor and city council shall proceed appropriately to appoint a replacement. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 1 (part); prior code § 13154)  
2.36.060 - Officers—Meetings—Secretary. 
The commission shall elect a chairperson, vice-chairperson, and such other officers as it deems appropriate annually at a January meeting. The commission shall designate the time, place and manner of its regular meeting with a minimum of one meeting every two months. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson or by any three members. The city council shall designate a staff representative to act as secretary to the commission. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 1 (part); prior code § 13155) 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 3, 4-6-2009)  
2.36.070 - Quorum and voting requirements. 
A majority of the appointed members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. In the event any member or members are present but disqualified and must be absent from deliberations or determination of any item, the member or members shall be counted as present for the purpose of establishing a quorum. Determination of any issue, except procedural matters, shall require the vote of at least three members. If a matter cannot be determined at a meeting due to the lack of three voting members, it shall be continued to the next available meeting. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 1 (part); prior code § 13156)  
2.36.080 - Minutes and rules for conduct of meetings. 
The staff representative designated to act as secretary to the commission shall provide for the taking of minutes which shall be reviewed and approved by the commission at its next regular meeting. The commission may from time to time adopt such rules and regulations for carrying on its business as it shall deem best, but in the absence of adopted rules to the contrary, Robert's Rules of Order shall be followed in the conduct of its meetings. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 1 (part); prior code § 13157)  
Chapter 2.40 - PUBLIC WORKS COMMISSION 
Sections: 
 
2.40.010 - Established. 
A public works commission is created to be known as the public works commission of the city of Orland. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 1 (part); prior code § 8500)  
2.40.020 - Purpose. 
The commission shall advise the city council on issues related to: 
A.  Prioritization of short-term and long- range construction projects to be completed by public works crews or by contract; 
B.  Review development standards for streets and related infrastructure; 
C.  Review construction cost estimates for public works crews to complete private construction projects; 
D.  Approve assessment of charges to reimburse the city for use of public works crews to complete emergency projects on private property; 
E.  Review and comment on recommended list of projects to be completed with outside funding such as Local Transportation Development Act funds, grants funds, etc.; 
F.  Recommend projects for consideration that may have no present funding source; 
G.  Review construction-related projects for utilities operated by the city. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 1 (part); prior code § 8510)  
2.40.030 - Public works commission, membership and appointment. 
The commission shall consist of five members, who shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. All reasonable attempts shall be made to select members who have a background in fiscal planning and in the techniques of building and construction. Membership shall consist of a majority of members residing within the city limits of the city of Orland, and the remaining members to reside within the 95963 postal zip code area. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 1 (part); prior code § 8520) 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 3, 12-7-2009) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 2009-04, adopted Dec. 7, 2009, changed the title of § 2.40.030 from "Membership and appointment" to "Public works commission, membership and appointment."  
2.40.040 - Term and filing of vacancies. 
Members shall be appointed to serve overlapping terms of two years with terms starting on January 1st and ending on December 31st. Members whose terms have expired shall continue to serve until their vacancy is filled by the city council. When a vacancy occurs, an appointment shall be made to fill the unexpired term by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 1 (part); prior code § 8530)  
2.40.050 - Removal from office. 
The city council reserves the right to remove any commissioner from office at any time for any reason. In addition, any commissioner missing three consecutive meetings shall be deemed to have resigned and be immediately terminated from such appointed office. The chairperson of the commission shall immediately notify the mayor of such automatic termination and the mayor and city council shall proceed appropriately to appoint a replacement. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 1 (part); prior code § 8540)  
2.40.060 - Officers—Meetings—Secretary. 
The commission shall elect a chairperson, vice-chairperson, and such other officers as it deems appropriate annually at a January meeting. The commission shall designate the time, place and manner of its regular meetings. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson or by any three members. The city council shall designate a staff representative to act as secretary to the commission. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 1 (part); prior code § 8550)  
2.40.070 - Quorum and voting requirements. 
A majority of the appointed members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. In the event any member or members are present but disqualified and must be absent from deliberations or determination of any item, the member or members shall be counted as present for the purpose of establishing a quorum. Determination of any issue, except procedural matters, shall require the vote of at least three members. If a matter cannot be determined at a meeting due to the lack of three voting members, it shall be continued to the next available meeting. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 1 (part); prior code § 8560)  
2.40.080 - Minutes and rules for conduct of meetings. 
The staff representative designated to act as secretary to the commission shall provide for the taking of minutes which shall be reviewed and approved by the commission at its next regular meeting. The commission may from time to time adopt such rules and regulations for carrying on its business as it shall deem best, but in the absence of adopted rules to the contrary, Robert's Rules of Order shall be followed in the conduct of its meetings. 
(Ord. 96-12 § 1 (part); prior code § 8570)  
Chapter 2.44 - PURCHASING PROCEDURE* 
Sections: 
 
2.44.010 - Expenditures—Compliance required. 
All expenditures of city funds in connection with purchases must be made strictly in accordance with the duly adopted budget. In order that budgetary control may be effectively exercised, the procedures in this chapter shall be followed. 
(Ord. 99-03 § 1 (part))  
2.44.020 - Purchasing. 
When the purchase of any articles, services, merchandise, or material is required, authorization from the appropriate department head or the city manager must be obtained. The invoice or other statement from the seller will be submitted to the finance office for review before payment is made. 
(Ord. 99-03 § 1 (part))  
2.44.030 - Requirements as to bidding. 
A.  No bids shall be required if the amount of the purchase does not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
B.  If the purchase will be more than one thousand dollars but not in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), two or more informal bids will be secured by the official handling the purchase and approved by the city manager, but no further procedure will be required. 
C.  If the purchase contemplated is in an amount in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), the procedures in Sections 2.44.040, 2.44.050, 2.44.060 and 2.44.070 must be followed. However, contracts and purchases covered by the Public Contracts Code shall be let to bid in accordance with the provisions of that code. 
D.  The bidding procedure may be dispensed with only when an emergency requires that an order be placed with the nearest available source of supply or when the commodity can be obtained from only one vendor. 
(Ord. 99-03 § 1 (part))  
2.44.040 - Expenditure over five thousand dollars ($5,000.00)—Bid invitation. 
Before a purchase in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) is made, a notice shall be published inviting the submission of bids. The notice inviting bids shall set a date for opening of the same. The first publication or posting of the notice shall be at least ten days before the opening of the bids. Notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, published in the city, or if there is none, it shall be posted in at least three public places in the city. The notice shall state distinctly the type of merchandise, material, work or services sought by the city. 
(Ord. 99-03 § 1 (part))  
2.44.050 - Acceptance of bids. 
 A. The council shall accept the bid from the lowest responsible bidder. 
B.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, in its discretion, the council may reject any bids presented and readvertise. 
C.  If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the council may accept the one it chooses. If no bids are received, the council may have the project done without further complying with the procedure. 
(Ord. 99-03 § 1 (part))  
2.44.060 - Noncompliance—When. 
After rejecting bids, the council may pass a resolution by a four-fifths vote of its members declaring that the project can be performed more economically by day labor, or the materials or supplies furnished at a lower price in the open market. Upon adoption of the resolution, it may have the project done in the manner stated without further compliance with this procedure. 
(Ord. 99-03 § 1 (part))  
2.44.070 - Delegated authority to purchase. 
In order to expedite the making of small purchases, and to further the efficient administration of city affairs, the city council delegates to each department head the right to make purchases up to a limit of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), provided that the items so purchased under this authority are within the category of items specified in the budget of the city as approved by the city council. 
(Ord. 99-03 § 1 (part))  
2.44.080 - Exceptions. 
 A. Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, Section 2.44.030, 2.44.040, 2.44.050, and 2.44.060 shall not apply to any contract subject to Government Code Sections 4525 through 4528 (pertaining to services of architects, engineers, lawyers, etc.), Public Contracts Code Section 20161 (c) (pertaining to maintenance and repair of streets and sewers), and Public Contracts Code Section 20168 (pertaining to emergency work). This chapter shall not apply to contracts for ?public projects? as defined in Public Contracts Code Section 20161 to mean any construction, erection, alteration, renovation, improvement, demolition or repair work involving any facility owned, leased or operated by the city, including the furnishing of supplies or materials for any such project, including maintenance or repair of streets or sewers. ?Public project? does not include maintenance work. 
B.  This chapter shall not apply to expenditures of any federal or state grant funds. All applicable federal and state rules and regulations will regulate these funds. 
(Ord. 99-03 § 1 (part))  
2.44.090 - Gratuities. 
The acceptance of any gratuity in the form of cash, merchandise, or any other thing of value by an official or employee of the city from a vendor or contractor, or prospective vendor or contractor, shall be a cause for disciplinary action. 
(Ord. 99-03 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 2.46 - PUBLIC PROJECT CONTRACTS 
Sections: 
 
2.46.010 - Public project defined. 
"Public project" within the meaning of this chapter shall be defined by reference to the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act (Public Contract Code 20161). 
(Ord. 99-03 § 2 (part))  
2.46.020 - Intent—Compliance with state policy. 
It is intended by the ordinance codified in this chapter to bring the city into compliance with the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act, contained in the Public Contract Code Section 22010 et seq., and to provide for the letting of small public project contracts in this city subject to and in accordance with the act as in effect at the effective date of the adoption of this chapter. The city shall comply in all respects with the Public Construction Cost Accounting Policies and procedures as promulgated by the State Controller and shall cooperate with the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission in any review of the city's accounting procedures conducted by the commission. 
(Ord. 99-03 § 2 (part))  
2.46.030 - Informal bidding—When allowed. 
 A. Public projects of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or less may be performed by city employees by force account or negotiated contract. 
B.  Public projects of seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) or less may be let to contract by informal procedures as set forth in Article 3 of Chapter 2 of the Public Contract Code commencing with Section 22030. 
(Ord. 99-03 § 2 (part))  
2.46.040 - Formal bidding—When required. 
Public projects of more than seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) shall, except as otherwise provided in Article 3 of Chapter 2 of the Public Contract Code, commencing with Section 22030, be let to contract by formal bidding procedures as set forth in said article, particularly Section 22037. 
(Ord. 99-03 § 2 (part))  
2.46.050 - List of qualified contractors. 
The city shall maintain a list of qualified contractors, identified according to categories of work. The development and maintenance of the list shall meet the minimum criteria as determined by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission. 
(Ord. 99-03 § 2 (part))  
2.46.060 - Informal bid invitation. 
A.  Except in the case that the product or service sought is proprietary, all contractors on the list for the category of work being bid, or all construction trade journals specified by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission, or both, shall be mailed a notice inviting informal bids. 
B.  All mailings of notices inviting informal bids shall be completed not less than ten (10) calendar days before bids are due and shall include a description of the project in general terms, how to obtain more detailed information about the project, and state the time and place for submission of the bids. 
C.  The city council may delegate the authority to bid informal contracts to the public works director, city manager or other appropriate person. 
D.  If all bids received are in excess of seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00), the city council may, if it determines the cost estimate by the city to be reasonable, award the contract by a four-fifths vote, at eighty thousand dollars ($80,000.00) or less to the lowest responsible bidder. 
(Ord. 99-03 § 2 (part))  
2.46.070 - Council approval for exceptions to informal and formal bid procedures. 
Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, observance of the informal and/or formal bidding procedures prescribed herein shall not be required when the city council determines by resolution that such procedures would be unavailing or would not produce a competitive advantage, and the advertisement for bids would therefore be undesirable, impractical or impossible. Such resolution may be made before or contemporaneously with the city council's approval of the contract. 
(Ord. 99-03 § 2 (part))  
2.46.080 - Exceptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to public project contracts funded by means of any federal or state grant programs. All applicable federal and state rules and regulations will regulate these contracts. 
(Ord. 99-03 § 2 (part))  
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 3.04 - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.04.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the real property transfer tax ordinance of the city of Orland. It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. 
(Prior code § 3400)  
3.04.020 - Documentary stamp tax— Rate of tax. 
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents ($0.275) for each five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fractional part thereof. 
(Prior code § 3401)  
3.04.030 - Payment of tax. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.04.020 of this chapter be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. 
(Prior code § 3402)  
3.04.040 - Exclusion of security instrument. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. 
(Prior code § 3403)  
3.04.050 - Nonliability of public agency for tax. 
The United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia shall not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter with respect to any deed, instrument or writing to which it is a party, but the tax may be collected by assessment from any other party liable therefor. 
(Prior code § 3404)  
3.04.060 - Exclusion of certain instruments under bankruptcy proceedings. 
A.  Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment; 
1.  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended; 
2.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title II of the United States Code, as amended; 
3.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title II of the United States Code, as amended; or 
4.  Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected. 
B.  Subsections (A)(1) through (4), inclusive, of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. 
(Prior code § 3405)  
3.04.070 - Exclusion of certain instruments made under orders of Securities and Exchange Commission. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if: 
A.  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935; 
B.  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; 
C.  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. 
(Prior code § 3406)  
3.04.080 - Exclusion of certain transfers of interest in partnership. 
A.  In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if: 
1.  Such partnership (or another partnership is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and 
2.  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
B.  If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
C.  Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(Prior code § 3407)  
3.04.090 - Administration of tax by county recorder. 
The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Prior code § 3408)  
3.04.100 - Claims for refund. 
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. 
(Prior code § 3409)  
Chapter 3.08 - SALES AND USE TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.08.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the uniform local sales and use tax ordinance. 
(Prior code § 3101)  
3.08.020 - Rate. 
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. 
(Prior code § 3102)  
3.08.030 - Purpose. 
The city council hereby declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions of this chapter be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
B.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
C.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes; 
D.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3104)  
3.08.040 - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this chapter provided that if this city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3105)  
3.08.050 - Sales tax. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.08.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3106)  
3.08.060 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Prior code § 3107)  
3.08.070 - Use tax. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in Section 3.08.020 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Prior code § 3108)  
3.08.080 - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Prior code § 3109)  
3.08.090 - Limitations on adoption of state law. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "State" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of this code; the substitution shall not be made in Section 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Prior code § 3110)  
3.08.100 - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3111)  
3.08.110 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city, in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
D.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Prior code § 3113(1))  
3.08.120 - Amendments. 
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3115)  
3.08.130 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Prior code § 3116)  
3.08.140 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 96-11 § 8: prior code § 3117)  
Chapter 3.10 - TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX 
 
3.10.010 - Title and applicability. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance." This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city of Orland. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 1)  
3.10.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall be defined as set forth in this chapter, except that any term or phrase not defined in this chapter shall have the same meaning as that term or phrase is defined in the California Revenue and Taxation Code, Division 2, Parts 1.6 and 1.7: 
"Chapter" means this Chapter 3.10 of the Orland Municipal Code, codifying the Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance. 
"City" means the City of Orland. 
"Operative date" means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than one hundred ten (110) days after the adoption of this chapter, November 8, 2016, pursuant to Taxation and Revenue Code Section 7265. The provisions of this chapter shall not take effect until the operative date. 
"Ordinance" means the "Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance." 
"State" means the State of California. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 1)  
3.10.030 - Purpose. 
This ordinance, codified in this chapter, is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and the ordinance shall be interpreted liberally in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To maintain and preserve city of Orland general fund public safety services, including fire suppression, acquisition and maintenance of fire protection equipment, support and training for fire personnel, capital equipment needs for police protection and public works, and other safety related services within and for the city. 
B.  To impose a retail transaction and use tax in to be applied throughout the entire territory of the city to the fullest extent permitted by law and accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code (the "Transactions and Use Tax Law") and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the city to adopt this general tax ordinance if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose. 
C.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California (contained in Part 1 (commencing with Revenue and Taxation Code Section 6001) insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
D.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure that can be administered and collected by the state board of equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the state board of equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes. 
E.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes and, at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
F.  To adopt by reference the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 7261 and 7262, as now in effect or as later amended, as deemed by so deemed by Revenue and Taxation Code section 7262.2. 
G.  To provide transactions and use tax revenue to the city to be used for the general governmental purposes of the city, with any transactions and use tax revenue received being placed into the city's general fund. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 1)  
3.10.040 - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the state board of equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the state board of equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such contract. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 1)  
3.10.050 - Transactions tax rate. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a transactions tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of one-half of one percent (0.50%) of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail within the territory of the city on and after the operative date of this chapter. 
"Transaction" or "transactions" as used in this chapter shall have the same meaning respectively as the words "sale" or "sales," and the word "transactor" as used in this part has the same meaning as "seller," as "sale" or "sales" and "seller" are used in Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of this division. 
This rate is in addition to any sales, transaction and use tax rate previously adopted by the city. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 1)  
3.10.060 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his, her or its agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the state board of equalization. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 1)  
3.10.070 - Use tax rate. 
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of this chapter for storage use or other consumption in the territory of the city at the rate of one-half of one percent (0.50%) of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
This rate is in addition to any sales, transaction and use tax rate previously adopted by the city. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 1)  
3.10.080 - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, and except insofar as they are consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 1)  
3.10.090 - Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code: 
A.  Wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the city shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when: 
1.  The word "state" is used as a part of the title of the state controller, state treasurer, state board of control, state board of equalization, state treasury, or the constitution of the state of California. 
2.  The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city, or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the state board of equalization in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter. 
3.  In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to: 
a.  Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible, personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; or, 
b.  Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provision of that code. 
4.  In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
B.  The word "city" shall be substituted for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Revenue and Taxation Code Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Revenue and Taxation Code Section 6203. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 1)  
3.10.100 - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 1)  
3.10.110 - Exemptions and exclusions. 
A.  There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law (Part 1.5 (commencing with Section 7200)) or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax. 
B.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from all of the following: 
1.  Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of the state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
2.  Sales of property to be used outside the city, which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to that point by the retailer or his or her agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For purposes of this subsection, "delivery" to a point outside the city shall be satisfied: 
a.  With respect to "delivery" of vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that the address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence. 
b.  With respect to "delivery" of commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address. 
3.  The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
4.  A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of that property for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
5.  For the purposes of subparagraphs 3. and 4. of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not that right is exercised. 
C.  There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property all of the following: 
1.  The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance. 
2.  Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft, and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government, is exempt from the use tax. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 6366 and 6366.1. 
3.  If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
4.  If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
5.  For purposes of subparagraphs 3. and 4. of this subsection, the storage, use, or other consumption of, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not the right is exercised. 
6.  Except as provided in subparagraph 7., a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer. 
7.  "A retailer engaged in business in the city" shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Chapter 2 of Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel or aircraft at an address in the city. 
D.  Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax or any transactions tax, or to reimbursement for a transactions tax, paid to a district or retailer in a district imposing a transactions and use tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 1)  
3.10.120 - Amendments. 
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not consistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter; provided, however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter. 
The city council or the city's voters may amend this chapter to comply with applicable law or as may be otherwise necessary to further the ordinance's stated purposes. However, as required by Article XIII C of the California Constitution, no amendment to this chapter may increase the rates of the taxes authorized by this chapter unless such amendment is submitted and approved by the voters. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 1)  
3.10.130 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected under this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 1)  
3.10.140 - Annual public reports. 
On or before each anniversary of the operative date, the city shall complete a study and produce a report reviewing the collection, management and expenditure of revenue from the transaction and use tax and shall present a report explaining and providing an overview of the same at an open and public meeting of the city council. This report shall be a public document and will be posted on the city website. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 1)  
3.10.150 - Declaration. 
The proceeds of the taxes imposed by this chapter may be used for any lawful purpose of the city, as authorized by ordinance, resolution or act of the city council. These taxes are not special taxes within the meaning of Section 1(d) of Article XIIIC of the California Constitution, but are general taxes imposed for general government purposes. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 1)  
3.10.160 - Election date. 
The date of election for approval of this chapter shall be November 8, 2016. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 1)  
Chapter 3.12 - HOTEL USER TAX* 
Sections: 
 
3.12.010 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter. 
"Hotel" means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by hotel users for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, bed and breakfast, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or other lodging including but not limited to a camping site or a space at a campground or recreational vehicle park, or other similar structure or portion thereof. 
"Hotel user" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a hotel user until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a hotel user, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered. 
"Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
"Operator" means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee, in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purpose of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
"Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
"Tax administrator" means the city treasurer. 
(Ord. 98-04 § 1 (part))  
3.12.020 - Tax imposed. 
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel located in the incorporated portion of the city, each hotel user is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of twelve (12) percent of the rent charged by the operator. Such tax constitutes a debt owed by the hotel user to the city, which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The hotel user shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the hotel user ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the treasurer shall require that such tax be paid directly to the treasurer of the city. 
(Ord. 2007-03 § 3; Ord. 98-04 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2018-07 , § 1)  
3.12.030 - Exemptions. 
Timeshare and specific campgrounds as stated in California Revenue and Taxation Code 7280. 
(Ord. 98-04 § 1 (part))  
3.12.040 - Operator's duties. 
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every hotel user. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each hotel user shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. 98-04 § 1 (part))  
3.12.050 - Registration. 
Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or within thirty (30) days after commencing business, whichever is later, the operator of any hotel shall register that fact with the tax administrator and obtain from the tax administrator a hotel user registration certificate to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Said certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
A.  The name of the operator; 
B.  The address of the hotel; 
C.  The date upon which the certificate was issued; 
D.  "The Hotel Users Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Hotel Users Tax Ordinance by registering with the tax administrator for the purpose of collecting from hotel users the hotel users tax and remitting said tax to the tax administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable law, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit." 
(Ord. 98-04 § 1 (part))  
3.12.060 - Reporting and remitting. 
Each operator shall on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for hotel user occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder in order to ensure collection of the tax and the tax administrator may require further information in the return. Returns and payment are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. 
(Ord. 98-04 § 1 (part))  
3.12.070 - Penalties and interest. 
A.  Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
B.  Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten (10) percent penalty first imposed. 
C.  Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section. 
D.  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of the penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
E.  Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. 
(Ord. 98-04 § 1 (part))  
3.12.080 - Failure to collect and report tax—Determination of tax by tax administrator. 
A.  If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner deemed best to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator shall procure such facts and information upon which to base the assessments of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, the tax administrator shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address. 
B.  Such operator may within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing on the amount assessed is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days' written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place in said notice why said amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. 
C.  At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen (15) days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.12.090. 
(Ord. 98-04 § 1 (part))  
3.12.090 - Appeal. 
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amounts of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen (15) days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The city council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at the operator's last known place of address. The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. 
(Ord. 98-04 § 1 (part))  
3.12.100 - Records. 
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as the operator may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. 98-04 § 1 (part))  
3.12.110 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within ninety (90) days of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator. 
B.  An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted, the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received, when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a hotel user; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the hotel user or credited to rent subsequently payable by the hotel user to the operator. 
C.  A hotel user may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the hotel user directly to the tax administrator or when the hotel user having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the hotel user has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
D.  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Ord. 98-04 § 1 (part))  
3.12.120 - Actions to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by any hotel user under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the hotel user to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. 
(Ord. 98-04 § 1 (part))  
3.12.130 - Violations—Misdemeanor. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefor by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.  Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as aforesaid. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. 
(Ord. 98-04 § 1 (part))  
Title 5 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 5.04 - BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY 
Sections:  
Article I. - General Provisions and Administration 
 
5.04.010 - Purpose—Revenue measure. 
This chapter is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes, and is not intended for regulation. 
(Prior code § 7100)  
5.04.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, the words and phrases used herein shall have meanings as hereinafter set forth in this section. 
"Business" means and includes professions, trades and occupations and all and every kind of calling whether or not carried out for profit. 
"Employee" means all persons engaged in the operation or conduct of any business, whether as owner, any member or owner, any member of owner's family, partner, agent, manager, solicitor and any and all other persons employed or working in such business. 
"Fixed place of business" means the premises occupied in the city for the particular purpose of conducting a business thereat and regularly kept open for that purpose with a competent person in attendance for the purpose of attending to such business. 
Gender. Whenever the masculine is used in this chapter, it shall also include the feminine and neuter. Whenever the singular is used, it shall also include the plural. 
"Newly established business" means a business in existence and operation for less than three months. 
"Peddler" means any hawker, vendor, or other persons who go from house to house or place to place, in or along the streets within the city, selling and making immediate delivery of any goods, wares, merchandise, or anything of value, in possession of the peddler, to persons other than manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers or retailers in such commodity. 
"Person" means and includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts business or common law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city, other than as an employee. 
"Photographer" means a person, or firm who maintains a permanent or occasional temporary studio location within the city for purposes of taking photographs and/or making portraits in exchange for payment. 
"Sale" means and includes the transfer in any manner or by any means whatsoever, of title to property for a consideration; the serving, supplying or furnishing for a consideration of any property; and a transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred and the seller retains the title as security for payment of the price, shall likewise be deemed a sale. The foregoing definition shall not be deemed to exclude any transaction which is, or which in effect results in a sale within the contemplation of law. 
"Solicitor" means every agent, canvasser, or other person who travels from place to place or house to house and solicits or takes orders for, or canvasses for, or makes demonstrations of any goods, wares, merchandise, or other things or articles to be performed in the future, or for subscription to periodicals, or tickets of admissions to entertainment, or membership in any club. 
"Vehicle" means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public street or highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Prior code §§ 7101—7107, 7109, 7110)  
5.04.030 - License required. 
A.  There are imposed upon the businesses specified herein, license taxes in the amounts hereinafter prescribed. No person shall transact and carry on any business, trade or profession, calling or occupation in the city without first having procured a license or without first having paid to the city the license tax provided herein. 
B.  This section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city if such requirement conflicts with applicable statutes of the United States or the state of California. 
(Prior code § 7111 (part))  
5.04.040 - License—Compliance with certain conditions required. 
A.  No license shall be issued hereunder until all applicable regulations under other chapters of this code have been complied with. 
B.  Licenses shall be granted only to those persons or firms whose application shows compliance with the following: 
1.  That the applicant is a resident of the state of California; a California corporation; or a nonresident person or corporation who is duly qualified to do business in the state of California and has supplied proof of same; and 
2.  That the applicant has a permanent address and telephone number within the state of California or has appointed a resident agent for service of process and supplies the name and address of such agent. 
(Prior code §§ 7108, 7111 (part))  
5.04.050 - Application—Contents—License issuance. 
A.  Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this chapter shall make application for same to the city treasurer, or her designee. Such application shall be a written statement upon a form provided by such collector and shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury, or sworn to be the applicant before a person authorized to administer oaths. The application shall set forth such information as may be necessary to properly determine the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant. If the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant is based upon the average number of employees, such application shall set forth the average number of employees for the applicable period as provided in Section 5.04.380. 
B.  Contents. All licenses shall be prepared and issued by the city, upon payment of the sums to be paid therefor, and completion of an application for a business license and containing such information as the city may require, including but not limited to: 
1.  The name of the person to whom the license is to be issued; 
2.  The kind or kinds of business license; 
3.  The location of such business; 
4.  The date of the expiration of such license; 
5.  Such other information as the treasurer may require. 
C.  There shall be charged an administrative fee of fifty cents ($.50) for copies of each business license and/or application requested. 
D.  Nothing therein shall require the city to reveal any information or data acquired in determining compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
E.  Thereafter, upon completion of the application and payment of any sums required, the city shall issue a business license. 
(Prior code §§ 7112, 7124)  
5.04.060 - Initial application for license—Determination of tax. 
The minimum license tax thus paid shall be tentative only, and such person shall, within thirty (30) days after the expiration of the period for which such license was issued, furnish the city treasurer with a sworn statement upon a form, to be provided by the city treasurer, setting forth such information as may be therein required and showing, during the period of such license, the average number of employees, the number of vehicles used by such persons or the number of tables, alleys, or other devices used for any game, etc., or other applicable basis. The license tax shall be ascertained and paid upon such applicable basis, credit being given for the minimum license tax previously paid. The number of vehicles used in computing the amount of license tax payable under this chapter shall be determined by the average number of vehicles regularly used in the conduct of such business in the city. 
(Prior code § 7125)  
5.04.070 - Licenses—Branch establishments. 
Separate licenses must be maintained for each branch establishment or location of the business engaged in, as if each such branch establishment or location were a separate business, and each license shall authorize the licensee to engage only in the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license; provided, that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter, shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. 
(Prior code § 7118)  
5.04.080 - Licenses—Multiple businesses at one location. 
If two or more businesses are conducted on the same premises by the same person, and such businesses are subject to tax under more than one section of this chapter, there shall be but one license issued, based on the following means of computation of total license fee: 
Type of 
License Fee 	Means of 
Computation 
A. 	Two or more businesses with license fee based on number of employees. 	The principal business conducted at the location is the factor determining applicable fee section. 
B. 	Two or more businesses with license fee based on flat rate schedule. 	Highest fee applicable at one hundred (100) percent plus all others at fifty (50) percent of flat rate, combined to represent total license tax. 
C. 	Any combination of the above. 	Fee based on employee rate and flat rate computed separately, then combined to arrive at total license tax. 
 
(Prior code § 7119)  
5.04.090 - Duplicate licenses. 
Duplicate licenses may be issued by the city treasurer, or her designee, to replace any license previously issued which has been lost or destroyed, upon the licensee filing an affidavit attesting to such fact, and at the time of filing such affidavit paying to the city treasurer the sum of two dollars ($2.00). 
(Prior code § 7120)  
5.04.100 - License—Renewal. 
In all cases, the applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit to the city treasurer for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant, a written statement, upon a form to be provided by the city treasurer, signed under penalty of perjury, or sworn to before a person authorized to administer oaths. Such statement shall set forth such information concerning the type of the applicant's business, the number of employees during the preceding year therein or other applicable basis as may be required by the city treasurer to enable him to ascertain the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7126)  
5.04.110 - License—Transfer. 
No license issued pursuant to this chapter be transferred, except that when a licensee transfers his business from one location to another in the city the license previously issued may be amended to authorize the conduct of the business at the new location. The license transfers and amendments herein authorized may be obtained upon application therefor to the city treasurer and the payment of the sum of two dollars ($2.00). 
(Prior code § 7121)  
5.04.120 - License—Posting or display. 
All licenses must be kept and posted in the following manner: 
A.  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on. 
B.  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license upon his person at all times while transacting and carrying on such business. 
C.  Any licensee to whom a license has been issued, which license is determined by the number of vehicles used by said licensee in the conduct of business in this city, shall prominently display within each such vehicle, a sticker, device, sign or license facsimile used by the city treasurer for identifying such business. 
(Prior code § 7122)  
5.04.130 - License—Revocation. 
Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the city treasurer upon the failure on the part of the licensee to pay the charges imposed in this chapter, or to file the application or statements required by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7132)  
5.04.140 - Exclusions. 
Except as may be otherwise specifically provided in this chapter the terms of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to apply to any of the following persons: 
A.  Any public utility which makes payments to the city under a franchise or similar agreement; 
B.  Banks, including national banking associations, to the extent that a city may not levy a license tax upon them under the provisions of California Constitution Article 13, Section 27; 
C.  Insurance companies and associations to the extent that a city may not levy a license tax upon them under the provisions of California Constitution Article 13, Section 28; 
D.  Any person whom the city is not authorized to license under any law or constitution of the United States or the state of California; 
E.  Commercial Travelers. The city treasurer may require the filing of a verified statement from any person claiming to be excluded by the provisions of this subsection which statement shall set forth all the facts upon which the exclusion is claimed; 
F.  Any business paying to the city an annual franchise fee based upon gross receipts shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7156)  
5.04.150 - Exemptions designated. 
The following are exempted from the payment of a license tax under this chapter: 
A.  Any charitable institution, organization or association organized and conducted for charitable purposes only. This exemption shall not apply to promoters employed by charitable organizations; 
B.  Any person conducting, carrying on or staging any concert, exhibition, lecture, dance, amusement or entertainment where the receipts, if any derived therefrom, are to be used solely for charitable or benevolent purposes and not for private gain or for the private gain of any person in whole or in part; 
C.  Any religious, fraternal, educational, military, state, county or municipal organization or association conducting, carrying on or staging any amusement or entertainment, concert, exhibition, lecture, dance or athletic event, when the receipts derived are to be wholly for the benefit of such organization and not in the whole or any part for private gain of any person; 
D.  None of the license taxes provided for by this chapter shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of the equal protection and due process clauses of the Constitution of the United States and the state of California. In any case where a license is believed by a licensee or applicant for a license to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of such constitutional clauses, he may apply to the administrator for an adjustment of the tax. Such application may be made before, at, or within six months after payment of the prescribed license tax. The applicant shall, by sworn statement and supporting testimony, show his method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the administrator may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden or violation. The administrator shall then conduct an investigation and, after having first obtained the written approval of the city attorney, shall fix as the license tax for the applicant, an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory and if the license tax has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the license tax so fixed. In fixing the license tax to be charged, the administrator shall have the power to base the license tax upon a percentage of gross receipts or any other measure which will assure that the license tax assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of a like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the license tax as prescribed by this chapter; 
E.  Any honorably discharged or honorably relieved soldier, sailor or marine of the United States who is physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor, and who is a voter of this state, distributing circulars, or hawking, peddling or vending any goods, wares or merchandise owned by him, except spiritous, malt, vinous or other intoxicating liquor; 
F.  Any resident natural person whose annual gross receipts from any and all business are five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less; 
G.  Any farmer or grower whose home-grown products are sold within the city. 
(Prior code § 7155)  
5.04.160 - Claims for exemption. 
Any person desiring to claim exemption from the payment of a license tax and to have a free license issued to him shall make application therefor upon forms prescribed by the city treasurer and shall furnish such information and make such affidavits as may be required. Upon the determination being made that the applicant is entitled to exemption from the payment of license taxes for any reason set forth in this chapter, the city treasurer, upon the applicant complying with the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city which may require a permit for the doing of the particular act proposed to be done shall issue a free license to such person which shall show upon its face that the license tax is exempt. 
(Prior code § 7157)  
5.04.170 - Revocation of exemption. 
The city treasurer may revoke any exempt license granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter upon information that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided therein. In such revocation the procedure to be followed and right of appeal shall be as provided in Sections 5.04.240 and 5.40.250 of this chapter for determination of a disputed tax. 
(Prior code § 7158)  
5.04.180 - License tax payment—Due when—Delinquency penalty. 
A.  Payment. All license taxes due hereunder shall be paid in advance, in lawful money of the United States, at the office of the city treasurer. 
B.  Due Date—Delinquency Penalty. All license taxes due hereunder shall be due and payable, and delinquent as follows: 
1.  Quarterly License. Due on the first day of January, April, July and October, and delinquent at five p.m. on the twentieth day of the first month in which the quarterly license is due. 
2.  Annual License Fee. All license fees are due on the first day of January and delinquent on the thirty-first day of January each year. 
3.  Any license fee delinquent shall be assessed a fifty (50) percent late penalty. 
(Prior code §§ 7113, 7114)  
5.04.190 - License tax payment—Proration. 
No proration of any license due hereunder shall be made for any portion of the period for which a license is payable except in the case of a first annual license the tax may be prorated as follows: 
A.  If application is made during the quarter beginning January 1st, one hundred (100) percent of such fee shall be paid; 
B.  If application is made during the quarter beginning April 1st, seventy-five (75) percent of such fee shall be paid; 
C.  If application is made during the quarter beginning July 1st, fifty (50) percent of such fee shall be paid; 
D.  If application is made during the quarter beginning October 1st, twenty-five (25) percent of such fee shall be paid. 
(Prior code § 7115)  
5.04.200 - Refunds. 
No refunds will be made on any amount paid as a license tax, except in case of an error on the part of the city in the determination of the amount of the license tax, in the event of double payment for a license, or in case of an illegally collected license tax. 
(Prior code § 7123)  
5.04.210 - License tax and issuance limitations. 
No greater or lesser amount of money shall be charged or received for any license tax than provided for in this chapter, and no license shall be sold or issued for any period of time other than provided in this chapter; provided, that this section shall not refer to such penalties as are provided for in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7117)  
5.04.220 - Statements not conclusive. 
No statement shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of same preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable under this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7127)  
5.04.230 - Information confidential. 
It is unlawful for the license administrator or any person having an administrative duty under the provisions of this chapter, to make known in any manner whatever, the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain a license provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent: 
A.  The disclosure to or the examination of records and equipment by another city official, employee or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of this chapter or collecting taxes imposed hereunder; 
B.  The disclosure of the names and addresses of persons to whom licenses have been issued and the general type or nature of their license and fee assessed; 
C.  The disclosure by way of public meeting or otherwise of such information as may be necessary to the city council in order to permit it to be fully advised as to the facts when a taxpayer files a claim for refund of license taxes or submits an offer or compromise with regard to a claim asserted against the business license holder by the city for license taxes or when acting upon any other matter; and 
D.  The disclosure of general statistics regarding license fees collected or business done in the city. 
(Prior code § 7128)  
5.04.240 - Specific determinations of license tax. 
A.  If any person fails to file any required statement within the time prescribed, or, if after demand therefor has been made by the city treasurer, such person fails to file a corrected statement within fifteen (15) days after notification to do so, or it appears to the satisfaction of the tax collector that a statement filed does not set forth the true facts of the business for which a license is required, the city treasurer shall determine the amount of license tax due from such person by means of such information as it may be able to obtain. 
B.  In case such determination is made, the city treasurer shall give notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States post office at Orland, postage prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at the address appearing on last license or application. Such person may, within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing of such notice, make application in writing to the city treasurer for a hearing on the amount of the license tax. If such application is made, the city treasurer shall give not less than five days' written notice in the manner prescribed herein, to the licensee to show cause at a time and place fixed in such notice, why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such license. At such hearing the licensee may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax should not be fixed as the license tax. After such hearing, the city treasurer shall determine the proper tax to be charged and shall forthwith give written notice to the licensee in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax. 
C.  If application by the licensee for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the license tax determined by the city treasurer shall become final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 7129)  
5.04.250 - Appeal. 
A.  Any person aggrieved by any decision of an administrative officer or agency with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue a license, or the amount of a license tax, may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen (15) days of such decision. The council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States post office at Orland, postage prepaid. 
B.  The notice shall be addressed to such person at the address appearing on last license or application. The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the applicant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. 
C.  The amount of any license tax finally determined as provided in this section, shall be due and payable as of the date the original license fee was due and payable, together with any penalties that may be due thereon; provided, however, if the amount of such license tax shall be fixed in accordance with the original statement of the applicant, then no penalty shall attach by reason of any delinquency. 
(Prior code § 7130)  
5.04.260 - Additional power of city treasurer. 
In addition to all other powers conferred, the city treasurer shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required sworn statement for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, and in such case to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued; and shall have the further power, with the consent of council, to compromise any claim as to amount of license tax due. 
(Prior code § 7131)  
5.04.270 - Chapter provisions not exclusive. 
Any person required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any business under this chapter shall not be relieved from the payment of any license tax for the privilege of doing such business which has been required under any other ordinance of the city, and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of such other ordinance. This section shall not apply to inspection or permit fees. 
(Prior code § 7159)  
5.04.280 - Effect on past actions and obligations. 
Neither the adoption of this chapter, nor its superseding of any portion of any other ordinance of the city shall in any manner be construed to affect prosecution for violation of any other ordinance committed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or any penal provision applicable to any such violation, nor be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required by any ordinance to be posted, filed or deposited, and all rights and obligations thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Prior code § 7160)  
5.04.290 - License tax as debt. 
The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed a debt to the city, and any person carrying on any business without first having procured a license from the city to do so shall be liable to an action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of the license tax and penalties imposed on such business. 
(Prior code § 7161)  
5.04.300 - Remedies cumulative. 
All remedies prescribed under this chapter shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7162)  
5.04.310 - Effect of mistake. 
In no case shall any mistake made by the city in stating the amount of a license tax prevent or prejudice the collection by the city of what shall be actually due from anyone carrying on a business subject to a license tax under this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7163)  
5.04.320 - Evidence of liability. 
In any action brought under or arising out of any of the provisions of this chapter, or of any ordinance imposing a license tax, the fact that a party thereto represented same as engaged in any business or calling for the transaction of which a license is required, or that such a party exhibited a sign indicating such business or calling, shall be conclusive evidence of the liability of such party to pay for a license for such business. 
(Prior code § 7164)  
5.04.330 - Administration of oaths. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the treasurer, deputies and authorized agents of the treasurer, shall be authorized to administer oaths. 
(Prior code § 7165)  
5.04.340 - Enforcement duty. 
It shall be the duty of the treasurer, the deputies and authorized agents of the treasurer, and/or employees of same, and they and each of them are directed to enforce each and all provisions of this chapter. The treasurer in the exercise of duties imposed upon same under this chapter, and acting through deputies or duly authorized assistants, shall examine or cause to be examined all places of business in the city to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter have been complied with. 
(Prior code § 7166)  
5.04.350 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  The responsibility for enforcing of the provisions of this chapter dealing specifically with nonpayment of business license fees shall be with the city administrator. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of the city any material factor procuring a license hereunder provided for shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided in Section 1.12.020 of this code. 
B.  The remedies provided for in this chapter shall not be exclusive. The city administrator retains in his sole discretion the right to determine whether or not to proceed by way of civil action including but not limited to small claims action and any enforcement proceedings necessary to enforce any judgment therein obtained. 
(Prior code § 7167)  
Article II. - License Taxes Designated 
 
5.04.360 - License taxes fixed. 
The amount license taxes to be paid to the city by any person engaged in or carrying on any profession, trade, calling, occupation or business hereinafter designated is fixed and established as hereinafter in this article provided. Such license tax shall be paid by every person engaged in carrying on or maintaining any such profession, trade, occupation, calling or business in the city. For every person engaged in carrying on or maintaining any profession, trade, occupation, calling or business, the license tax shall be as set forth in the following sections of this article. 
(Prior code § 7137 (part))  
5.04.365 - Business license fee—Temporary fee applying to all businesses. 
A.  In addition to any fee to be paid in accordance with the provisions of this title, any business operating within the city of Orland shall pay an annual fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
B.  Subsection A of this section shall be of no further force or effect at two years from the date of adoption by the city council. 
(Ord. 2006-04 § 3)  
5.04.370 - Computation of tax for certain businesses and professions. 
A.  Every person conducting or carrying on any business, profession or occupation hereinafter enumerated shall pay an annual license tax based on the number employees, including professional members, as follows: 
1.  For one to five employees or members, forty dollars ($40.00); 
2.  For six to ten (10) employees or members, sixty-five dollars ($65.00); 
3.  For eleven (11) to fifteen (15) employees or members, ninety dollars ($90.00); 
4.  For sixteen (16) or more employees or members, one hundred fifteen dollars ($115.00). 
B.  Businesses and Professions Enumerated. 
Abstract and title; 
Accountant; 
Advertising agent; 
Appraiser; 
Architect; 
Artist; 
Assayer; 
Attorney at law; 
Auditor; 
Bacteriologist; 
Blueprinter; 
Book agent; 
Broker or commission agent other than real estate brokers and agents; 
Certified public accountant; 
Chemist; 
Chiropodist; 
Chiropractor; 
Civil, electrical, mining, chemical, structural, consulting or hydraulic engineer; 
Collection agency; 
Contractors; 
Credit reporting bureau; 
Dentist; 
Designer, illustrator or decorator; 
Detective agency and/or private patrol; 
Draftsman; 
Drugless practitioner; 
Electrologist; 
Engineer; 
Engraver; 
Entomologist; 
Feed, grain and fruit broker; 
Geologist; 
Illustrator or show card writer; 
Insurance or claims adjuster; 
Interpreter; 
Landscape gardener or architect; 
Lapidary; 
Masseuse; 
Mercantile agency; 
Morticians; 
Naturopath; 
Occultist; 
Optician; 
Optometrist; 
Physicians; 
Physiotherapist; 
Piano tuner; 
Public stenographer; 
Roentgenologist; 
Sign painter; 
Surgeon; 
Surveyor; 
Taxidermist; 
Termite inspector; 
Veterinarian; 
Every person conducting or carrying on the business of treating, curing, administering to or giving treatments to the sick, wounded or infirm for the purpose of bringing about their recovery, by any method or pursuant to any belief, doctrine or system other than those hereinabove specifically named and charging a fee or compensation therefor; 
Any other profession or semiprofession not otherwise classified in this article. 
(Ord. 2007-09 § 3 (part); prior code § 7141) 
( Ord. No. 2016-04 , § 1)  
5.04.380 - Determination of average number of employees. 
The average number of employees shall be determined by ascertaining the total number of hours of service performed by all employees during the year and dividing the total by the number of hours of service constituting the years' work by one full-time employee, according to the custom governing such employment. 
(Prior code § 7137 (part))  
5.04.390 - Advertising, outdoor. 
Every person conducting or carrying on the business of erecting, installing, maintaining or operating outdoor advertising, advertising structures, billboards, signboards or similar devices shall pay an annual license tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) plus five dollars ($5.00) per billboard, signboard or similar device over ten (10). 
(Prior code § 7143(a))  
5.04.400 - Advertising, handbills, peddlers and solicitors. 
Every person conducting or carrying on the business of distributing handbills, advertising throwaways and other similar types of advertising, peddling or soliciting business directly or for third parties, shall pay a license tax of ten dollars ($10.00) per day or seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per year. 
(Ord. 2007-09 § 3 (part): prior code § 7143(b))  
5.04.410 - Amusements. 
Every person conducting or carrying on any business hereinafter in this section mentioned, shall pay a license tax in the amount as set forth herein: 
A.  Maintaining a place where tables are used by the public for playing cards, and for the use of which a fee or compensation is charged the players: twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per year for the first table, plus fifteen dollars ($15.00) per year for each additional table, whether or not same is in actual use; 
B.  Any pool hall or billiard parlor: five dollars ($5.00) per year for each pool or billiard table; 
C.  Any ice or roller skating rink: twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per year. This shall not apply to any exhibition given in any restaurant, cafe, hotel or theater, when the public is not permitted to participate in such exhibition; 
D.  Any shooting gallery: twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per year; 
E.  In addition to any license required under this section, any place where dancing is permitted shall pay an additional twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per year; 
F.  Any public bowling alley shall pay an annual license tax of twenty dollars ($20.00) for the first alley plus five dollars ($5.00) for each additional alley; 
G.  This section shall not apply to any individual or firm whose business is limited exclusively to renting, leasing or operating coin-operated vending machines. 
(Prior code § 7144(a))  
5.04.420 - Amusements—Circuses, menageries, tent shows, theatricals. 
A.  Any circus, carnival or other similar exhibition shall pay a tax of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first day, plus fifty dollars ($50.00) for each additional day, and for each circus or menagerie parade or procession on, over or along any public street or highway of the city, by any person not having a license to exhibit such circus, carnival or other similar exhibit in said city, the license tax shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day; 
B.  When the carnival, circus or tent show license tax is paid, no additional license shall be required for shows, exhibitions, rides or devices within the carnival circus or tent show; 
C.  Any lecture or traveling theatrical performance under or surrounded or partially enclosed by canvas, such as comedy, spoken drama, opera or concert, shall pay a license tax of ten dollars ($10.00) for the first day and five dollars ($5.00) for each additional day; for any of such performances held in any public hall, club room, assembly hall or theater, where movable scenery and theatrical appliances are used, whether or not an admission fee is charged, ten dollars ($10.00) per day. The holder of a theater license shall not be required to procure an additional license to conduct or carry on any theatrical or vaudeville performance when such performance is conducted at any such theater so licensed; 
D.  Any concerts, lectures, motion pictures, indoor tennis matches, theatrical performances, vaudeville performances, or any similar type of entertainment not otherwise specifically licensed hereunder, where an admission fee is charged, the annual license tax therefor shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for a building with a seating capacity of one to five hundred (500) seats; forty dollars ($40.00) for a building with a seating capacity of five hundred one (501) to one thousand (1,000) seats; and sixty dollars ($60.00) for a building with a seating capacity of over one thousand (1,000) seats; 
E.  Any drive-in theater, an annual license tax of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) where there are less than five hundred (500) saleable car spaces; fifty dollars ($50.00) where there are less than one thousand (1,000) saleable car spaces, but more than five hundred (500) such spaces; and seventy-five dollars ($75.00) where there are in excess of one thousand (1,000) saleable car spaces; 
F.  Any concession or rides for children, including miniature train, merry-go-round, pony ride, speedway (small electric automobiles, small gasoline automobiles, pig slides, etc.) a license tax of thirty dollars ($30.00) per year; 
G.  Any rides other than carnivals for adults or concessions including carousel, loop-o-plane, aeroplane, Ferris wheel, sky flier, scooter, whip, toonerville, motorcycle ride, globe of death, magic carpet, ride-in-the-dark, or rides or devices of similar character, a license tax of one hundred dollars ($100.00) semiannually. 
(Prior code § 7144(b))  
5.04.430 - Amusements—Coin-operated vending machines excluded from Section 5.04.410. 
Every individual or firm whose business, within the city of Orland, is limited exclusively to renting, leasing or operating coin-operated vending machines, as that term is used in Section 16002.5 of the California Business and Professions Code, shall pay a licensed tax based on the gross receipts of such business as follows: 
Twenty dollars ($20.00) for annual gross receipts of zero to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); 
Thirty dollars ($30.00) for annual gross receipts of one thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00); 
Forty dollars ($40.00) for annual gross receipts of five thousand one dollars ($5,001.00) to fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00); 
Fifty dollars ($50.00) for annual gross receipts in excess of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00). 
(Ord. 2007-09 § 3 (part): prior code § 7144(c))  
5.04.440 - Astrology. 
Every person conducting, carrying on, practicing or professing to practice the business or art of astrology, palmistry, life-reading, fortunetelling, cartomancy, clairvoyance, clair-audience, crystal gazing, hypnotism, mediumship, prophecy, augury, divination, magic or necromancy, and who demands or receives a fee for the practice of exhibition thereof, at any place where an admission fee is charged, the tax shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year. 
(Prior code § 7145)  
5.04.450 - Bankruptcy sales, etc. 
Every person conducting or carrying on the business of owning, operating, opening, establishing, managing or having charge of any temporary location or place of business of any kind for the sale of any insolvent, bankrupt, fire damaged, or other similar goods, wares or merchandise, and every itinerant or transient merchant having a temporary place of business, but not having any continuous or permanent place of business in the city, who sells or offers for sale any insolvent, bankrupt, fire damaged, or other goods, wares or merchandise, shall pay a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day. 
(Prior code § 7147)  
5.04.460 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-04 , § 2, adopted April 18, 2016, repealed former § 5.04.460 which pertained to contractors, and derived from prior code § 7148; and Ord. No. 2006-06, § 3.  
5.04.470 - Hospitals, sanitarium, rest home, nursing home, asylum. 
Hospitals, sanitariums, rest homes, nursing homes, and asylums shall pay a license tax of thirty dollars ($30.00) per year for the first ten (10) beds; and for each additional bed in excess of ten (10) beds, three dollars ($3.00) per year per bed. This section shall not apply to nonprofit institutions exempted by the state of California. 
(Ord. 2007-09 § 3 (part): prior code § 7149)  
5.04.480 - Hotels, motels, apartment houses, rooming houses. 
Every person conducting or carrying on the business of operating any hotel, or motel or rooming house, boarding house, apartment house, lodging house, house court or bungalow court, or conducting or carrying on the business of letting or renting rooms, apartments or other accommodations for dwelling, sleeping, housekeeping or lodging, having five or more units or rooms shall pay an annual license tax computed as follows: 
A.  Five to nine rooms, twenty dollars ($20.00) per year; 
B.  Ten (10) to fourteen (14) rooms, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per year; 
C.  Fifteen (15) to nineteen (19) rooms, thirty dollars ($30.00) per year; 
D.  Twenty (20) or more rooms, thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per year. 
(Ord. 2007-09 § 3 (part): prior code § 7150)  
5.04.490 - House trailer and mobile home park. 
Every person conducting or carrying on the business of operating a trailer park, mobile home park, or other similar business, where the owners of house trailers or mobile homes are allowed to use space within the house trailer park or mobile home park through a lease, rental, or other similar agreement, shall pay an annual tax as follows for all rental spaces over four; 
A.  Five to nine spaces, twenty dollars ($20.00) per year; 
B.  Ten (10) to fourteen (14) spaces, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per year; 
C.  Fifteen (15) to nineteen (19) spaces, thirty dollars ($30.00) per year; 
D.  Twenty (20) or more spaces, thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per year. 
(Ord. 2007-09 § 3 (part): prior code § 7151)  
5.04.500 - Manufacturing, processing and wholesaling. 
Every person conducting or carrying on the business of manufacturing, processing, packaging or selling at wholesale, any goods, wares, merchandise and/or commodities, at a fixed place of business within the city of Orland, or conducting or carrying on the business of cold storage or refrigeration plant, shall pay an annual license tax as follows: 
A.  For one to five employees, forty dollars ($40.00); 
B.  For six to ten (10) employees, sixty-five dollars ($65.00); 
C.  For eleven (11) to fifteen (15) employees, ninety dollars ($90.00); 
D.  For sixteen (16) or more employees, one hundred fifteen dollars ($115.00). 
(Ord. 2007-09 § 3 (part): prior code § 7140)  
5.04.510 - Real estate brokers and agents. 
Every person conducting or carrying on the business of real estate broker, broker-salesman, salesman or agent, shall pay an annual license tax as follows; 
A.  For one to five employees, forty dollars ($40.00); 
B.  For six to ten (10) employees, sixty-five dollars ($65.00); 
C.  For eleven (11) to fifteen (15) employees, ninety dollars ($90.00); 
D.  For sixteen (16) or more employees, one hundred fifteen dollars ($115.00). 
(Ord. 2007-09 § 3 (part): prior code § 7142)  
5.04.520 - Retail sales and miscellaneous. 
Every person conducting or carrying on the business of selling at retail any goods, wares, merchandise or commodities, or conducting or carrying on any trade, occupation or business not otherwise specifically licensed by other sections of this chapter, shall pay an annual license tax as follows: 
A.  For one to five employees, forty dollars ($40.00); 
B.  For six to ten (10) employees, sixty-five dollars ($65.00); 
C.  For eleven (11) to fifteen (15) employees, ninety dollars ($90.00); 
D.  For sixteen (16) or more employees, one hundred fifteen dollars ($115.00). 
(Ord. 2007-09 § 3 (part): prior code § 7138)  
5.04.530 - Wholesale and retail delivery. 
Every person conducting or carrying on the business of transporting goods, wares, merchandise of any kind at wholesale or retail, or transportation of persons for hire, or who provides any by the use of vehicles in the city, shall pay an annual license tax of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per year. 
(Ord. 2007-09 § 3 (part): prior code § 7153)  
5.04.540 - Conflict of fees. 
Any conflict in this article as to the fees to be paid shall be resolved in favor of the highest amount calculated which amount shall prevail and shall be paid. 
(Prior code § 7139)  
Chapter 5.08 - BINGO 
Sections: 
 
5.08.010 - License required. 
No person shall conduct or participate in a bingo game which is not licensed pursuant to this code. 
(Prior code § 5500)  
5.08.020 - Application. 
A.  Each nonprofit, charitable organization seeking a license to conduct bingo games shall file with the chief of police an application and an annual license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the issuing of such license to each non-profit, charitable organization which it authorizes to conduct bingo games. An additional fee of one percent of monthly gross receipts over five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) derived from bingo games shall be collected monthly by the city from each nonprofit, charitable organization which it authorizes to conduct bingo games. 
B.  The application shall be filed at least twenty (20) working days prior to the initial games and shall include: 
1.  The name and address of the nonprofit, charitable organization which is seeking to conduct game(s); 
2.  The name and address of the nonprofit, charitable organization for whose benefit the game(s) is (are) conducted; 
3.  The names and addresses of the officers and members of the organization set forth pursuant to subsections (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section; 
4.  The building or location where the game(s) will be conducted; 
5.  The days or dates and hours when the game(s) will be conducted; 
6.  The rules and regulation of each type of bingo game(s) to be played; and 
7.  Such other information as the chief of police deems relevant to the enforcement of the requirements of this code. 
(Prior code § 5501)  
5.08.030 - Application fee. 
The application fee referred to in Section 5.08.020 of this code may be modified by resolution from time to time as deemed necessary by the Orland city council. 
(Prior code § 5517)  
5.08.040 - Investigation. 
The chief of police, fire chief and building inspector shall investigate the applicants and locations of the proposed game(s) to determine if the applicants meet the requirements of this code. 
(Prior code § 5502)  
5.08.050 - License issuance. 
Upon finding that the applicant meets the qualifications of this code, the chief of police shall issue a license to the nonprofit, charitable organization setting the location, times and other conditions necessary to comply with this code. 
(Prior code § 5503)  
5.08.060 - License revocation. 
The chief of police may, upon notice and opportunity to be heard, revoke or suspend any such license for cause. 
(Prior code § 5504)  
5.08.070 - License limitations—Nonprofit, charitable organizations. 
A license shall be granted only to organizations exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701(d) of Revenue and Taxation Code and a contribution or gift to which would be a charitable contribution under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. It shall be the duty of the applicant to supply and furnish proof that the applicant is a nonprofit, charitable organization within the meaning of California Revenue and Taxation Code and the Internal Revenue Code. This duty shall commence at the time applicant applies for a license to conduct bingo games and shall continue thereafter, or until one year after the last bingo game(s) was completed. 
(Prior code § 5505)  
5.08.080 - Minors participation prohibited. 
No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall be allowed to participate in any bingo games. 
(Prior code § 5506)  
5.08.090 - Ownership or leasing of premises. 
A nonprofit, charitable organization shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for the performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. 
(Prior code § 5507)  
5.08.100 - Open to public. 
All bingo games shall be open to the public and not just to the members of the nonprofit, charitable organization. 
(Prior code § 5508)  
5.08.110 - Operation of game(s). 
A bingo game(s) shall be operated and staffed only by members (eighteen (18) years of age or older) of the nonprofit, charitable organization which organize it. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game(s). Only the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game(s) shall operate such game(s), or participate in the promotion, supervision, or any other phase of the game(s). Members of the nonprofit, charitable organization operating the bingo game(s) shall not be allowed to participate in the playing of any bingo game(s) while such organization is operating it. 
(Ord. 96-11 § 10; prior code § 5509)  
5.08.120 - Financial interest prohibited. 
No individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity except the nonprofit, charitable organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. 
(Prior code § 5510)  
5.08.130 - Special account for funds. 
All profits derived from a bingo game(s) shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account, and profits shall be used only for charitable purposes or as herein provided: 
A.  Such proceeds may be used for prizes and a portion of such proceeds not to exceed twenty (20) percent of the proceeds after deduction for prizes, or two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per month, whichever is less, may be used for expenses for other organizations not exempt under Section 326.5(k)(2) of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
B.  If the monthly gross receipts from bingo game(s) of an organization exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) a minimum of ten (10) percent of the proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes. 
(Ord. 96-11 § 11; prior code § 5511)  
5.08.140 - Physical presence required. 
No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. 
(Prior code § 5512)  
5.08.150 - Prizes. 
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. 
(Prior code § 5513)  
5.08.160 - Number of games. 
No organization licensed to operate bingo game(s) will be allowed to conduct any more than twenty (20) single games on any one date. 
(Prior code § 5514)  
5.08.170 - Recordkeeping. 
Licensees shall keep and maintain full, complete and accurate records and accounts and shall include in such accounts, the amount of money obtained from the players, the amount of money or type of value or prizes for each game played, and the disposition of all funds generated by the conduct of bingo game(s). The city shall have the right to inspect such records at any reasonable time. 
(Prior code § 5515)  
5.08.180 - Violations—Penalties. 
Any person, including a corporation who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as set forth if Section 1.12.010 of this code; that is to say, such punishment shall be a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Prior code § 5516)  
Chapter 5.12 - CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES 
Sections:  
Article I. - Purpose 
 
5.12.010 - Purpose. 
The city council finds that the development of cable communications systems has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon the residents of Orland. The city council further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers governing the installation, construction, operation and maintenance of cable communications systems which should be vested in the city and such persons as the city shall designate. It is the intent of this chapter to provide for and specify the means to attain the best possible public interest and public purpose in these matters and any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include this finding as an integral part thereof. 
(Prior code § 15001)  
Article II. - Definitions 
 
5.12.020 - Definitions. 
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the definitions set forth in this section shall govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this chapter. 
"Basic cable service" means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals. 
"Broadcast signal" means a television or audio signal originating from a broadcast facility licensed by the FCC that is transmitted over the air to a wide geographic audience, is intended for reception by the general public, and is received by a cable communications system off-the-air, by satellite, or by microwave. 
"Cable communications system," "cable system" or "system" means a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the city, but such term does not include: 
1.  A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple dwelling units under common ownership, control or management, unless such facility uses any public street or right-of-way; 
2.  A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video and/or audio programming directly to subscribers; or 
3.  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
"Cablecast signal" means a nonbroadcast signal that originates within the facilities of the cable communications system, including local origination programming and community access programming. 
"Cable service" means: 
1.  The one-way transmission to subscribers of video and/or audio programming or other programming service; and 
2.  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video and/or audio programming or other programming service. 
"Channel" means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel as defined by the FCC. 
"Commence construction" means that time and date when construction of the cable communications system is considered to have commenced, which shall be when the first connection is physically made to a utility pole or undergrounding of cables is initiated after preliminary engineering (strand mapping) and after all necessary permits and authorizations have been obtained. 
"Commence operation" means that time and date when operation of the cable communications system is considered to have commenced, which shall be when sufficient distribution facilities have been installed so as to permit the offering of full service to one ormore subscribers. 
"Commercial subscriber" means a subscriber who receives cable service in a place of business, where the service may be utilized in connection with a business, trade or profession. 
"Community access channel" means such channel capacity on the cable communications system as from time to time may be allocated to public, educational or governmental programming, together with such facilities and equipment as are made available for the use of such channel capacity. 
"Completion of construction" means that point in time when all distribution facilities of the cable communications system required by a franchise have been installed and are in an operational state. 
"Converter" means an electronic device which converts signal carriers from one form to another. 
"FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed or elected successor. 
"Franchise" means the nonexclusive rights granted pursuant to this chapter to install, construct, operate and maintain a cable communications system along the public streets and rights-of-way within all or a specified area of the city. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall be in lieu of any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city as required by other chapters of this code. 
"Franchise fee" means any tax, fee or assessment of any kind imposed by the city on the grantee or any of its cable subscribers, or both, solely because of their status as such. The term "franchise fee" does not include: 
1.  Any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability; 
2.  Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by the grantee for community access facilities; 
3.  Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties or liquidated damages; or 
4.  Any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code. 
"Grantee" means any person receiving a franchise pursuant to this chapter and such person's lawful successor, transferee or assignee. 
"Gross revenues" means all compensation received by the grantee from subscribers in the city as the result of the use of the public streets and rights-of-way in the city for the operation of its cable communications system, provided that there shall be deducted from gross revenues as so determined: (a) refunds made in connection with such operations; and (b) bad debts written off by the grantee in the usual and ordinary course of business, in each case to the extent that the revenue with respect thereto has been included in the determination of gross revenues. 
1.  Gross revenues shall not include: (a) amounts received in the nature of refundable security deposits; (b) revenue received by the grantee from the provision of services or the sale, rental or servicing of equipment or merchandise not required for the delivery of the grantee's cable service through its cable communications system in the city; (c) sales, excise, or other taxes collected for direct pass-through to federal, state or local authorities, including copyright and franchise fees. 
2.  In computing gross revenues for each calendar quarter from sources other than subscribers of the grantee's cable service located within the city, including, but not limited to, revenues derived from the sale of advertising or the lease of channel capacity by the grantee on its cable communications system, the aggregate of the revenues received by the grantee from such other sources during such calendar quarter shall be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the arithmetic average of the number of subscribers in the city as of the first and last day of such calendar quarter and the denominator of which shall be the arithmetic average of the number of subscribers within all areas to which the grantee provides its cable service by the same physical cable system as of the first and last day of such calendar quarter. The result obtained thereby shall be included in the determination of the grantee's gross revenues for purposes of computing the franchise fee due the city for such calendar quarter. 
"Initial service area" means the area of the city which will receive cable service initially, as set forth in the grantee's franchise. If not stated otherwise in the franchise, the initial service area shall consist of the entire city. 
"Installation" means the connection of the cable communications system from feeder cable to subscribers' terminals and the provision of service. 
"Monitoring" means observing a communication signal, or the absence of a signal, where the observer is neither of the communicating parties, whether the signal is observed by visual or electronic means for any purpose whatsoever. Monitoring shall not include individually addressed sweeps of the cable communications system solely for the purpose of detecting unauthorized connections to the system nor system-wide, nonindividually addressed sweeps of the system for purposes of verifying system integrity, controlling return path transmissions, or billing for pay cable. 
"Nonbroadcast signal" means a signal that is transmitted by a cable communications system and that is not involved in an over-the-air broadcast transmission path intended for reception by the general public. 
"Pay cable service" means the delivery to subscribers, over the cable communications system, of video and/or audio signals for a fee or charge to subscribers over and above the charge for basic cable service, or a per-program, per-channel, or other subscription basis. 
"Programmer" means a person who or which produces or otherwise provides program material or information for transmission by video, audio, digital, or other signals, either live or from recorded tapes or other storage media, to subscribers by means of the cable communications system. 
"Resident" means any person residing in the city as otherwise defined by applicable law. 
"Residential subscriber" means a person occupying a dwelling unit who receives cable service and is billed directly by the grantee on an individual subscriber basis. 
"School" means any nonprofit educational institution, including primary and secondary schools, colleges and universities, both public and private. 
"Service area" means the entire geographic area within the city in which the grantee is authorized to provide cable service under the terms of its franchise. Unless otherwise specified in the franchise, a grantee's service area shall include any new or additional territory which is annexed to the city immediately upon completion of annexation, provided that the city shall give the grantee prompt written notice thereof and shall identify the area which has been so annexed. 
"Subscriber" means any person who or which elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, a cable service provided by the grantee by means of or in connection with the cable communications system. 
(Prior code § 15002)  
Article III. - Grant of Franchise 
 
5.12.030 - Franchise required. 
No cable communications system shall be allowed to occupy or use the public streets or rights-of-way of the city or be allowed to operate such a system without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 15003)  
5.12.040 - Franchise application. 
A.  Application. Any person seeking a franchise to operate a cable communications system within the city shall file an application for such franchise with the city. Such application shall be in the form and contain the information required by the city administrator and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee established by the city council in an amount not to exceed the reasonable cost of processing the application. 
B.  Public Hearing. When filed, the application shall be available for public inspection at places designated by the city administrator. No later than ninety (90) days after filing the application, a public hearing or hearings shall be held by the city council on the application. Notice of the initial public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city on three separate days not less than five nor more than ten (10) days immediately preceding such hearing. 
C.  Decision. At the conclusion of such hearing or hearings, the city council shall determine to grant the franchise subject to any appropriate terms and conditions as the council may prescribe or determine not to grant the franchise. 
(Prior code § 15004)  
5.12.050 - Scope of grant. 
Any franchise granted under this chapter shall authorize and permit the grantee to engage in the business of operating and providing a cable communications system in the city within the service area specified in the franchise and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, inspect, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, under, on, across, along, over and above any street or right-of-way such structures and equipment as are necessary, appurtenant or useful in the operation of the cable communications system. 
(Prior code § 15005(A))  
5.12.060 - Grant both a right and an obligation. 
In the event that the city council shall grant to the grantee a franchise to install, construct, operate and maintain a cable communications system within a service area, such franchise shall constitute both a right and an obligation to provide the services of a cable communications system as required by the provisions of this chapter and the franchise. 
(Prior code § 15005(B))  
5.12.070 - Franchise nonexclusive. 
Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The city council specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for cable communications system as it deems appropriate. 
(Prior code § 15006)  
5.12.080 - Use of public streets and rights-of-way. 
For the purpose of operating and maintaining a cable communications system in the service area, and subject to the provisions of this chapter, the grantee may erect, install, construct, inspect, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, under, on, across, along, over and above any street or right-of-way within the service area such wires, cables, conductors, connectors, poles, anchors, guys, pole attachments, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, transformers, appliances, pedestals, drops, attachments, and other structures and equipment as are necessary, appurtenant or useful to the operation of the cable communications system. Prior to construction or alteration of any part of the cable communications system situated in the streets or rights-of-way for which an encroachment permit or other approval is required by this code, the grantee shall in each case file plans with the appropriate city department and receive such encroachment permit or other approval before proceeding. The grantee shall comply with all applicable city requirements relating to construction performed within city streets or rights-of-way. 
(Prior code § 15007)  
5.12.090 - Franchise term. 
The term of any franchise and all rights, privileges, obligations and restrictions pertaining thereto shall be as set forth in the grantee's franchise, but shall in no event be for a period of more than twenty (20) years from the effective date of the franchise. The effective date of the franchise shall be the date written acceptance thereof by the grantee is filed with the city clerk or such other date as may be specified in such franchise. 
(Prior code § 15008)  
5.12.100 - Service area. 
The city council may grant a franchise for the construction, operation and maintenance of a cable communications system for the entire city or any defined portion of the city. 
(Prior code § 15009)  
5.12.110 - Franchise fee. 
A.  Amount of Franchise Fee. A grantee of a franchise granted hereunder shall pay to the city a franchise fee in the amount specified in grantee's franchise. 
B.  Acceptance by City. The acceptance of a franchise fee payment by the city shall not be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee. 
C.  Failure to Make Required Payment. In the event that any franchise fee payment is not made on or before the date specified herein and the grantee fails to make such payment within five days after receipt of written notice from the city demanding such payment, the grantee shall pay as additional compensation: 
1.  An interest charge, computed from such due date, at the legal rate of interest under California law in effect upon the due rate; 
2.  A sum of money equal to five percent of the amount due (exclusive of interest due under subsection (C)(1) of this section) in order to defray those additional expenses and costs incurred by the city by reason of delinquent payment. 
D.  Quarterly Payments. Franchise fee payments due the city under this section shall be computed quarterly, for the preceding quarter, as of March 31st, June 30th, September 30th, and December 31st. Each quarterly payment shall be due and payable no later than forty-five (45) days after the dates listed in the previous sentence. Each payment shall be accompanied by a statement of gross revenues received by the grantee for such quarterly period showing the basis for the computation of the franchise fee then due. Such statement shall be certified as accurate by an authorized representative of the grantee. 
E.  Annual Certification. Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the expiration of each calendar year or portion thereof during which the franchise is in force or within such other time as may be specified in the grantee's franchise, the grantee shall file with the city finance officer a statement prepared by a certified public accountant for the grantee setting forth the gross revenues for such calendar year or portion thereof. If the amount of the gross revenues reported by such certified public accountant exceeds the amount thereof as reported in the statements prepared by the grantee for all quarterly periods of such calendar year, the grantee shall pay to city, within fifteen (15) days after the time for filing the statement certified by such certified public accountant, the amount of the additional franchise fee due for such calendar year or portion thereof, provided that if the amount of the additional franchise fee is in excess of five percent of the gross revenues as reported by such certified public accountant, the grantee shall also pay the city interest on the amount of the additional franchise fee at the legal rate of interest under California law as in effect and computed from and after January 1st of the year in which such certified statement is furnished to the city. If the amount of the gross revenues reported by such certified public accountant is less than the amount thereof as reported in the quarterly statements prepared by the grantee, the city shall pay to the grantee, within fifteen (15) days after the time for filing the statement certified by such certified public accountant, the amount by which the franchise fee was overpaid or, at the option of the city, such overpayment shall be credited against the franchise fee next becoming due and payable to the city. 
F.  Right of Inspection. At all reasonable times upon prior written notice to the grantee, the city shall have the right to inspect and audit the grantee's records showing the gross revenues from which its franchise payments are computed, provided that such inspection and audit shall extend to no other books or records of the grantee. If any independent audit of the grantee's records directed by the city evidences an underpayment of the franchise fee in excess of five percent, the grantee shall assume all reasonable costs for said audit. 
(Prior code § 15010)  
5.12.120 - Transfer of ownership or control. 
A.  Transfer of Franchise. Any franchise granted hereunder shall be a privilege to be held for the benefit of the public. Such franchise cannot in any event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of by forced or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, receivership, or other means without the prior consent of the city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld and then only under such conditions as the city may establish, provided that the franchise maybe transferred to any affiliate of grantee or to any entity controlled by or under common control of grantee as of the effective date of the initial franchise without such consent. 
B.  Ownership or Control. The grantee shall promptly notify the city of any proposed change in, transfer of or acquisition by any other party of control of the grantee. The word "control" as used in this section is not limited to major partners or stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or transfer by any person or group of persons of twenty-five (25) percent of the aggregate partnership interests in or voting shares of the grantee. Every change, transfer or acquisition of control of the grantee shall make the franchise subject to cancellation unless and until the city shall have consented thereto, except as provided in subsection A of this section. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer or acquisition of control, the city may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the grantee shall assist the city in any such inquiry. In seeking the city's consent to any change in ownership or control of the grantee, the grantee shall have the responsibility to establish to the reasonable satisfaction of the city: 
1.  Whether the proposed purchaser, transferee or assignee (the "proposed transferee") which, in the case of a partnership or corporation, shall include all partners, officers, director and all persons having a legal or equitable interest in five percent or more of its partnership interests or voting stock, or any of the proposed transferee's principals: 
a.  Has ever been convicted or held liable for acts involving moral turpitude or is presently under an indictment, investigation or complaint charging such acts, or 
b.  Has ever had a judgment in an action for fraud, or misrepresentation entered against it, her, him or them by any court of competent jurisdiction, or 
c.  Has pending against it, her, him or them any legal claim, lawsuit or administrative proceeding arising out of or involving a cable communications system; and 
2.  Whether the proposed transferee has the financial and technical capability to enable it to maintain and operate the cable communications system for the remaining term of the franchise under the existing franchise provisions. 
C.  Right of Lender to Operate System. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this chapter, any financial institution having a pledge of the franchise for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the cable communications system operating under authority of such franchise shall have the right to notify the city that it or its designee satisfactory to the city will take control and operate the cable communications system in the event of a grantee default in its financial obligations. Further, such financial institution shall also submit a plan for such operation that will insure continued service and compliance with all franchise requirements during the term the financial institution exercises control over the system. The financial institution shall not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding one year unless extended by the city in its discretion and during such period of time it shall have the right to petition the city to transfer the franchise to another grantee. If, after considering the legal, financial, character, technical, and other public interest qualities of the proposed transferee, the city finds that such transfer is satisfactory, the city will approve the transfer and assign the rights and obligations of such franchise to such proposed transferee. 
D.  No Transfer Before Completion of Construction. In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the city will not approve any transfer or assignment of the franchise prior to completion of construction or reconstruction of the proposed cable communications system. 
E.  Transferee to Assume Grantee's Obligations Under Franchise. In no event shall a transfer of ownership or control be approved without the successor in interest to the grantee assuming all of the grantee's obligations under its franchise. Notwithstanding the requirements of the grantee's franchise, the city may require, as a condition of the transfer of such franchise, that the proposed transferee furnish either or both a security fund and a performance bond in such amount or amounts as the city shall designate. 
F.  Permitted Encumbrances. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the grantee may pledge, assign, hypothecate or create a security interest in its franchise without the consent of the city in favor of any bank, financial institution, or other lender with respect to any indebtedness of the grantee to such person. 
(Prior code § 15011)  
5.12.130 - Franchise renewal. 
Renewal of any franchise granted under this chapter shall be undertaken in accordance with applicable federal or state law or, in the absence of any such renewal procedures, the following provisions of this section shall apply. 
A.  Application. Not later than eighteen (18) nor earlier than twenty-four (24) months prior to the expiration of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, a grantee may submit an application for renewal of such franchise. Such application shall be in the form and contain the information required by the city administrator and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee established by the city council in an amount not to exceed the reasonable cost of processing the application. 
B.  Public Hearing. When filed, the application shall be available for public inspection at places designated by the city administrator. No later than ninety (90) days after filing the application, a public hearing or hearings shall be held by the city council on the application. Notice of the initial public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city on three separate days not less than five nor more than ten (10) days immediately preceding such hearing. 
C.  Decision. At the conclusion of such hearing or hearings, the city council shall determine to renew the franchise subject to any appropriate terms and conditions as the council may prescribe or determine not to renew the franchise. 
D.  Nonrenewal. If the decision of the city council is not to renew the franchise, the council may initiate public solicitations for applications for a new franchise. The original grantee shall not be precluded from submitting such an application. 
E.  Additional Services. In any renewal or public solicitation, the city council may require additional services, system upgrade, or any other conditions it deems feasible and appropriate in the light of the state of art of the cable communications industry at that time, taking into consideration the cost of such services, upgrades, or other conditions to both the grantee and its subscribers. 
F.  Renewal of Existing Franchises. The provisions of this section relating to the time for filing a franchise renewal application and the time for holding a hearing or hearings on such application shall not be applicable to any franchise originally granted prior to January 1, 1987. 
(Prior code § 15012)  
5.12.140 - Franchise processing costs. 
For either a new franchise award, a franchise transfer or a franchise renewal, costs to be borne by the grantee, unless otherwise specified in the grantee's franchise, shall include, but shall not be limited to, all costs incurred for publication of any notice of a public hearing on the franchise award, transfer or renewal, all costs incurred in the development and publication of relevant ordinances or agreements, and any cost not covered by the application fee but reasonably incurred by the city in its study, preparation of proposal solicitation documents, and evaluation of applications, including, but not limited to, consultant and attorney fees and city staff time. 
(Prior code § 15013)  
Article IV. - Regulation of Franchise 
 
5.12.150 - City regulations. 
Every cable communications system for which a franchise is required by this chapter shall be constructed, operated and maintained in accordance with the regulations now or hereafter adopted by or pursuant to this chapter, as well as the provisions of any city law or regulation of general application now or hereafter in effect, including, but not limited to, any such city law or regulation requiring the issuance of a permit and payment of a permit fee incident to the performance of work within a public street or right-of-way, provided that in the event of a conflict between a regulation adopted by or pursuant to this chapter and the provisions of any city law or regulation of general application, the regulations adopted by or pursuant to this chapter shall prevail. However, the provisions of this section shall not be construed to accord to the city any right to adopt any law or regulation which results in the unconstitutional impairment of any right of a grantee under a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 15014)  
5.12.160 - Federal and state regulations. 
The regulations adopted by or pursuant to this chapter shall be interpreted and applied so as to be consistent with any applicable federal or state law or regulation now or hereafter in effect to the extent such federal or state law or regulation is preemptive of local laws and regulations, provided that in the event of any conflict between this chapter or any regulations adopted by or pursuant to this chapter and any such federal or state law or regulation, the federal or state law or regulation shall prevail. 
(Prior code § 15015)  
5.12.170 - Joint regulatory responsibility. 
If the area served by the grantee's cable communications system also serves other contiguous or neighboring communities, the city may, at its sole option, participate in a joint regulatory agency with the delegated responsibility in the area of cable and related communications. The city, acting jointly with othergrantors, may exercise or delegate the following regulatory responsibility: 
A.  Administration. Administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter and the cable communications system franchise(s); 
B.  Coordination. Coordination of the operation of community access channels and public programming services; 
C.  Support. Providing technical, programming and operational support to public agency users, such as governmental agencies, schools and health care institutions; 
D.  Interconnection. Analyzing the possibility of integrating cable communications systems with other national, state or local telecommunications networks; 
E.  Policy. Formulating and recommending long-range telecommunications policy. 
(Prior code § 15016)  
5.12.180 - Initial rates. 
The grantee shall establish initial rates that must be applied fairly and uniformly to all subscribers similarly situated in its service area. 
(Prior code § 15017)  
5.12.190 - Rate change procedures. 
The procedures set forth in this section shall apply only to the extent the city is permitted, consistent with applicable federal and state law, to regulate or control the rates, charges and rate structures established by the grantee for the services provided over its cable communications system. 
A.  Application. A grantee seeking a rate change shall file an application for such rate change with the city council. Such application shall be in the form and contain the information required by the city administrator and shall be accompanied by such records, financial data, and other information as the city administrator may request, including, but not limited to, financial statements of the grantee with respect to the operation of its cable communications system within the city. 
B.  Public Hearing. When filed, the application shall be available for public inspection at places designated by the city administrator. No later than ninety (90) days after filing the application, a public hearing or hearings shall be held by the city council on the application. 
C.  Notice. The grantee shall notify its subscribers of its application for a rate change by including notice of the application in a regular billing statement mailed by the grantee to its subscribers not less than twenty (20) nor more than seventy-five (75) days immediately preceding the date of the initial public hearing on the proposed rate change. Such notice shall set forth the proposed rate change and the time and place of the initial public hearing on the proposed rate change. 
D.  Decision. Within ninety (90) days after said hearing or hearings, the city council shall render a decision on the grantee's application, either approving, rejecting, modifying or deferring the same and reciting the basis for its decision. The city council may consider whatever factors or employ whatever methods it shall consider necessary or appropriate for the purpose of evaluating the grantee's application for rate change. The city council shall have the right to audit the records, financial data, and other information submitted by the grantee in support of its application to verify the accuracy thereof. If the results of any such audit reveal an understatement of gross revenues or an overstatement of expenses in excess of five percent, the grantee shall bear the reasonable cost of such audit. 
E.  Rates Deemed Approved. If the city council fails to render a decision either approving, rejecting, modifying or deferring the grantee's application within one hundred eighty (180) days of the filing of the grantee's application and receipt of requested records, financial data, and other financial information pursuant to this section, the grantee shall thereafter be entitled to put its proposed new rates into effect as contained in such application. 
F.  Submission of Rate Increase Requests. The grantee shall not submit an application for rate increases earlier than twelve (12) months after approval of a prior request for the same level of service. 
(Prior code § 15018)  
5.12.200 - Limitations respecting rates. 
A.  Schedule of Rates. The grantee shall maintain and file with the city, upon request of the city or within thirty (30) days after any change therein, a complete schedule of subscriber rates, including, but not limited to, rates for basic cable service, pay cable services, ancillary services, installation, converter rental and related charges. 
B.  No Consideration Beyond Schedule. If subject to rate regulation by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the grantee shall receive no consideration whatsoever for or in connection with its provision of cable service to its subscribers over or by means of its cable communications system other than as set forth in the schedule of subscriber rates approved by the city council for those rates which the city may regulate or as set forth above in Section 5.12.190. 
C.  Disconnections. There shall be no charge for disconnection from the cable communications system. However, if a subscriber has failed to pay properly due monthly fees or if a subscriber disconnects for seasonal periods, the grantee may require, in addition to full payment of any delinquent fees, a reasonable fee for reconnection. 
(Prior code § 15019)  
5.12.210 - System and service review. 
To evaluate technological, economic and regulatory changes in the state of the art of cable communications, to facilitate renewal procedures, and to promote a continuing, advanced modern system, the city and the grantee shall comply with the system and services review provisions set forth in Sections 5.12.220 and 5.12.230. 
(Prior code § 15020)  
5.12.220 - Triannual review. 
A.  Review. At the city council's sole option, the city council and the grantee shall hold a system and services review session on or about the third anniversary of the effective date of the franchise. Subsequent review sessions may be scheduled by the city each three years thereafter. The grantee shall, at its expense, notify its subscribers of each such review reasonably in advance thereof so as to afford such subscribers the opportunity to comment with respect to any proceedings held in connection with such review. Such notice may be given by electronic means across one or more channels of the grantee's cable communications system. 
B.  Issues. Topics for discussion and review at the system and services review sessions shall include, but shall not be limited to, services provided, application of new technologies and the economic impact with respect thereto, system performance, programming, subscriber complaints, user complaints, rights of privacy, undergrounding processes, developments in the law and regulatory constraints. 
C.  Additional Topics. Either the city council or the grantee may select additional topics for discussion at any such review session. 
D.  Services Not Offered. Prior to the date scheduled for any such review, the grantee shall furnish the city council with a report of those cable services, if any, being provided on a full-time operational basis (excluding test and demonstrations) by similarly situated local cable communications systems which services are not then offered by the grantee. 
E.  Findings. Not later than sixty (60) days after the conclusion of each system and services review session, the city council may issue findings. 
(Prior code § 15021)  
5.12.230 - Annual review of performance. 
A.  Review. At the city council's sole option, within ninety (90) days after any anniversary of the effective date of the grantee's franchise, the city council and the grantee shall meet to review the grantee's performance and quality of service with respect to operation of the cable communications system. The reports required of the grantee under this chapter regarding subscriber complaints and the records of performance tests shall be utilized as the basis for review. In addition, any subscriber may submit comments or complaints during the review meetings, either orally or in writing, and these shall be considered. The grantee shall, at its expense, notify its subscribers of any such review reasonably in advance thereof, which notice may be given by electronic means across one or more channels of the grantee's cable communications system. 
B.  Findings. Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of such meetings, the city council may issue findings with respect to the adequacy of system performance and quality of service. If any event of default (as defined in this chapter) by the grantee is found to exist, the city may direct the grantee by written notice to correct such default within such period of time as is specified therefore in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 15022)  
5.12.240 - Default. 
The grantee shall be deemed to be in default with respect to the performance of its obligations under its franchise upon the occurrence of any of the following events (any such occurrence, an "event of default"): 
A.  The grantee is in violation of the provisions of its franchise, this chapter or any federal or state law or regulation applicable to the operation of the grantee's cable communications system in the city and such violation is not corrected within thirty (30) days following receipt of written notice thereof from the city administrator specifying such violation or, if more than thirty (30) days are reasonably required to correct such violation within such additional time as the city administrator shall consider reasonably necessary to effect such correction; 
B.  The grantee has engaged in repeated violations of any of its material obligations under its franchise or this chapter or any material federal or state law or regulation applicable to the operation of the grantee's cable communications system in the city which, for purposes of this chapter, shall be deemed to exist if the same or similar violation occurs three or more times within any twelve (12) month period. In any such case, the grantee shall not be entitled to notice or a period to correct the third such violation; or 
C.  If the grantee ceases to operate the cable communications system in all or substantially all of its service area for a period of seven consecutive days without the prior approval of the city or for any reason within the control of the grantee. 
(Prior code § 15023)  
5.12.250 - Remedies upon default. 
A.  Upon the occurrence of any event of default by the grantee, the city council may: 
1.  Assess against the grantee monetary penalties as specified in any franchise for each such event of default or series of related events of default and/or require the grantee to cure each such event of default within such time, in such manner, and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall designate; or 
2.  Revoke and terminate the grantee's franchise. 
B.  Public Hearing. Prior to imposing any such remedy or remedies upon the grantee upon the occurrence of any such event of default, the city shall do the following: 
1.  The city shall provide the grantee with at least thirty (30) days' prior written notice of the time and place of a public hearing to be held before the city council for purposes of determining whether such event of default has occurred and, if it has occurred, whether such event of default was for just cause. Notice as to the time and place of such hearing shall be published least once ten (10) days before such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the grantee's service area; 
2.  The grantee shall be afforded full due process in connection with such hearing, including, but not limited to, adequate notice of the hearing and fair opportunity to introduce evidence, to require the production of evidence and to introduce and/or question persons connected with or having knowledge of the alleged default. A transcript may be made of the hearing at the grantee's expense; 
3.  The city council shall hear any persons interested therein and, based upon the evidence presented at such hearing, shall determine whether or not an event of default by the grantee has occurred; 
4.  If the city council shall determine that there occurred an event of default by the grantee and such default was with just cause, the city council shall direct the grantee to correct or remedy the same within such additional time, in such manner, and upon such terms and conditions as the council determines to be necessary; or 
5.  If the city council shall determine that there occurred an event of default by the grantee and such default was without just cause, then the city council may, by resolution, impose any one or more of the remedies set forth in subsection A of this section. 
C.  Remedies Cumulative. The city council may, in its sole judgment and discretion, impose any one or more of the foregoing remedies against the grantee, which administrative remedies shall be in addition to any and all other legal or equitable remedies it has under the franchise or under any applicable law. 
(Prior code § 15024)  
5.12.260 - Procedures in the event of termination or expiration. 
A.  Disposition of Facilities. 
1.  In the event the franchise expires, is revoked, or is otherwise terminated, the city council may order the removal of the cable communications system facilities from the franchise area or require the original grantee to maintain and operate its cable communications system until a subsequent grantee is selected and a subsequent or modified cable system becomes operational, but in no event shall the original grantee be required to continue maintenance and operation of its cable system for more than six months after such expiration, revocation or termination. If the city council orders removal of the system facilities of the grantee upon any such expiration, revocation or termination, such removal shall be diligently pursued and shall be completed by the grantee within twelve (12) months after the grantee's receipt of notice of termination or forfeiture of its franchise, provided that the city council or the city administrator may extend the time for removal for such reasonable additional period as shall be required to complete the same in the event the grantee, acting in good faith, cannot reasonably remove its cable system within such twelve (12) month period or by reason of any circumstance beyond the grantee's control. 
2.  The grantee may, at its option, abandon all or any part of the system provided the part so abandoned does not unreasonably interfere with the use of the public streets or rights-of-way. Upon abandonment of any such property, the grantee shall cause to be executed, acknowledged and delivered to the city such instruments as the city council shall prescribe and approve transferring and conveying the ownership of such property to the city. 
B.  Restoration of Property. In removing its facilities, the grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all streets affected by such removal in as good condition as that prevailing prior to the grantee's removal of its facilities without unreasonably affecting the electrical or telephone cable, wires or attachments. Grantee shall obtain encroachment permits before proceeding with removal of any facilities. The city shall inspect and approve the condition of such streets after removal. Any liability insurance and performance bond required of the grantee under its franchise shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by the grantee with the terms and conditions of this section. 
C.  Restoration by City—Reimbursement of Costs. In the event of a failure by the grantee to complete any work required of it under this section within the period allowed therefor to the satisfaction of the city, the city may upon five days' notice to grantee cause such work to be done and the grantee shall reimburse the city the cost thereof within thirty (30) days after receipt of an itemized list of such costs or the city may recover such costs through the security fund or bonds provided by the grantee in accordance with the terms of its franchise. 
D.  Extended Operation. In the event the city council requires the grantee to continue to operate the cable communications system subsequent to the expiration, revocation or termination of its franchise, the grantee shall, as trustee for its successor in interest, continue to operate the cable system under the terms and conditions of this chapter and its franchise and to provide the cable services that may be provided at that time. The grantee shall be entitled to collect and retain all revenues derived from the operation of the cable communications system during this period, subject to the obligation to pay the franchise fee with respect thereto in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
E.  City's Rights Not Affected. The termination and forfeiture of any franchise shall in no way affect any of the rights of the city under the franchise or any provision of law. 
(Prior code § 15025)  
5.12.270 - Receivership and foreclosure. 
A.  Receivership. Any franchise granted shall, at the option of the city, cease and terminate one hundred twenty (120) days after the appointment of a receiver or receivers or trustee or trustees to take over and conduct the business of the grantee whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy, or other action or proceeding unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said one hundred twenty (120) days or unless: 
1.  Such receivers or trustees shall have, within one hundred twenty (120) days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and provisions of this chapter and the franchise granted pursuant hereto, and the receivers or trustees within said one hundred twenty (120) days shall have remedied all material defaults under the franchise; and 
2.  Such receivers or trustees shall, within said one hundred twenty (120) days, execute an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the franchise. 
B.  Foreclosure. Subject to the provisions of this chapter permitting a lender to operate a cable communications system upon the default of the grantee in its obligations to such lender, in the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the plant, property and equipment of the grantee, or any part thereof, thecity may serve notice of termination upon the grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, in which event the franchise and all rights and privileges of the grantee hereunder shall cease and terminate thirty (30) days after the services of such notice, unless: 
1.  The city council shall have approved the transfer of the franchise in the manner provided by this chapter; and 
2.  Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the city to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of the franchise. 
(Prior code § 15026)  
Article V. - General Financial and Insurance Provisions 
 
5.12.280 - Construction bond. 
A.  Filing Bond. Within thirty (30) days after the granting of a franchise and prior to the commencement of any construction work by the grantee, the grantee shall, if required by the franchise, file with the city a construction bond in the amount specified in the franchise in favor of the city and any other person who may claim damages as a result of the breach of any duty by the grantee assured by such bond. Such bond shall be in a form approved by the city attorney. 
B.  No Limitation of Liability. In no event shall the amount of such bond be construed to limit the liability of the grantee for damages. 
C.  Waiver. The city, at its sole option, may waive this requirements, or permit consolidation of the construction bond with the performance bond and/or security fund specified in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 15027)  
5.12.290 - Performance bond. 
A.  Filing of Bond. In addition to the construction bond set forth in Section 5.12.280, the grantee shall, at least thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of operation or, if completion of construction of the cable communications system has occurred, within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the franchise, file with the city a performance bond in the amount specified in the franchise in favor of the city and any other person who may be entitled to damages as a result of any act or omission of the grantee, its employees, agents and contractors arising in the operation or termination of the cable communications system operated under the franchise, and including the payments required to be made to the city hereunder. Such bond shall be in a form approved by the city attorney. 
B.  No Limitation of Liability. In no event shall the amount of such bond be construed to limit the liability of the grantee for damages. 
(Prior code § 15028)  
5.12.300 - Security fund. 
A.  Deposit and Amount. If so required under its franchise, within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the franchise the grantee shall deposit with the city, and maintain on deposit through the term of the franchise the sum specified in the franchise as security for the faithful performance by it of all the provisions of the franchise, and compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any department of the city having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under this chapter, and the payment of the grantee of any claims, liens and taxes due the city which arise by reason of the installation, construction, operation or maintenance of the cable communications system. No interest shall accrue or be paid to the grantee with respect to such security fund. The security fund may be assessed by the city for purposes including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Failure of the grantee to pay the city sums due under the terms of the franchise; 
2.  Reimbursement of costs borne by the city to correct franchise violations not corrected by grantee, after due notice; and 
3.  Monetary remedies or damages assessed against the grantee due to default or violation of franchise requirements. 
B.  Letter of Credit in Lieu of Deposit. At the city's sole option, all or a portion of the security fund may be provided by way of an irrevocable letter of credit in a form approved by the city attorney. 
C.  Restoration of Fund. Within thirty (30) days after notice that any amount has been withdrawn by the city from the security fund or letter of credit pursuant to the provisions of this section, the grantee shall deposit with the city a sum of money sufficient to restore such security fund to the original amount or shall restore the letter of credit to the original amount thereof. 
D.  Withdrawal from Fund. If the grantee fails, after ten (10) days' notice, to pay to the city any franchise fee or taxes due and unpaid, or fails to pay to the city within such ten (10) days any damages, costs or expenses which the city shall be compelled to pay by reason of any event of default of the grantee in connection with the franchise, or fails, after notice of such failure by the city and expiration of the applicable cure period, to comply with any provision of the franchise which the city reasonably determines can be remedied by an expenditure of the security fund or draw against the letter of credit, as the case may be, the city may immediately withdraw the amount thereof, with interest and any penalties, from the security fund or the letter of credit. Upon such withdrawal, the city shall notify the grantee of the amount and date thereof. 
E.  Forfeiture or Return of Fund. The security fund deposited pursuant to this section shall become the property of the city in the event that the franchise is revoked for cause by reason of the occurrence of an event of default by the grantee in accordance with the procedures of this chapter. The grantee, however, shall be entitled to the return of such security fund, or portion thereof, as remains on deposit no later than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the term of the franchise, provided that there is then no outstanding default on the part of the grantee in the performance of its obligations required under its franchise. 
F.  No Limitation of Liability. In no event shall the amount of such security fund be construed to limit the liability of the grantee for damages. 
(Prior code § 15029)  
5.12.310 - Insurance. 
A.  Scope of Coverage. The grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise insurance in amounts at least as follows: 
1.  Worker's Compensation Insurance. Worker's compensation insurance shall be maintained in accordance with the worker's compensation insurance and safety laws of the state of California. 
2.  Comprehensive General Liability. Comprehensive general liability insurance, including, but not limited to, coverage for bodily injury and property damage shall be maintained in the sum(s) specified in the franchise. 
3.  Comprehensive Automobile Liability. Comprehensive automobile liability insurance including, but not limited to, nonownership and hired car coverage, as well as owned vehicles with coverage for bodily injury and property damage, shall be maintained in the sum(s) specified in the franchise. 
B.  Certificates of Insurance. The grantee shall furnish the city with copies of such insurance policies or certificates of insurance evidencing compliance by the grantee with the provisions of this section and the corresponding provisions of the franchise. 
C.  City as Additional Insured. The city, its officers, boards and commissions, and members thereof, its employees and agents shall be named as additional insured in any of such liability insurance policies required under subsections (A)(2) and (A)(3) of this section. The obligation of the insurer under such policies to provide coverage in the amounts specified in the grantee's franchise shall be primary up to the limits of liability as set forth in such franchise without right of contribution from any insurance in effect for the city. Such policies shall not be cancelled or reduced in coverage without thirty (30) days' prior written notice to the city of the effective date thereof. 
D.  No Limitation of Liability. The minimum amounts set forth in the franchise for such insurance shall not be construed to limit the liability of the grantee to the city under the franchise issued hereunder to the amounts of such insurance. 
E.  Licensed Insurers. All insurance carriers providing coverage under this section shall be duly licensed to operate in the state of California and shall be subject to approval of the city, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(Prior code § 15030)  
5.12.320 - Indemnification. 
The grantee shall by acceptance of any franchise granted herein indemnify the city, its officers, boards and commissions, and members thereof, its employees and agents from any and all liabilities which might arise out of or relate to the exercise or enjoyment by the grantee of such franchise, except with respect to any such liability as may be due to the active negligence of the city, its employees, agents or contractors. Should the city or any of its officers, boards and commissions, and members thereof, its employees or agents be named in any suit, or should any claim be made against it or any of them by suit or otherwise, whether the same be groundless or not, arising out of or relating to any claim for which the grantee may be required to indemnify the city hereunder, the grantee shall defend the city and such officers, boards and commissions, and members thereof, its employees and agents and shall indemnify them for any judgment rendered against them or any sums paid out in settlement or otherwise, provided that neither the city nor any such other person shall agree to any settlement, compromise, or other resolution or disposition with respect to such suit or claim without the prior written consent of the grantee. 
(Prior code § 15031)  
Article VI. - Design and Construction Provisions 
 
5.12.330 - System design. 
The cable communications system shall be constructed in accordance with the design requirements contained in the franchise. 
(Prior code § 15032)  
5.12.340 - Geographical coverage. 
The grantee shall design and construct the cable communications system in such a manner as to have the eventual capability to pass by every residential dwelling unit, commercial establishment, school and public agency within the service area of the franchise, except as otherwise provided in the grantee's franchise. Cable system construction and provision of service shall be nondiscriminatory, and the grantee shall not delay or defer service to any section of the service area on the grounds ofeconomic preference, but shall extend the cable system to such section in accordance with the construction schedules and/or line extension policies established in grantee's franchise. 
(Prior code § 15033)  
5.12.350 - System construction schedule. 
A.  Compliance with Schedule. The grantee shall comply with the requirements of the system construction schedule contained in the franchise. 
B.  Construction Plan. If required by the franchise, the grantee shall provide a detailed construction plan indicating progress schedule, area construction maps, test plan and projected dates for offering service. In addition, the grantee shall update this information on a monthly basis, showing specifically whether schedules are being met and the reasons for any delay. 
(Prior code § 15034)  
5.12.360 - Remedies for delay in construction. 
A.  The city may, at its sole option, apply any or all of the following remedies in connection with delays in system construction occasioned by events within the grantee's reasonable control: 
1.  Forfeiture of Bonds and Other Monetary Assessments. Forfeiture of any construction bond, as well as the assessment of monetary penalties in such amounts as are specified in the grantee's franchise. 
2.  Termination (Delay in Construction). Termination of the franchise within one year after award of the franchise if the grantee has failed to commence construction within such period. 
3.  Termination (Other Delays). Termination of the franchise for other delays exceeding eighteen (18) months, including failure to commence operation within such period. 
B.  Any remedies applied for delays in construction shall be in accordance with the procedures provided in this chapter, including, but not limited to, notice, hearing and due process. 
(Prior code § 15035)  
5.12.370 - Provision of service. 
Following commencement of operations in any area, the grantee shall provide service to any person requesting cable service in such area within thirty (30) days from the date of request, provided that: 
A.  Such person's residence or commercial establishment for which such service is requested is located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the grantee's activated trunk cable; and 
B.  Such person has the financial capacity to pay the grantee for such services as are to be provided to such subscriber; and 
C.  Grantee can secure all rights of access to such person's residence on terms reasonably satisfactory to grantee. 
(Prior code § 15036)  
5.12.380 - Undergrounding of cable. 
The undergrounding of cable is encouraged. In any event, cables shall be installed underground at the grantee's cost where both telephone and electric utilities are already underground. Previously installed aerial cable shall be undergrounded and relocated in concert with other utilities when both telephone and electric utilities convert from aerial to underground construction. Where public funds or funds from property owners are specifically available for which work of undergrounding the cable system, whether pursuant to statute or otherwise, the grantee shall be reimbursed for such work to the extent of the availability of such funds. 
(Prior code § 15037)  
5.12.390 - New development undergrounding. 
A.  In cases of new construction or property development where utilities are to be placed underground, the developer or property owner shall give the grantee at least thirty (30) days' advance notice of the particular date on which utilities are to be placed underground in conjunction with such construction or property development. The grantee shall promptly thereafter provide the developer or property owner with specifications as needed for trenching, installation of conduit, vaults, pedestals, cable, and related components, and for the prewiring of the units being constructed. 
B.  Installation. 
1.  The developer or property owner will, at its own cost and expense: 
a.  Perform all necessary trenching and backfilling for underground distribution and service laterals required for the extension of the underground distribution system of any cable communications system authorized to provide service in such area; 
b.  Provide for the installation of all conduit, vaults and pedestals required for the distribution and transmission lines of the cable system to be located in such distribution and service laterals (with the grantee to place the cable therein and attach all required electronic components thereto); and 
c.  Provide for the prewiring of each residential dwelling unit located in such development or on such property so as to enable it to receive cable service, all as directed by the grantee. 
2.  The cost of all conduit, vaults and pedestals required for such underground distribution system or for such prewiring which are to be installed by the developer or property owner under the provisions of this section shall be borne by the developer or property owner. The cost of the cable and associated electronics required for such underground distribution system or for such prewiring shall be borne by the grantee. 
(Prior code § 15038)  
5.12.400 - Undergrounding at multiple dwelling units. 
In cases of multiple dwelling units serviced by aerial utilities, the grantee shall make every effort to minimize the number of individual aerial drop cables giving preference to undergrounding of multiple drop cables between the pole and the dwelling unit. 
(Prior code § 15039)  
5.12.410 - Street occupancy. 
A.  Existing Facilities. The grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduit occupied by the grantee's activated cable distribution system, and other facilities whenever possible, and shall not construct or install any new, different or additional poles, conduits or other facilities in the streets until the written approval of the city is obtained. However, no location of any pole or wireholding structure of the grantee in the streets shall be a vested interest and such poles or structures shall be removed or modified by the grantee at its own expense for any of the reasons set forth in this section. 
B.  Notice of Construction. The grantee shall notify the city at least ten (10) days prior to the intention of the grantee to commence any construction in any streets. The city shall cooperate with the grantee in granting any permits required therefor. Construction by the grantee shall not unreasonably interfere with the use of such streets and shall be done in accordance with the pertinent provisions of this code and the grantee's franchise. 
C.  Manner of Installation. All transmission lines, equipment and structures shall be so installed and located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners and shall be kept and maintained in a safe, adequate and substantial condition, and in good order and repair. The grantee shall employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares, or other devices shall be used at such times and places as are reasonably required for the safety of members of the public. Any poles or other fixtures placed in any street by the grantee shall be placed in such a manner as not to unreasonably interfere with the usual travel on such public way. 
D.  Restoration. The grantee shall, at its own expense, and in a manner approved by the city, restore to the standards and specifications required by this code or the grantee's franchise any damage or disturbance caused to the streets by the grantee, and its employees, agents or contractors as a result of its operations or construction on its behalf in connection with the exercise of its rights under its franchise. 
E.  No Charge to City. Whenever, in case of fire or other disaster, it becomes necessary in the judgment of the city to remove any of the grantee's facilities due to material and imminent harm to the public health, safety, property or welfare, no charge shall be made by the grantee against the city for restoration and repair. 
F.  Tree Trimming. The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees on public property in accordance with the provisions of this code at its own expense as may be necessary to protect its wires and facilities, subject to the supervision and direction of the city. Trimming of trees on private property shall require consent of the property owner. 
G.  Relocation. The grantee at its expense shall protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove any property of the grantee when, in the opinion of the city, the same is reasonably required by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway or street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power line, signal line, transportation facilities, tracks, or any other type of structure or improvement by governmental agencies whether acting in a governmental or a proprietary capacity, or any other public improvement, including, but not limited to, movement of buildings, redevelopment, or any general program under which the city shall undertake to cause any such properties to be located beneath the surface of the ground. Where public funds or funds from property owners are specifically available for such work of protection, support, disconnection, relocation, removal or undergrounding of the cable system, whether pursuant to statute or otherwise, the grantee shall be reimbursed for such work to the extent of the availability of such funds. Nothing hereunder shall be deemed a taking of the property of the grantee and the grantee shall be entitled to no surcharge by reason of anything hereunder. 
H.  Right of City to Perform. Upon failure of the grantee to commence, pursue or complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this chapter or the grantee's franchise to be done by the grantee in any street within the time prescribed therein or herein and to the satisfaction of the city, the city may, at its option, upon five days' notice to grantee cause such work to be done if the grantee has failed to promptly commence such work, and the grantee shall pay to the city the reasonable cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the city to the grantee within thirty (30) days after receipt of such itemized report, provided that no such written direction need be given by the city in the event of material and imminent harm to the public health, safety, property or welfare. 
I.  Paving or Curb Cuts. The grantee shall make no paving or curb cuts in the streets unless absolutely necessary, and only after the grantee has secured an encroachment permit issued by the city authorizing such cuts. 
J.  Conduit Required. The city reserves the right to require conduit for underground cabling. 
(Prior code § 15040)  
5.12.420 - Construction and technical standards. 
A.  Construction Standards. 
1.  The grantee shall comply with all applicable city construction codes and permit procedures and pay all applicable permit and inspection fees with respect thereto. 
2.  Construction undertaken by the grantee with respect to its cable communications system shall comply with all federal, state and city laws, rules and regulations applicable thereto. 
3.  All the grantee's plant and equipment, including, but not limited to, the antenna site, headend, distribution system, towers, house connections, structures, poles, wire, cable, coaxial cable, fixtures and appurtenances shall be installed, located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained and operated in accordance with good engineering practices, performed by experienced maintenance and construction personnel so as not to endanger or unreasonably interfere with the streets or public improvements or to unreasonably interfere with the rights of any property owner, or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
B.  Technical Standards. The cable communications system shall meet all technical and performance standards contained in the franchise. 
C.  Test and Compliance Procedures. The grantee shall submit within sixty (60) days after request by the city a detailed test plan describing the methods and schedules for testing the cable communications system on an ongoing basis to determine compliance with the provisions of the franchise. The proof of performance requirements for cable communications system set forth in the FCC's Rules and Regulations shall constitute a satisfactory test plan for purposes of demonstrating compliance with such provisions. 
D.  Special Tests. At any time after commencement of service to subscribers the city may require additional tests, full or partial repeat tests, or tests involving a specific subscriber's terminal. Requests for such additional tests will be made on the basis of complaints received or other evidence indicating a material unresolved controversy or significant noncompliance, and such tests shall be limited to the particular matter in controversy. The city shall endeavor to so arrange its requests for such special tests so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to the grantee and to the subscriber. 
(Prior code § 15041)  
Article VII. - Operation and Maintenance 
 
5.12.430 - Services to be provided. 
The grantee shall initially provide the cable services set forth in its franchise. 
(Prior code § 15042)  
5.12.440 - Open books and records. 
The city shall have the right to inspect at any time during normal business hours and upon reasonable prior notice to the grantee all maps, cable communications system construction plans, financial records limited to gross revenues, service complaint logs, and performance test results which relate to the operation of the franchise and are maintained at the grantee's office within the service area. If any of such records are not kept in the grantee's local office, or upon reasonable request made available to the city, and if the city shall determine that an examination of such records is necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of the city's duties, then all travel and maintenance expenses necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be paid by the grantee. 
(Prior code § 15043)  
5.12.450 - Records required. 
In any event the grantee shall at all times maintain: 
A.  Subscriber Complaints. Grantee shall maintain a written record or the equivalent stored in computer memory and capable of being retrieved of complaints received and interruptions and/or degradation of service for a period of three years. In any event the grantee shall maintain: Such records or a reasonable summary thereof identifying the number and nature of complaints and their disposition for each month at issue shall be furnished to the city upon request of the city, allowing reasonable time to assemble and/or copy the same. 
B.  System Maps. A full and complete set of plans, records and as-built maps as of a reasonably current date accurately showing the location of the cable communications system equipment then installed or in use in the service area, exclusive of subscriber service drops. Such plans, records and maps will befurnished to the city upon request of the city, allowing reasonable time to assemble and/or copy the same. 
(Prior code § 15044)  
5.12.460 - Consumer protection. 
A.  Consumer Service Standards. The grantee shall maintain the necessary facilities, equipment and personnel to comply with the following consumer standards under normal conditions of operation: 
1.  Sufficient toll-free telephone line capacity during normal business hours to assure on twenty (20) consecutive business days average that a minimum of ninety (90) percent of all callers for any service will not be required to wait more than three minutes before being connected to a customer service representative. The grantee shall also acquire, install and maintain adequate monitoring equipment to assure that this requirement is satisfied. For purposes of the computation required in this section, the grantee shall be allowed to exclude any days on which material system outages occur or other material events which are beyond grantee's reasonable control; 
2.  Emergency toll-free telephone answering capacity on a twenty-four (24) hour basis, including weekends and holidays. A tape recorded answering machine does not constitute an answering service. A bona fide answering (business) service is acceptable; 
3.  An emergency system maintenance and repair staff, capable of responding to and commencing repairing of major system malfunction on a twenty-four (24) hour basis; 
4.  An installation staff, capable of installing service to any subscriber within ten (10) business days after receipt of a bona fide request, in all areas where trunk and feeder cable have been activated; 
5.  Grantee shall schedule, within a specified time period, e.g., either before noon or after noon, all appointments with subscribers for installation or service. 
B.  Requests for Cable Service Repairs. 
1.  The grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. A written log or an equivalent stored in computer memory and capable of access and reproduction, shall be maintained for all service interruptions and requests for cable service repair as required. Such records shall be maintained for thirty-six (36) months. 
2.  The grantee shall maintain a repair force of technicians normally capable of responding to subscriber requests for service within the following time frames: 
a.  System outages: within two hours, including weekends and holidays, of determining that a sound or picture outage of one or more channels has occurred which affects all or a considerable number of the subscribers of the system; 
b.  Isolated outage: within twenty-four (24) hours, including weekends, of receiving requests for service identifying an isolated outage of sound or picture for one or more channels. 
3.  Grantee shall be deemed to have responded to a complaint or a request for service under the provisions of this section when a technician arrives at the service location and begins work on the problem or attempts to diagnose the problem by way of telephone contact with the customer. In the case of a subscriber not being home when the technician arrives, response shall be deemed to have taken place if the technician leaves written notification of arrival. 
4.  As in the case of calls for installation service, the grantee, when scheduling service calls, shall advise the person requesting the repair service of a time period either before noon or after noon within which the call will be made. Moreover, no charge shall be made to a subscriber for a repair service call unless the service request can be demonstrated to be both repeated and noncable in origin, or to involve subscriber negligence. 
5.  Grantee shall interrupt cable service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Scheduled interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the cable system, preferably between midnight and six a.m. 
C.  Verification of Standards. Upon reasonable notice, the grantee shall demonstrate compliance with any or all of the standards required in subsections A and B of this section. The grantee shall provide sufficient detail to permit the grantor to verify the extent of compliance no more than twice per year. However, if any noncompliance is detected the grantor may in its sole discretion require such additional verification as it deems necessary and at grantee's expense for each time additional verification is needed. 
D.  Noncompliance with Standards. A repeated and verifiable pattern of noncompliance with the consumer protection standards of subsections A and B of this section, after grantee receipt of due notice and an opportunity to cure, may be termed a breach of the franchise, subject to any and all remedies as prescribed in Section 5.12.250 and applicable law. 
E.  Local Office. The grantee shall maintain an office in Glenn County which shall be open during normal business hours and have a publicly listed toll free telephone. Such office shall be adequately staffed to accept subscriber payments and respond to service requests and complaints. The grantee may use an answering service to receive such complaints and requests during other than the grantee's usual business hours or on such days as the grantee is not open for business. 
(Prior code § 15045)  
5.12.470 - Complaint procedures. 
The grantee shall establish procedures for receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints. The procedures shall prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit a compliant, either orally or in writing, that the grantee has violated any provisions of this chapter, the franchise granted by the city to grantee pursuant to this chapter, or in the terms and conditions of the subscriber's contract with the grantee. 
(Prior code § 15046)  
5.12.480 - Subscriber notices. 
A.  Notice of Operating Policies. As subscribers are connected or reconnected to the cable system, the grantee shall provide each such subscriber with written information about grantee including the name, address, telephone number and normal business hours of grantee. The purpose in providing this information to the subscriber is to keep the subscriber informed of whom to contact with inquiries or complaints regarding the service. 
B.  Notice of Change in Rates and Services. The grantee shall provide all subscribers with at least ten (10) days' written notice prior to the implementation of any change in rates or programming services. 
(Prior code § 15047)  
5.12.490 - Rights of individuals. 
A.  Nondiscrimination. The grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age or sex. The grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and city laws and regulations, and all executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination which are incorporated and made part of this chapter by reference. 
B.  Equal Employment Opportunity. The grantee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity requirements of the FCC and state and local authorities, as amended from time to time. 
C.  Monitoring. No signals of a cable communications channel shall be transmitted from a subscriber terminal for purposes of monitoring individual viewing patterns or practices without the express written permission of the subscriber. The request for such permission shall be contained in a separate document with a prominent statement that the subscriber is authorizing the permission in full knowledge of its provisions. Such written permission shall be for a limited period of time not to exceed one year, which shall be renewable at the option of the subscriber. No penalty shall be invoked for a subscriber's failure to provide or renew such an authorization. The authorization shall be revocable at any time by the subscriber without penalty of any kind whatsoever. Such authorization is required for each type or classification of cable television activity planned, provided that the grantee shall be entitled to conduct system-wide or individually addressed sweeps for the purpose of verifying system integrity, controlling return path transmissions or billing for pay services, or for the purpose of detecting unauthorized connections to the cable communications system. 
D.  Subscriber Information. The grantee's policy with respect to personally identifiable information shall be consistent with federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations with respect thereto. 
(Prior code § 15048)  
5.12.500 - Continuity of service. 
A.  Continuity Required. It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. In the event that the grantee elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify or sell the cable communications system, or the city gives notice of intent to terminate or fails to renew the franchise, the grantee shall act so as to minimize the period of any interruption in service resulting therefrom. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice to the affected subscribers and shall be limited to periods of minimum use of the service or services to be interrupted. 
B.  Operation by Grantee After Termination. In the event of a change of grantee, or in the event a new operator acquires the cable communications system, the grantee shall cooperate with the city, new grantee or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During such period, the grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the system. 
(Prior code § 15049)  
5.12.510 - Grantee rules and regulations. 
The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as the grantee shall consider reasonably necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under the franchise and to assure service to each and all of its subscribers, provided that such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions hereof or applicable federal and state laws, rules and regulations. The grantee shall provide the city with copies of any such rules, regulations, terms and conditions within thirty (30) days after any change therein. 
(Prior code § 15050)  
5.12.520 - Tenant rights. 
The grantee shall be required to provide tenants in individually billed units of a multiple dwelling unit housing facility with all cable services offered to other dwelling units located within the service area, so long as the owner of the facility consents in writing, if requested by the grantee, to the following: 
A.  To the grantee's providing of the service directly to individual units of the facility; 
B.  To reasonable conditions and times for installation, maintenance and inspection of the system on the facility premises; 
C.  To reasonable conditions promulgated by the grantee to protect the grantee's equipment and to encourage widespread use of the system; and 
D.  To not discriminate in retail charges or otherwise between tenants who receive cable service and those who do not. 
(Prior code § 15051)  
Article VIII. - Rights Reserved to the City 
 
5.12.530 - Right to purchase system. 
The city may in any lawful manner and upon the payment of a fair valuation lawfully ascertained, purchase, condemn, acquire, take over, and hold the property and plant of the grantee in whole or in part. If such purchase or taking over be upon revocation of the franchise or at the expiration of the term of the franchise, such evaluation shall not include any sum for the value of the franchise or grant under which such plant and property is being operated. 
(Prior code § 15052)  
5.12.540 - Right of inspection of construction. 
The city shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation work performed in the streets pursuant to the provisions of the grantee's franchise and to make such tests as are provided in this chapter, such franchise, or applicable federal, state or city law as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this chapter, the franchise, and such other pertinent provisions of law. 
(Prior code § 15053)  
Article IX. - Rights Reserved to the Grantee 
 
5.12.550 - Rights of grantee generally. 
In the event of any dispute between the city and the grantee arising with respect to this chapter or the grantee's franchise, or with respect to any rights or obligations arising therefrom, the grantee shall first pursue and exhaust all available administrative remedies. Thereafter, the grantee may pursue appropriate legal action. 
(Prior code § 15054)  
Article X. - Reports 
 
5.12.560 - Annual reports. 
At the city's sole option, within sixty (60) days after the close of the grantee's fiscal year, the grantee shall submit a written annual report, in a form approved by the city, which shall contain the following information: 
A.  Activities Undertaken. A summary of the previous year's (or, in the case of the initial report year, the initial year's) activities in development of the cable communications system, including, but not limited to, services begun or discontinued during the reporting year and the number of subscribers for each class of service. 
B.  Partners, Officers and Directors. A list of the grantee's general partners, officers, members of its board of directors, or other principals, as the case may be. 
C.  Principal Partners and Stockholders. A list of partners, stockholders, or other equity investors holding five percent or more of the partnership interests in the grantee or the voting interest in the grantee, its parent, and subsidiary and affiliated corporations, if any. 
(Prior code § 15056)  
5.12.570 - Plant survey report. 
At the city's sole option, the grantee shall submit to the city within ninety (90) days after its request therefor an annual plant survey report which shall be a complete survey of the grantee's plant and a full report thereon relating to the most recently completed calendar year. Such report shall contain a description of the portions of the service area that have been cabled and have all cable services available and shall reference the availability of as-built maps showing location of the cable communications system installed in the service area as of the end of the calendar year for which such report is requested. Such report shall be in sufficient detail to enable the city to ascertain that the technical standards of the FCC are achieved and maintained, which shall be satisfied by incorporating in the plant survey report the proof of performance report completed by the grantee for such calendar year. If the city has reason to believe that portions or all of the system materially fail to satisfy the FCC technical standards applicable to cable communications system, at the city's request, but no more often than once each three years, the grantee and the city shall agree upon the appointment of a qualified independent engineer to evaluate and verify the technical performance of the cable system. The cost of such evaluation shall be borne equally by the grantee and the city,unless such evaluation indicates that the cable communications system materially fails to meet such FCC technical standards, in which case the cost thereof shall be borne solely by the grantee. 
(Prior code § 15057)  
5.12.580 - Public reports. 
Upon request of the city, the grantee shall furnish copies of any publicly available reports concerning the grantee, its parent, or affiliates, including, but not limited to, annual and other periodic reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. 
(Prior code § 15058)  
5.12.590 - Surveys. 
Upon request of the city, the grantee shall furnish the results of any survey undertaken by the grantee of a representative sample of all of its subscribers, provided that the grantee shall give the city at least ten (10) days' prior notice of any such survey to permit the city to submit requests for items to be included in such survey. The grantee may, in its reasonable judgment, elect not to include any or all of those items requested by the city for incorporation in such survey. 
(Prior code § 15059)  
5.12.600 - Miscellaneous reports. 
The grantee shall submit to the city such other information or reports in such forms and at such times as the city may reasonably request, provided that such information or reports shall relate directly to information or reports which the city is entitled to receive under the terms of this chapter or the grantee's franchise and, provided further, that the grantor shall bear the reasonable expense of preparing such information or reports. 
(Prior code § 15060)  
5.12.610 - Inspection of facilities. 
The grantee shall allow the city to make inspections of any of the grantee's distribution facilities and equipment at any time during the grantee's normal business hours upon reasonable notice or, in case of emergency, upon demand without prior notice, to allow the city to verify the accuracy of any submitted report. 
(Prior code § 15061)  
5.12.620 - Public inspection. 
All reports subject to public disclosure and maintained in the city's records shall be available for public inspection at a designated city office during normal business hours. 
(Prior code § 15062)  
5.12.630 - Failure to report. 
The refusal, failure or neglect of the grantee to file any of the reports required under this chapter or the grantee's franchise shall be deemed a material breach of the franchise if the grantee fails to file such report, after receipt of written notice from the city with respect thereto, within the period of cure allowed under this chapter for an event of default by the grantee in the performance of any of its material obligations under this chapter, and shall subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the city under the grantee's franchise or otherwise. 
(Prior code § 15063)  
5.12.640 - False statements. 
Any materially false or misleading statement or representation made knowingly by the grantee in any report required under this chapter or the franchise shall be deemed a material breach of the franchise and shall subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the city under the grantee's franchise or otherwise. 
(Prior code § 15064)  
5.12.650 - Cost of reports. 
All reports and records required under this or any other section shall be furnished at the sole expense of the grantee, except with respect to miscellaneous information and reports as set forth in Section 5.12.600. 
(Prior code § 15065)  
Article XI. - Miscellaneous Provisions 
 
5.12.660 - Notices. 
The grantee shall maintain within Butte or Glenn Counties throughout the term of the franchise an address for service of notices by mail. 
(Prior code § 15067)  
5.12.670 - Nonenforcement by the city. 
The grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of the city to enforce prompt compliance. 
(Prior code § 15068)  
5.12.680 - Theft of services and tampering. 
No person, whether or not a subscriber to the cable communications system, may intentionally or knowingly damage or cause to be damaged any wire, cable, conduit, equipment, apparatus or appurtenance of the grantee, or commit any act with intent to cause damage, or to tap, tamper with, or otherwise connect any wire or device to a wire, cable, conduit, equipment, apparatus or appurtenance of the grantee with the intent to obtain a signal or impulse from the cable communications system without authorization from or compensation to the grantee, or to obtain cable or other communication services with intent to cheat or defraud the grantee of any lawful charge to which it is entitled. 
(Prior code § 15069)  
5.12.690 - Force majeure. 
In the event the grantee's performance of any of the terms, conditions, obligations or requirements of its franchise, including such terms, conditions, obligations or requirements as are set forth in this chapter, is prevented or impaired due to any cause beyond its reasonable control or not reasonably foreseeable, such inability to perform shall be deemed to be excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof, provided that the grantee has notified the city in writing within thirty (30) days of its discovery of the occurrence of such an event. Such causes beyond the grantee's reasonable control or not reasonably foreseeable shall include, but shall not be limited to, acts of God and civil emergencies. 
(Prior code § 15070)  
Chapter 5.20 - PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS AND JUNK DEALERS 
Sections: 
 
5.20.010 - License required. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in, conduct, manage or carry on the business of pawnbroker, second-hand dealer, junk dealer or junk collector, without first having procured a license to do so and having paid the fee for such license as in this chapter provided. 
(Prior code § 7500)  
5.20.020 - License—Procurement required when. 
A license must be procured immediately before the continuance hereunder or the commencement of any business or occupation liable to license fees as provided in this chapter, from the treasurer of this city which license shall authorize the party obtaining same to transact the business described in such license for the period named therein. A separate license must be obtained for each branch, establishment or separate house or place of business located within the city. 
(Prior code § 7501)  
5.20.030 - License—Application procedure. 
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to obtain a license under provisions of this chapter shall file an application in writing therefor with the city council, filing a duplicate copy of such application with the chief of police, specifying by street and number the place where such business is proposed to be carried on; or, in the case of a junk collector who has no fixed place of business, such application shall specify street and number and town or city of such collector's residence. 
(Prior code § 7506)  
5.20.040 - License—Issuance—Fees payable when—Contents. 
A.  No license to conduct or carry on any business mentioned in this chapter shall be granted or issued except upon order of the city council, written notice of which shall be given to the treasurer by the clerk of the city council. 
B.  All sums of money for license fees provided for by this chapter are due and payable in advance at the office of the city treasurer and all licenses herein provided for shall be issued quarterly in advance, except wherein it is herein otherwise expressly provided. Each license shall state the person to whom, and the kind of business and the location for which, the same is issued, and the date of issuance, the license period for which issued, and the amount received therefor, and shall refer to this chapter and be signed by the treasurer. 
(Prior code §§ 7502, 7507)  
5.20.050 - Collection—Duties of treasurer. 
It shall be the duty of the treasurer to collect the license fees under this chapter, and to perform such other duties as are prescribed in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7503)  
5.20.060 - License fees enumerated. 
A.  Pawnbroker. Every pawnbroker shall pay a license fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per quarter. For the purpose of this chapter, a "pawnbroker" is defined to be a person, firm or corporation engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on the business of "pawnbroking," or the business of lending money for himself or any other person, firm or corporation upon personal property, pawns or pledges; or the business of purchasing articles of personal property and reselling, or agreeing to resell such articles to the vendors or their assignees at prices agreed upon at or before the time of such purchase. A "pawnshop" is defined to be any room, store, building or other place in which any such business is engaged in, carried on or conducted; 
B.  Secondhand Dealer. Except as hereinafter in this section provided, every secondhand dealer shall pay a license fee of six dollars and twenty-five cents ($6.25) per quarter. For the purpose of this chapter, a "secondhand dealer" is defined to be a person, firm or corporation engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on the business of buying, selling or otherwise dealing in secondhand goods, wares or merchandise; 
C.  Junk Dealer. Except as hereinafter in this section provided, every junk dealer shall pay a license fee of six dollars and twenty-five cents ($6.25) per quarter. For the purpose of this chapter, a "junk dealer" is defined to be a person, firm or corporation having a fixed place of business in the city and engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on a business of buying, selling or otherwise dealing in, either at wholesale or retail, any old rags, sacks, bottles, cans, papers, metal, scrap metals, scrap materials, or other articles commonly known as junk, or the dismantling or wrecking of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery; 
D.  Junk Collector. Except as hereinafter in this section provided, every junk collector shall pay a license fee of twelve dollars and fifty cents ($12.50) per quarter, for each wagon, vehicle or part used by him in his business as such junk collector. For the purpose of this chapter, a "junk collector" is defined to be a person, firm or corporation not having a fixed place of business in the city who goes from house to house, or from place to place gathering, collecting, buying, selling, or otherwise dealing in any old rags, sacks, bottles, cans, papers, metal or other articles commonly known as junk; 
E.  Provided, however, that any institution or organization which is conducted, managed or carried on exclusively for the benefit of charitable purposes, from which no profit is derived either directly or indirectly by any individual, firm or corporation, other than bona fide employees thereof, engaged in or carrying on the business of secondhand dealer or junk dealer, shall pay a license fee of one dollar ($1.00) per year, and any such charitable institution or organization engaged in or carrying on the business of junk collector shall pay a license fee of one dollar ($1.00) per year for each wagon, vehicle or cart used by it in such business; and 
F.  Further provided, that any such charitable institution or organization claiming to come under the provisions of this section shall furnish to the city council a statement in writing, duly sworn to, setting forth the purposes of such institution or organization, including such competent information with respect to such institution or organization as the city council may prescribe. 
(Prior code § 7505)  
5.20.070 - License—Revocation or denial. 
A.  Every license granted under this chapter or any section hereof is granted and accepted by all parties receiving such license with the express understanding that the city council may revoke the same at any time when it appears that any state of facts exists upon which they would be authorized to deny an application for such license, or that the person, firm or corporation to whom such license was issued, or any of his or its agents, servants or employees, has violated or been convicted of violating any of the terms of this chapter, or of any other section of this code, or of any law of the state, now or hereafter, in force regulating the occupation or business for which such license was issued, or that the license was obtained by fraudulent representations, or that the holder of the license is an unfit person to be intrusted with the privileges granted by such license, or has conducted his business in an immoral or disorderly manner; provided, however, that no license shall be revoked without giving the holder thereof an opportunity to appear before the city council in his own behalf. On the revocation of the license no part of the money in the hands of the treasurer shall be returned, but such license fee shall be forfeited to the city. Notice of such revocation shall be given to the treasurer by the clerk. When a license of any person, firm or corporation is revoked for any cause, no new or other license shall be granted to the same person, firm or corporation within six months after such revocation. 
B.  The city council may refuse to grant a license upon the same grounds as specified herein as causes for revocation. 
(Prior code § 7508)  
5.20.080 - License—Posting and display. 
Every person, firm or corporation having a license under the provisions of this chapter, and conducting, managing or carrying on a business or occupation at a fixed place of business, shall keep such license posted and exhibited while in force in some conspicuous part of such place of business. Every person having such license and not having a fixed place of business shall carry such license with him at all times while carrying on the business or occupation for which the same was granted. Every person, firm or corporation having a license under the provisions of this chapter shall produce and exhibit the same whenever requested to do so by any officer authorized to issue, inspect or collect licenses. 
(Prior code § 7509)  
5.20.090 - Junkyard permit required. 
A.  No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter establish a junkyard within the incorporated area of the city unless and until a permit therefor shall first have been secured from the city council, and no junkyard shall be maintained or operated except in conformance with the terms and conditions of such permit. 
B.  For the purposes of this section the term "junkyard" is defined to be a land area of four hundred (400) square feet or more, located within two hundred (200) feet of any public road or street, which is used for the storage or keeping of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap material, and/or for the dismantling or wrecking of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery. 
C.  Application for a junkyard permit shall be made in writing and submitted to the city council, and shall be accompanied by a description of the proposed location, a plot plan and statement describing the proposed operation. Applications may be approved, conditionally approved or disapproved, and permits approved shall be issued for a term of one year, renewable at the discretion of the city council. Conditions to approval may include requirements for additional fences than are herein otherwise prescribed in this chapter, or screen planting, setbacks, driveway and access widths and locations, control of advertising, sanitation, health and safety controls, and any other controls to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Prior code § 7521)  
5.20.100 - Weekly reports required. 
Every pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, junk dealer and junk collector shall, once a week, on each Saturday, or sooner, before the hour of ten a.m. make out and mail to the chief of police on a blank form to be obtained by such pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, junk dealer and junk collector from the chief of police for that purpose, a full, true and complete report of all goods, wares, merchandise or things received on deposit, pledged or purchased during the week preceding the filing of such report. Such report shall show the hour of the day when such article was received on deposit, pledged or purchased, and the true name and address, as nearly as the same is known to, or can be ascertained of the person or persons by whom such article was left on deposit, pledged or sold, together with a description of such person or persons. Such report shall further designate the make and license number of any automobile operated by such person or persons together with his operator's license number. The description to be given of every such person shall show style of dress, height, age, sex, complexion, color of mustache or beard, or both, where the same are worn, and if neither is worn, such fact shall be noted. Such report shall show the number of pawn ticket, amount loaned, quantity purchased and complete description of such article left on deposit, pledged or purchased. If any article so left on deposit, pledged or purchased has engraved thereon any number, word or initial, or contains any settings of any kind, the description of such article in such report shall contain such numbers, word or initial and shall show the kind of settings and the number of each kind. Blanks to be obtained from the office of the chief of police, shall be so printed and subdivided as to contain spaces with the proper captions for the furnishing of the information required by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7510)  
5.20.110 - Chief of police—Storage of weekly reports. 
Chief of police shall file, in some secure place in police's office, all reports received pursuant to terms herein, and same shall be open to inspection only to duly authorized peace officers, or upon an order of a court of competent jurisdiction made for that purpose. 
(Prior code § 7512)  
5.20.120 - Recordkeeping and inspection. 
Every pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, junk dealer and junk collector shall keep a complete record of all goods, wares, merchandise or things pledged to or purchased or received by him, which record shall contain all the matters required to be shown in the reports referred to and described in Section 5.20.100. Every such record and all goods, wares, merchandise and things pledged to or purchased or received by any such pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, junk dealer or junk collector, shall be produced for inspection to any duly authorized peace officer. 
(Prior code § 7511)  
5.20.130 - Reports and records—Standards. 
Every report and record required herein to be filed or kept shall be written or printed entirely in the English language, in a clear and legible manner. 
(Prior code § 7513)  
5.20.140 - Reports and records—Failure to keep prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation engaged in, conducting, managing or carrying on the business of pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, junk dealer or junk collector, or for any agent or employee of any such person, firm or corporation to fail, refuse or neglect to file any report in the form, in the manner, at the time and in all respects in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, or to fail, refuse or neglect to keep any record or records in the form and in the manner required by this chapter, or to fail, refuse or neglect to exhibit to any officer or person referred to in Section 5.20.120, immediately upon demand for the privilege of such inspection, any such record or any goods, wares, merchandise or things pledged to or purchased or received by such person, firm or corporation. 
(Prior code § 7514)  
5.20.150 - Junkyard and pawnbroking on same premises prohibited. 
No owner or keeper of a junk shop or junkyard shall receive any personal property by way of pledge or pawn, nor shall any owner or keeper of a junk shop or junkyard engage in the business of pawnbroking on the same premises wherein a junk shop or junkyard is located. 
(Prior code § 7516)  
5.20.160 - Exception to Sections 5.20.100 through 5.20.150. 
The provisions of Sections 5.20.100 through 5.20.150 shall not apply to the receipt or sale of a secondhand article by any person, firm or corporation that receives such secondhand article as part payment of a new article, if such person, firm or corporation is the authorized representative or agent of the manufacturer of the new article sold. 
(Prior code § 7518)  
5.20.170 - Waiting period for disposal of goods. 
Except upon the prior written permission of the chief of police, it is unlawful for any pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk collector to sell or otherwise dispose of any article or thing within one week after making a report to the chief of police as required in Section 5.20.100 that such article or thing has been purchased or received by such pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, junk dealer or junk collector; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to motor vehicles duly and regularly cleared for transfer by the state of California, Division of Motor Vehicles. 
(Prior code § 7515)  
5.20.180 - Transacting with intoxicated persons and minors. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, maintaining or operating a junk shop or junkyard, to receive or purchase any property, article or thing, from any person who shall appear to be, or who is known to be intoxicated, or from any minor under the age of twenty-one (21) years; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply where the minor dealing with such person, firm or corporation, presents the written consent of his parent or guardian, duly signed, authorizing the particular transaction had with such person, firm or corporation; and provided, further, that such written consent be retained by such person, firm or corporation, as long as the property procured through such transaction remains in the possession of such person, firm or corporation, and provided that the written consent shall be exhibited, upon demand, to any peace officer requiring the same. 
(Prior code § 7517)  
5.20.190 - Hours of operation. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation engaged in, conducting, managing or carrying on the business of pawnbroker, junk dealer or junk collector or for any agent or employee of any such person, firm or corporation, to accept any pledge or to loan any money upon personal property or to receive or purchase any goods, wares or merchandise or any article or thing or in any manner whatsoever engage in or conduct any such business between the hour of seven p.m. of any day and the hour of seven a.m. of the following day. 
(Prior code § 7519)  
5.20.200 - Rodent proofing and waterproofing requirements. 
A.  If any business or establishment referred to in Section 5.20.010 shall be located in whole or in part in any yard, enclosure, lot or open area, such premises shall be completely surrounded and enclosed by a wall, fence or barrier constructed of wood or other solid impervious material, and so constructed as to be a continuous barrier, except for necessary openings, sufficient to prevent the ingress or egress of rats, mice or other rodents. Such wall, fence or barrier shall be continuously kept and maintained in the condition required by this section. Such wall, fence or barrier shall extend above the ground for at least six feet and shall extend to the level of the ground. Any and all necessary openings in such fence, wall or barrier shall be provided with suitable gates or door constructed of the same material and in the same manner of construction as is authorized by this chapter as suitable and sufficient for a fence, wall or barrier under this section. No such opening shall in any single instance exceed twelve (12) feet in width. Such gate or door shall be closed at all times except when in actual use for the purpose of ingress and egress. 
It is unlawful for any person to permit any such business or establishment referred to and described in this chapter to be established, conducted, carried on or maintained unless the premises shall have been rendered rodentproof in the manner prescribed in this section and continuously maintained in such condition. Each day's violation of the requirements declared and established by this provision shall be and constitute a separate and distinct violation and offense. 
B.  If any business or establishment referred to in Section 5.20.010 of this chapter shall be located in whole or in part in a yard, enclosure, lot or open area, such premises and area shall be kept clean and free from rubbish and similar loose material that might serve as a harborage for rats, mice or other rodents, and all loose metal, or parts or accessories of automobiles, and all other material kept, stored or accumulated in such place, shall be neatly and carefully piled, in such manner as to minimize and prevent as far as possible the harboring of such rodents, and shall be suitably protected from water and the elements so that there can be no accumulation of water in any article or thing located on such premises. 
(Prior code §§ 7520, 7522)  
5.20.210 - Engaging in more than one business regulated by this chapter. 
If any person, firm or corporation shall engage in, conduct, manage or carry on, at the same time, more then one of the businesses defined and referred to in this chapter, such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed to be engaging in, conducting, managing and carrying on each business separately and apart from the other such business, and such person, firm or corporation shall comply in all respects with the provisions of this chapter, relating to each such business, and it is unlawful for any such person, firm or corporation to fail, refuse or neglect to do so. 
(Prior code § 7523)  
Chapter 5.24 - POOL ROOMS 
Sections: 
 
5.24.010 - License or permit—Application. 
Before opening a pool hall or engaging in such business, an application must be made in writing to the city council and filed with the city clerk at least five days before the same may be granted. 
(Prior code § 7400)  
5.24.020 - License or permit—Revocation. 
If the city council shall at any time become satisfied after a hearing held, or the opportunity of a hearing offered, that any person to whom such permit and/or license has been granted, such person's clerk, agent or employee has allowed or is allowing gambling in any form in, or on, the premises used in conducting such business, or is conducting such business in a manner contrary to law or contrary to good morals in the city; or is, or are, maintaining a nuisance upon the premises used in conducting such business, the city council shall cancel, revoke and withdraw such permit and license, and all rights thereunder, and it shall thereafter be unlawful for such person to conduct or carry on such business within the city. 
(Prior code § 7401)  
5.24.030 - Prohibitions. 
It is unlawful for the owner, proprietor, manager or person in charge of any billiard room or pool room located within the corporate limits of the city, to permit or allow any person or persons to remain or enter in any such billiard room or pool room, between the hours of twelve midnight and six a.m. of any day, for the purpose of engaging in or taking part in any game of any kind, and it is declared to be unlawful for any person to remain in or to enter any such place between the stated hours and for any of such purposes; or to permit minors under the age of eighteen (18) years in or about such places. 
(Prior code § 7402)  
Chapter 5.28 - PUBLIC DANCES, EXHIBITIONS, CARNIVALS AND OTHER PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT 
Sections: 
 
5.28.010 - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, club, organization or association to hold or conduct any public dance, exhibition, carnival or public entertainment to which attendance by the general public is invited or solicited in the city whether or not a charge for admission is made, without first obtaining a valid permit from the chief of police. 
(Prior code § 5400)  
5.28.020 - Permit application. 
Any person, firm, corporation, club, organization or association desiring to hold or conduct a public dance, exhibition, carnival or public entertainment in the city, shall file an application for a permit to hold such public dance, exhibition, carnival or public entertainment with the chief of police not less than three days prior to the date of such event. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the chief of police and shall set forth the following: 
A.  The name of the person, firm, corporation, club, organization or association holding or conducting the event; 
B.  The date, time and place of the event; 
C.  The amount of the admission charge to the event, if any; 
D.  The type of music to be played at the event (live instrumental or recorded), and whether or not amplifiers will be used; 
E.  The number of persons expected to be in attendance at the event. 
(Prior code § 5401)  
5.28.030 - Permit—Issuance conditions. 
A.  Before issuing the permit, the chief of police shall require the applicant to exhibit a signed receipt indicating that all business licenses, taxes, etc., if any, and as may be required by the city under other sections of this code, have been paid. 
B.  The chief of police may also require, as a condition to the issuance of the permit, that the applicant hire and employ at applicant's expense, not to exceed three special police officers, who shall meet with the approval of the chief of police as to competence, training and ability, and who shall be in attendance in distinctive special police officer's uniforms at all times during the conduct of the public dance, exhibition, carnival or public entertainment, in order to maintain law and order and prevent disturbances of the peace at, in, or about the premises where the event is being held. In the enforcement of the public peace, such special officers shall act under the direction and orders of the chief of police, but shall in no way be deemed to be agents or employees of the city while in the performance of such duties as special officers. 
(Prior code § 5402)  
5.28.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of this city, any material fact in procuring the permit herein provided for, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code. Each day's operation without such a permit is a separate violation. 
(Prior code § 5403)  
Chapter 5.30 - MARIJUANA DISTRIBUTION FACILITIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-01 , § 2, adopted Jan. 17, 2017, changed the title of Ch. 5.30 from "Medical Marijuana Distribution Facilities" to read as herein set out. 
 
5.30.010 - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
"Marijuana" and "medical marijuana" shall be as defined in Orland Municipal Code Section 8.24.020. Where applicable, "marijuana" shall include "medical marijuana." 
"Marijuana distribution facility" is (1) any facility or location, whether fixed or mobile, where marijuana is made available, sold, transmitted, given or otherwise provided to any person; (2) any facility or location, whether fixed or mobile, where marijuana is made available, sold, transmitted, given or otherwise provided to two or more persons with identification cards or qualified patients, or primary caregivers, as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq. as amended from time to time, or (3) any facility where two or more qualified patients, persons with identification cards or primary caregivers meet or congregate collectively and cooperatively to cultivate or distribute marijuana for medical purposes under the purported authority of California Health and Safety Code section 11362.5 et seq. 
"Marijuana distribution facility" includes any location in the city to which any marijuana is delivered pursuant to any commercial transaction. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2; Ord. No. 2017-01 , § 2)  
5.30.020 - Prohibition. 
A.  Marijuana distribution facilities are prohibited in the city of Orland, and no person shall operate or locate a marijuana distribution facility in the city of Orland. The city shall not issue, approve, or grant any permit, license, or other entitlement for the establishment or operation of a marijuana distribution facility in the city of Orland. 
B.  This chapter does not apply where preempted by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2; Ord. No. 2017-01 , § 2)  
5.30.030 - Violations—Penalty. 
A.  Any use or condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be abated by the city pursuant to the procedures set forth in this code. 
B.  Each violation of this chapter and each day a violation of this chapter continues to exist shall be considered a separate and distinct violation. 
C.  All means of enforcement authorized under this code may be used to address violations of this chapter, including but not limited to: Civil penalties, nuisance abatement, civil actions, and administrative citations. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2)  
Title 6 - ANIMALS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 6.04 - ANIMALS 
Sections: 
 
6.04.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, the following terms as used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
"Animal" means and includes any domesticated animals, fowl or captivated wild animals. 
"Animal control officer" means any person statutorily or contractually designated as the animal control officer for the city, and authorized to act in its behalf in the enforcement of the animal and rabies program. 
"At large" means any animal not in an enclosed area, or not under restraint by leash, and/or not under the immediate and direct control of a responsible person. 
1.  Exceptions to the definition of "at large" are as follows: 
a.  A hunting dog is to be presumed to be under direct control of its owner or custodian when performing the act of legally hunting game, upland or waterfowl or within the area or confines of its owner's or custodian's property. 
b.  A stock or working dog is presumed to be under direct control of its owner or custodian when performing its herding duties within the area of confines of its owner's or custodian's property. 
"Cat" means and includes all domesticated felines. 
"Dog" means and includes all domesticated canines. 
"Health department" means the health department of the county of Glenn. 
"Health officer" means the Glenn County director of health services or any person duly authorized to act on his behalf. 
"Hunting pack" means three to five hunting breed dogs used exclusively for running and hunting. 
"Kennel" means any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises where or wherein five or more dogs are kept or maintained for the sole purpose of breeding, training, selling, show, purchase or boarding and provided further that this definition of kennel shall not be construed as applying to a duly licensed veterinary hospital. 
"Livestock" means and includes all domesticated bovine, equine, caprine, ovine, avian, poultry and rodent species. 
"Owner" means any person of any age, a firm or corporation owning, harboring, having an interest in, and/or control or ostensible control, custody and/or possession of any animal. 
"Person" means a person of any age, a firm, partnership, copartnership, association, company, corporation, estate, trust or organization of any kind. 
"Pet shop" means an establishment operated by any person, firm or corporation where any live animals are kept for sale, barter, hire or trade. 
"Pound" means and includes all places where impounded animals are to be confined. 
"Public aquarium" means any place where fish or other aquatic animals are kept, maintained for public exhibit, sale or trade. 
"Responsible person" means a person who can and does control and restrain the animal. 
"Stock pack" means three to five working or stock breed dogs used for the purpose of herding or otherwise working livestock. 
"Stray" means any livestock off the premises of its owner not under restraint and not in the immediate presence of the owner. 
"Veterinarian" means a person licensed to practice veterinary medicine in California. 
"Vicious animal" means any animal, dog or cat which shows a propensity to attack, bite, scratch or harass people or other animals without provocation. 
"Working animals" means animals under the control of humans used in the movement of livestock, poultry, or in the taking of wild animals or fowls during the season established by the United States Government or the state, or in field trials, exhibitions or competitions. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.020 - Animal control officer—Authority. 
A.  The animal control officer and each of his deputies shall have and is vested with the authority of a public officer. Each animal control officer may, in the performance of his duties, enter upon any property pursuant to law, to ascertain if any of the provisions of this chapter or any state laws relating to disease, care, treatment, impounding or cruelty to animals are being violated. Each animal control officer may issue citations for the violation of the provisions of this chapter or any state laws in the manner prescribed by the city or by the agency contracting with the city for animal control services, and authorized to act in its behalf in the enforcement of the animal and rabies program. 
B.  In performance of his duties, the animal control officer shall have the authority to employ the use of a tranquilizer gun and all lawful animal control devices in common use within the state. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.030 - Animal control officer—Enforcement powers. 
A.  The animal control officer, all deputy animal control officers and all deputy sheriffs shall have the power and duty to enforce the provisions of this chapter and the relevant provisions of the Penal Code and Agricultural Code of the state of California. Pursuant to Section 836.5 of the Penal Code, any of them may arrest a person without a warrant whenever he has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a misdemeanor in his presence which is a violation of the penal provisions of this chapter. In that capacity, they shall be empowered to make arrests for violations of this chapter and may release the arrested person upon the issuance of a citation as provided in Section 853.6 of the Penal Code. 
B.  For the purpose of discharging his duties imposed by this chapter, the animal control officer and his deputies are authorized and directed to enter upon any enclosed or unenclosed property upon which the animal is kept or found in violation of the provisions of this chapter and to demand from the person owning or having charge or control of the animal, exhibition of the license and tag for such animal if it is required to be licensed by this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.040 - Animal control officer—Duties. 
The duties of the animal control officer shall be to: 
A.  Operate or contract for public pound services within the county at such place or places as may be designated by the board of supervisors; 
B.  Provide for the sale and issuance of licenses and to enforce all provisions of this chapter and all laws of the state relating to the control of dogs and other animals, domestic or wild; 
C.  Keep a record of the number of all animals impounded, showing in detail in the case of each animal, the description, dates of receipt, the date and manner of disposal, the name of the person redeeming or purchasing, and the fees and charges and proceeds of sales received on account thereof, and such additional records as may be required by the board of supervisors; 
D.  Take up and impound any stray animal or animals found at large on any public property; 
E.  Take up and impound animals as prescribed by Section 6.04.090 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.050 - Taking up stray animals—Regulation. 
Any person who finds any animal which has strayed or is running at large upon his own property or any other place contrary to the provisions of this chapter may take possession of and hold the same; provided, however, that he shall be obligated to notify the animal control officer or the sheriff of the fact that he has such animal in his possession within six hours after securing possession thereof, and give such animal control officer or sheriff full information in regard to the same, and surrender the same to the animal control officer upon demand. The taker-up shall provide adequate and proper care in conformance with the provisions of 597f of the Penal Code. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.060 - Prohibited actions. 
It is unlawful within the incorporated areas of the city of Orland for any person owning, harboring or controlling any animal to: 
A.  Abandon the animal in any incorporated area of this city; 
B.  Permit the animal to run at large; 
C.  Permit the animal to trespass on public or private property; 
D.  Permit the animal to damage or destroy anything of value thereon, or to commit a nuisance thereon; 
E.  Keep the animal when they know, or should know, that the animal is vicious; 
F.  Permit the animal to threaten the safety of any person or animal; 
G.  Permit a female dog which is in heat or estrus to be accessible to other dogs who are at large; 
H.  Permit any animal to trespass on any lands whereon livestock or domestic fowl are kept; 
I.  Permit any animal to worry or harass livestock or domestic fowl; 
J.  Permit an animal to be staked or tied on any street, public or private, or other public place, or upon any private property where the animal could reach or threaten other animals, children or adults; 
K.  Permit an animal to be staked or tied on any street, public or private, or other public place, or upon any private property with the consent of the owner or occupant thereof; provided, that this provision shall only be enforced upon complaint of an interested party; 
L.  Refuse to display the animal to the animal control officer upon his reasonable request, together with a current license tag for such animal if such is required by this chapter; 
M.  Refuse to obey the conditions of a lawfully imposed quarantine; 
N.  In the case of a dog required to be licensed pursuant to this chapter, permit to remain attached to the dog a license issued by the county or any other county or city in the state for the current or immediately preceding year when the license was not issued for that particular dog; 
O.  Permit any animal to be at large or be pastured or kept on any street or other public place or on private property against the wishes of the owner or occupant; 
P.  Permit any animal to do any other act or thing which would in any manner or place result in injury to any person or the owner or occupant of any real or personal property; 
Q.  Keep or harbor any dog or other animal, whether licensed or not, which by habitual howling, yelping, barking or other noise disturbs or annoys any number of persons or any neighborhood. 
(Ord. 2007-07 § 3)  
6.04.090 - Duty of animal control officer. 
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to take up within the city of Orland and impound: 
A.  Any animal not having attached to its body a current license tag or brand where such is required by this chapter; 
B.  Any animal when there is reason to believe the animal has been abandoned; 
C.  Any animal at large; 
D.  Any animal trespassing on public or private property; 
E.  Any animal which has damaged anything of value; 
F.  Any animal which has committed a nuisance; 
G.  Any animal which is vicious; 
H.  Any animal which threatens the safety of any person or other animal; 
I.  Any female dog which is in heat or estrus and accessible to other dogs who are at large; 
J.  Any animal trespassing on any lands whereon livestock or domestic fowl are kept; 
K.  Any animal worrying or harassing livestock or domestic fowl; 
L.  Any animal staked or tied on any street, public or private, or other public place, or upon any private property where the animal could reach or threaten other animals, children or adults; 
M.  Any animal staked or tied on any street, public or private, or other public place, or upon any private property without the consent of the owner or occupant thereof; 
N.  Any animal whose owner has refused to display the animal to the animal control officer upon his reasonable request, together with a current license tag for such animal if such is required by this chapter; 
O.  Any animal whose owner has refused to obey the conditions of a lawfully imposed quarantine; 
P.  Any animal required to be licensed pursuant to this chapter, whose owner has permitted to remain attached to the animal, a license issued by the county or any other county or city in the state for the current or immediately preceding year when the license was not issued for that particular animal; 
Q.  Any animal found to be at large or be pastured or kept on any street or other public place or on private property against the wishes of the owner or occupant; 
R.  Any animal which does any act or thing which would in any manner or place result in injury to any person or the owner or occupant of any real or personal property; 
S.  Any animal, whether licensed or not, which by habitual howling, yelping, barking or other noise disturbs or annoys any person or any neighborhood; 
T.  Any animal which has destroyed anything of value; 
U.  Any animal when such taking up is necessary for the health and safety of the community; 
V.  Any stray or animal at large in violation of any law of this state; 
W.  Any animal when such impounding is necessary to facilitate investigation, prosecution or enforcement of this chapter or any other law of this county or state. 
(Ord. 2006-07 § 3 (part); Ord. 2006-05 (part): former Section 6.04.130)  
6.04.100 - Notification—Destruction of animals. 
A.  Upon impounding any animal in accordance with this chapter, the animal control officer shall make a reasonably diligent effort to ascertain the name and address of the owner, either from the licensing records, in the case of a dog carrying a license tag, or from such other sources as the animal control officer may find. If the animal control officer can ascertain the name and address of the animal's owner, the officer shall notify the owner by telephone, and in any event within twenty-four (24) hours of the impoundment shall mail by certified mail a written notice of the impoundment. The notice shall state that the owner may redeem the animal within four business days (not counting the day the animal was picked up, weekends and legal holidays) of the date of the mailing of the notice; providing he pays all impoundment fees, and that if not redeemed within that time, the animal shall be placed in a bona fide home other than the owner's or humanely destroyed. If the animal's owner objects to the impoundment or refuses to redeem the animal within the same four business days (not counting the day the animal was picked up, weekends and legal holidays) from the date of impoundment or the date of mailing of the notice as in this section, whichever is later, the animal control officer shall advise the owner that he may forthwith request a hearing before the county hearing officer regarding the circumstances surrounding the impoundment. The hearing shall be held within five days of the filing of the request. At the conclusion of the hearing, the county hearing officer shall order disposition of the animal and may prescribe that the cost of the impoundment shall be borne either by the county, or the animal's owner, or apportioned between them. 
B.  In no event shall any impounded animal be placed in a bona fide home or destroyed before the expiration of four business days (not counting the day the animal was picked up, weekends and legal holidays) of the date of the mailing of the notice from the date of impoundment or the date of mailing of the notice as in this section, whichever is later, except that the animal control officer may and he is authorized and empowered to forthwith destroy any impounded animal which is, by reason of injury or disease, dangerous to keep impounded, and report such fact to the owner, if known, and to the county hearing officer. 
C.  The animal control officer shall determine which animals are placed for adoption (after the allotted holding time). If the animal control officer determines the animal is not suitable for adoption, it will be humanely destroyed. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): former Section 6.04.150)  
6.04.110 - Impound loose dogs near children. 
For the health, welfare and safety of children, any dog found at large, upon or near any schoolyard, bus stop, road, street, alley or highway where one or more children are gathered shall be forthwith seized by any peace officer or by the animal control officer or his deputies and impounded. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.120 - Record of impounded animals. 
A.  The animal control officer shall keep a record of all animals impounded by him or his deputies which shall show the date of impoundment, license tag number, if any, brand or ear mark, and if sold, name and address of the person by whom redeemed or purchased, the amounts of all fees and other moneys received or collected by him and the disposition thereof. 
B.  The animal control officer shall keep such other records of impounded animals as may be required of him or as he shall deem necessary in the pursuance of his duties. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): former Section 6.04.160)  
6.04.130 - Fees—Redemption. 
A.  The animal control officer shall charge and collect fees for impounded animals when claimed. Such fees shall be prescribed by resolution of the city council, or as provided by contract with any person or organization contracting with the county for the maintenance of a public pound. 
B.  Except as provided in subsection D of this section, any animal taken up and impounded pursuant to this chapter may be redeemed by the owner thereafter at any time prior to actual disposal of the animal upon the payment of all fees and costs as provided by the prescribed fee schedule and upon presentation of evidence that the animal is duly licensed where such is required. A signed declaration of ownership shall be prima facie evidence of ownership and shall justify release of the animal to the declared owner. 
C.  The animal control officer shall charge and collect fees for the destruction of animals, for the placement of animals in bona fide homes or for other disposal when such service is requested by the owner of the animal; provided, however, that upon the animal control officer's written certification that such charges in a given case would probably result in the abandonment of an animal, he may accept such animal from its owner without charge. Such fees shall be prescribed by city council, or as provided by contract with any person or organization contracting with the county for the maintenance of a public pound. 
D.  If the animal control officer, district attorney, sheriff or probation officer determines that any animal impounded under the terms of this chapter should be retained by the county to facilitate investigation, prosecution or other enforcement of this chapter or other county or state law, the animal control officer shall refuse to permit redemption of the animal until the need for retention no longer exists. The cost of such retention, but not including any damages claimed by the owner, shall, after attempted redemption by the owner, be borne by the county. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.140 - Diseased or vicious animals—Prohibited. 
A.  No person owning or having charge of any vicious animal shall permit such animal to be or remain upon any street or other public place in the city. 
B.  No person owning or having charge of any animal that is infected with any disease transmissible to man or that constitutes a public health hazard shall knowingly permit such animal to be or remain within the city other than at an approved veterinary hospital. 
C.  The animal control officer shall seize any animal he reasonably believes to be diseased, vicious or which is alleged to have bitten any person. He shall keep such animal in a safe place long enough to observe, examine and determine whether it is diseased or vicious so as to be a menace to public health or safety. 
D.  Diseased or vicious animals which are a menace to public health or safety shall be destroyed. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.150 - Habitual problem animals—Impoundment. 
The keeping or harboring of any animal, whether licensed or not, which by habitual howling, yelping, barking or other noise, or is a habitual nuisance by reason of trespassing or disturbance or is damaging property, or is vicious or by its actions potentially vicious, or in any other manner causes undue annoyance, is unlawful. The animal control officer, if he finds such nuisance to exist, shall serve notice upon the owner or custodian that such activity constitutes a public nuisance and must be abated. If such nuisance is not abated within three days of service of the notice, the animal control officer shall impound the animal in accordance with Section 6.04.100 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.160 - Habitual problem animals—Private complaint. 
The keeping or harboring of any animal, whether licensed or not, which by habitual howling, yelping, barking or other noise or is a habitual nuisance by reason of trespassing, or disturbance or is damaging property, or is vicious or by its actions potentially vicious, or in any other manner causes undue annoyance is unlawful. Whenever it is affirmed in writing by five or more persons having separate residences in the neighborhood that any animal, whether licensed or not, which by habitual howling, yelping, barking or other noise or is a habitual nuisance by reason of trespassing, howling, barking or creating other noise or disturbance or is damaging property, or is vicious or by its actions potentially vicious, or in any other manner causes undue annoyance, the animal control officer, if he finds such nuisance to exist, shall serve notice upon the owner or custodian that such activity constitutes a public nuisance and must be abated. If such nuisance is not abated within three days of service of the notice, the animal control officer shall impound the animal in accordance with Section 6.04.100 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.170 - License requirement. 
Every person owning or having control, custody or possession of any dog within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. 2006-07 § 3 (part): Ord. 2006-05 (part): former Section 6.04.020)  
6.04.180 - Tags and certificates—Procurement. 
The animal control officer shall procure an appropriate supply of serially numbered dog license certificates and tags as may be sufficient for use during annual, biennial, or triennial licensing. The certificates and tags shall be effective for a period commencing on the first day of the month in which they are issued and continuing until the last day of the immediately preceding month of the first, second, and third succeeding year thereafter. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): former Section 6.04.030)  
6.04.190 - Tags and certificates—Issuance. 
A metallic tag and license certificate with corresponding numbers shall be issued and furnished by the animal control officer to any person upon payment of the fee prescribed by the city council. Each license certificate shall include descriptive identification of the dog for which the tag and certificate are issued, the name and address of the dog's owner, and the name and address of the veterinarian or veterinary facility that last vaccinated the dog for rabies. The tag and corresponding certificate shall constitute the license of the dog for which they are issued and shall be valid only for the period for which issued. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): former Section 6.04.040)  
6.04.200 - Fees. 
A.  The annual, biennial, and triennial license fee for each dog over the age of four months shall be as set forth in the fee schedule prescribed by resolution of the city council. 
B.  Upon presentation of proper proof of spaying or neutering, certified by a licensed veterinarian, the license fee shall be issued for one-half of less of the basic license fee, as set by the city council. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): former Sections 6.04.050 and 6.04.080)  
6.04.210 - Duplicate tags. 
Whenever a tag issued for the then current period by the animal control officer or license collector, has been lost or stolen, the owner or possessor of the dog for which the same was issued may, upon the payment of the appropriate fee as set forth in the fee schedule prescribed by resolution of the city council, to the animal control officer and upon making and subscribing to any affidavit of such loss and filing the same with the animal control officer, receive a duplicate tag for such animal. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): former Section 6.04.060)  
6.04.220 - Dogs of nonresidents. 
The provisions of Sections 6.04.170 through 6.04.210 of this chapter shall not apply to any dog owned by or in the care or charge of a nonresident of the city who is traveling through the city or temporarily sojourning therein for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, nor to any dog temporarily brought into the city for the exclusive purpose of being entered in a bench show or dog exhibition or for breeding purposes, provided such dog is so entered and not kept elsewhere in the city. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): former Section 6.04.070)  
6.04.230 - Time limit—Records. 
The animal control officer shall keep a record of the name and address of each owner or person making payment of any license fee and to whom a certificate and tag have been issued and the number and date of such certificate and such tag. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): former Section 6.04.080)  
6.04.240 - Tag to be worn. 
Every license tag issued pursuant to this chapter shall be securely fixed to a collar, harness or other device to be worn at all times on the neck of the dog for which the license is issued. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): former Section 6.04.080)  
6.04.250 - Tag must be shown. 
No person shall fail or refuse to show to the animal control officer, any deputy animal control officer, or any deputy sheriff of the county, the license certificate and the tag for any duly registered dog kept or remaining within any home or upon any enclosed premises under his immediate control. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): former Section 6.04.090)  
6.04.260 - Removal of license tags. 
No unauthorized person shall remove from any dog any collar, harness, or other device to which is attached a license tag for the current year, or remove such a tag therefrom. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): former Section 6.04.100)  
6.04.270 - Counterfeiting tags—Prohibited. 
No person shall imitate or counterfeit the tags provided for in this chapter, or use any imitation or counterfeit of such tag. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): former Section 6.04.110)  
6.04.280 - Misuse of tags. 
No person shall attach a license tag issued by this city or any other agency or jurisdiction for the current or immediately preceding period to a dog when such person knows or should know that the license tag was not issued for such dog. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.290 - License not transferable. 
License certificates and tags issued pursuant to this chapter are not transferable. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.300 - Exemptions from licenses, tags or fees. 
The following dogs are exempt from the requirement for a license: 
A.  Dogs less than one hundred twenty (120) days old; 
B.  Dogs licensed and vaccinated in other jurisdictions for a current valid period of license when such dogs have been re-registered with Glenn County and issued a license tag at one-half of the standard fee; 
C.  Dogs on sale in a duly licensed pet shop; 
D.  Dogs used for the purpose of leading persons with defective eyesight. Any blind person having custody and control of any seeing eye dog may file an affidavit biennially with the animal control officer. The affidavit shall contain the name and address of the blind person, the required description of the dog and the statement "I am blind. I have a Seeing Eye Dog." The applicant may deliver the affidavit and a current rabies certificate to the animal control officer who shall thereupon endorse the license receipt, "Blind Person. Seeing Eye Dog," and deliver the license tag without charge. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.310 - Rabies vaccination required. 
Every owner of a dog over four months of age that resides or is otherwise kept in the incorporated area of the city shall cause such dog to be vaccinated for rabies with a state-approved vaccine administered by a duly licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): former Section 6.04.210)  
6.04.320 - Vaccination certificate. 
A.  Every dog owner whose dog has been vaccinated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, Chapter 8.06, or Section 1920 of the Health and Safety Code or any amendments thereto, shall be issued a certificate of vaccination by the veterinarian that complies with the requirements of Section 2606.4(a)(2) of Title 17 of the California Code of Regulations. Such certificate shall be exhibited by owner to the animal control officer or any peace officer upon demand at any reasonable time. 
B.  A license certificate and tag shall not be issued for any dog unless and until a copy of the certificate for the dog's current vaccination is received by the animal control officer. 
C.  A copy of each certificate of vaccination issued by a veterinarian for a dog kept within the city shall be delivered to the animal control officer within thirty (30) days after the issuance thereof. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part): former Section 6.04.210)  
6.04.330 - Quarantine of animals. 
The animal control officer shall ensure that all animals shall be isolated, quarantined and/or destroyed as prescribed under the provisions of Title 17 of the California Code of Regulations. The administration and enforcement will be in accordance with Sections 120435 through 121690 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.340 - Duty to report rabid animals. 
A.  Any person having knowledge of the whereabouts of an animal or the carcass of an animal known to have or suspected of having rabies shall immediately notify the animal control officer. Every person having any such information shall disclose the same after demand by the health officer or the animal control officer. 
B.  When notified of the whereabouts of such an animal, the animal control officer shall notify the health officer who shall direct the animal control officer as to the immediate disposition of the animal in accordance with Sections 120435 through 121690 of the California Health and Safety Code and provisions under Title 17 of the California Code of Regulations. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.350 - Duty to assist in quarantine of suspected rabid animals. 
It is the duty of any person having knowledge that any dog or other animal has or is suspected of having bitten any human being within the county to report immediately that fact to the animal control officer or to the health department and to furnish complete information regarding the incident. In the event that the animal control officer secures information of the existence of any case of rabies or other animal disease dangerous to human beings he shall immediately report the same to the health officer. The owner of any animal which has or is suspected of having bitten any person within the preceding fourteen (14) days shall immediately, upon demand, surrender such animal to the animal control officer for purposes of quarantine or confinement pursuant to Section 6.04.330 of this chapter. It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person having control, custody or possession of the animal, whether or not he is the owner of the animal, to fail to surrender such animal to the animal control officer upon demand, or to in any way hinder, interfere with or delay the animal control officer in the performance of his duties under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.360 - Violation of quarantine. 
A.  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for the owner or keeper of any animal to violate any of the conditions of isolation or quarantine prescribed by the health officer, the animal control officer or their assistants. 
B.  The costs of impounding any animal when such impounding is ordered by the health officer shall be a proper charge against funds budgeted for animal control; provided, however, that in the case of rabies where it cannot be proven that a dog so impounded has been vaccinated against rabies as required by law, then the owner of such dog shall pay all expenses of such impounding. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.370 - Exemption from vaccination. 
A.  Any dog may be exempted from antirabic vaccination if its owner presents to the animal control officer a statement in writing from a licensed veterinarian that the dog is not in physical condition to be vaccinated or that antirabic vaccination would be detrimental, for a physiological reason, to such dog's health. Such written statement must be presented to and endorsed by the animal control officer within five days of the examination. The intent of this provision is to cover periods of actual illness and not to exempt animals because of age alone. 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of the Health and Safety Code and California Code of Regulations of the state relating to rabies shall control when such provisions are more stringent than those provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.380 - Special rabies license. 
Whenever the State Department of Public Health determines that a rabies epidemic exists in the county, a special additional dog license tax as provided in Sections 1912, 1913 and 1914 of the California Health and Safety Code shall be imposed as provided therein. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.390 - Vaccination clinics. 
It shall be the responsibility of the animal control officer to arrange for dog vaccinations at clinics operated by veterinary groups or associations held at strategic locations throughout the county. No charge in excess of actual cost shall be made for any one vaccination at such clinic. No owner of a dog shall be required to have his dog vaccinated at a public clinic if the owner elects to have the dog vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian of the owner's choice. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.400 - Licensing requirements. 
Every person who is the legal owner or actually in control of or operates a commercial kennel or pet shop, unless otherwise exempt, shall apply to and procure a kennel license for each biennium or any portion thereof from the animal control officer. Application for such kennel license shall be made on the form provided by the animal control officer. No kennel shall be hereinafter established unless the person proposing to act as kennel operator shall first apply for and receive a kennel license pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.410 - Inspection of kennels. 
No original kennel license shall be issued unless and until the premises have been inspected and approved by the animal control officer or health department officer as meeting the appropriate standards set forth in Sections 6.04.430, 6.04.440 and 6.04.470 of this chapter. 
No such inspection shall be a prerequisite to renewal of kennel or pet shop licenses, and the fact of such renewal shall not be construed as an approval of the conditions of the kennel or the manner in which it is operated. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.420 - License fees. 
A.  The animal control officer shall issue a commercial kennel or pet shop license for the biennial years upon filing with him a properly completed application and upon payment of the prescribed fee. 
B.  The fee for a kennel or pet shop license shall be as provided in the fee schedule prescribed by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.430 - Zoning compliance. 
No original license for a kennel or pet shop, and no license for a hunting pack or stock pack of dogs shall be issued until the city manager has cleared the proposed license for compliance with Title 17 of this code. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.440 - Rabies vaccination certificate. 
No kennel or pet shop license shall be issued unless the applicant therefor displays at the time of application certificates showing that all dogs permanently kept in the kennel or pet shop have been vaccinated against rabies. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.450 - Delinquent license. 
Any license which was properly issuable more than thirty (30) days prior to the actual date of issuance shall be subject to penalties prescribed in the schedule of fees adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.460 - Kennel license tags. 
At the time of issuance of a kennel license, the animal control officer shall issue a special kennel license tag to the licensee. No dog kept by the kennel shall be taken therefrom without having attached to its body a tag issued pursuant to this provision, unless the dog is otherwise licensed and has attached to it a tag issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.470 - Sanitation and inspection. 
All commercial kennels and pet shops shall be designed to provide adequate exercise areas and to permit the premises to be kept in a clean and sanitary condition; constructed so as to prevent animals confined therein from running at large; maintained that they will not cause detriment or nuisance in the immediate neighborhood. Periodic inspections of licensed kennels and pet shops shall be made by the animal control officer at such intervals as he deems necessary. Such inspections may also be made by the health officer or his designated agent at the request of the animal control officer or on his own initiative. Inspecting officers shall use reasonable caution to prevent contamination of any pet shop or kennel during inspection. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.480 - Revocation of license. 
A.  When, after inspection, conditions exist which the animal control officer or health officer believes are in violation of this chapter or state law and warrant the revocation of a commercial kennel or pet shop license, the animal control officer or health officer shall report such facts to the county hearing officer with a recommendation that such permit be revoked. The licensee's refusal to permit reasonable inspection of the licensed premises by the animal control officer, or the failure to make the premises available for inspection after reasonable notice, shall constitute a valid ground for revocation. 
B.  After receipt of such recommendation, and upon ten (10) days written notice of the time and place thereof, the county hearing officer shall hold a hearing on the recommendation and, at the conclusion thereof, may permit the continued operation under the permit or revoke the permit. Should the county hearing officer order the revocation of the permit, he may direct that no similar permit be issued to the licensee for a period not to exceed one year following the revocation. The licensee, animal control officer or health officer shall have the right of appeal to the board of supervisors from any decision of the county hearing officer by filing a written notice of appeal with the county clerk within ten (10) days of such decision. This section shall not be interpreted to limit any power granted to the animal control officer or the health officer under any other provision of law. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.490 - Display of license. 
The kennel or pet shop license issued as required by this chapter shall be conspicuously displayed upon the kennel or pet shop premises. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.500 - Transfer of license. 
Within thirty (30) days after the transfer of ownership of any kennel or pet shop licensed pursuant to this chapter, the new owner shall apply to the animal control officer for the transfer of the license to his name. Such transfer shall be made without charge by the animal control officer. The fact of the transfer shall not be construed as an approval of the condition of the kennel or the manner in which it is observed. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.510 - Hunting pack license. 
Any person who owns or controls a pack of three to five hunting breed dogs for the exclusive purpose of hunting and running shall pay an annual license fee as set forth in the fee schedule, adopted by resolution of the city council, for such pack which shall be the license for all hunting dogs, regularly kept upon the premises and constituting such pack. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.520 - Working or stock pack license. 
Any person who owns or control a pack of three to five working or stock dogs for the purpose of herding or otherwise working cattle, sheep, or other livestock, shall pay an annual license fee as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council for such pack, which shall be the license for all working dogs regularly kept upon the premises and constituting such pack. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.530 - Wild, exotic or nondomestic animals in captivity. 
A.  No person shall have, keep, maintain, sell, trade or let for hire any wild, exotic, dangerous or nondomestic animal without first applying to and receiving special authorization from the animal control officer. The animal control officer shall not grant such authorization until the applicant demonstrates compliance with Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 2116) of Division 3 of the California Fish and Game Code. The keeping or maintaining of such animals shall also conform to the appropriate zoning code. 
B.  The animal control officer may authorize the keeping or maintaining of any nondomestic, wild, exotic or dangerous animal when any such animal may be kept or maintained without endangering the safety of any person or property; provided, however, that the animal control officer may require any such animal to be properly caged, tethered or restrained, and he may make such additional requirements that may be necessary and proper under the circumstances. He may revoke such authorization when, in his opinion, the safety of any person or property is endangered by the keeping of any such animal. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to licensed circuses, carnivals, zoos, or other collection of wild animals under jurisdiction of a city, county, state or federal government. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.540 - Trapping wild animals. 
A.  No person shall trap or capture wild animals of a species subject to rabies within the city for the purpose of selling the animal alive for profit unless the person files first with the animal control officer and the health officer a complete statement of such contemplated activities and thereafter complies with such rules and regulations relating to rabies control as may be prescribed by the animal control officer. Such person shall also comply with any and all state laws applicable to the trapping and possession of wild animals. 
B.  Wild animals shall be either returned to their natural habitat or destroyed in the discretion of the animal control officer, but no disposition thereof shall be in violation of any law of this state providing for the protection or regulation of wild animals. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.550 - Disposal of dead animals. 
A.  When any dog or other animal or fowl owned by or in the custody or control of any person dies in the city, such person shall within a reasonable time period provide for the burial, incineration or other disposition of the body of such dead animal or fowl in a safe and sanitary manner. 
B.  Upon learning that the body of a dead animal located within the city has not been disposed of in a safe and sanitary manner or upon the request of the person in charge of such body, the animal control officer may upon payment of the prescribed fee dispose of the body immediately. 
C.  The animal control officer shall collect a fee as provided in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council to defray the costs incidental to removal and disposal of bodies of animals. The owner or person in charge of any dead animal shall pay the fee. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.560 - Dead animals on public property. 
A.  The animal control officer shall not be required to move and dispose of the bodies of dead animals, wild or domestic, on state or interstate highways or on state or federal property within the city. 
B.  The animal control officer may remove and dispose of the remains of dead animals on city-owned property. 
C.  The actual costs incurred by the animal control officer in removing and disposing of remains of dead animals pursuant to this section shall be charged against the owner or keeper of the animal, if known. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.570 - Teasing animals prohibited—Exception. 
No person, except a peace officer or animal control officer in the performance of his duty, shall tease any animal. No parent shall allow or knowingly permit a minor child to incite any animal to vicious acts or to tease any animal. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.580 - Obstructing an officer unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person to resist, hinder or obstruct the animal control officer or the health officer or any of their deputies in the exercise of their duties as imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
6.04.600 - Contracts with county. 
A.  The city council may enter into a joint exercise of powers agreement with the county board of supervisors, whereby such services as are provided to the unincorporated areas of the county may be rendered and extended to the city of Orland. 
B.  The city council may contract with the county for performance of the city's animal control or rabies control function, or both, pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 51300) of Part 2 of Division 1 of Title 5 of the Government Code. 
C.  Any agreement entered into pursuant to subsection A or B of this section shall include, at a minimum, a description of the services to be provided by county officers and employees acting on behalf of the city (including the licensing of dogs pursuant to this chapter), a provision for the amount, manner and timing of payment of compensation to the county, and provisions for adequate notice to be given by the county or city for any termination of the agreement. 
(Ord. 2006-05 (part))  
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapters:  
Chapter 8.04 - ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW PROCEDURES 
Sections: 
 
8.04.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)" means California Public Resources Code Sections 21000 through 21174. 
"Environment" means the physical conditions which exist in the area which will be affected by a proposed project including land, air, water, minerals, flora, fauna, ambient noise and objects of historic or aesthetic significance. 
"Environmental impact report (EIR)" means a detailed statement setting forth the environmental effects and considerations pertaining to a project as specified in Section 21100 of the California Environmental Quality Act. 
"Environmental review commission" means three or more persons designated by the city council who shall evaluate projects, impacts and reports, and take other actions relative to environmental reviews as instructed by the city council. 
"Project" means the whole of an action, resulting in physical impact on the environment, directly or ultimately, that is any of the following: 
1.  An activity directly undertaken by the city or public agency, including but not limited to, public works construction and related activities, clearing or grading of land, improvements to existing public structures, enactment and amendment of zoning ordinances, and the adoption of local general plans or elements thereof; 
2.  An activity undertaken by a person which is supported in whole or in part through city contracts, grants, subsidies, loans, or other forms of assistance from the city or other public agency; 
3.  An activity involving the issuance to a person of a lease, permit, license, certificate, or other entitlement for use by the city. 
"Significant effect" means a substantial adverse impact on environment. 
(Prior code § 14000)  
8.04.020 - Environmental review—Application. 
All projects within the city which may have a significant effect on the environment shall be reviewed and evaluated by the environmental review commission. For all projects which the commission determines will, in fact, have a significant effect on the environment, an environmental impact report shall be prepared. 
(Prior code § 14010)  
8.04.030 - Environmental review fees. 
Environmental review of any project shall be subject to fees which shall be determined as detailed in Table A of this section. 
CITY OF ORLAND 
MUNICIPAL FEES 
TABLE A: CEQA ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW FEE SCHEDULE 
Task # 	Task Description 	City Planner Hours 
Included in Fee 	New Fee 
11.0 	CEQA REVIEW 
	11.1 	CEQA Notice of Exemption 	1 	$100 
	11.2 	CEQA Notice of Determination 	1 	$100 
	11.3 	CEQA Initial Study 	Deposit collected, hourly rate of $60 billed to applicant. 	Deposit collected, hourly rate of $60 billed to applicant. 
	11.4 	CEQA Negative Declaration/Mitigated Negative Declaration 	Deposit collected, hourly rate of $60 billed to applicant. 	Deposit collected, hourly rate of $60 billed to applicant. 
	11.5 	Environmental Impact Report (EIR) 	Prepared by consultant, approved by City at applicant's expense. 	Actual cost of contract. 
	11.6 	Review of Negative Declaration/Mitigated Negative Declaration/EIR prepared by consultant. 	15% of value of consultant contract 	15% of value of consultant contract 
 
(a) City Engineer will calculate the appropriate deposit, against which engineering services will be billed at an hourly rate of $80 per hour. 
(b) This fee covers only initial 5.5 hours of City Engineer's preliminary/conceptual review and site assessment for T.A.C. City Engineer will calculate the appropriate deposit, against which all subsequent engineering services will be billed at an hourly rate of $80 per hour. 
(c) Based on a 28-lot subdivision. 
NOTES:  The amount of the appropriate deposit to be collected for Initial Study and/or Negative Declaration/Mitigated Negative Declaration will be determined by the City Planner, based on the scope of the specific project to be reviewed. 
If changes to the project are deemed by the City of Orland to be substantial and result in redundant processing by City staff, the applicant agrees to pay those costs at the stated hourly rate. 
(Ord. 2004-08 § 3: prior code § 12800)  
8.04.040 - Guidelines. 
The city council shall adopt, by resolution, guidelines for the evaluation of projects and for the preparation and processing of environmental impact reports. These guidelines shall establish rules and standards for determination of significant effect and for determination of the necessity for environmental review of individual projects. 
(Prior code § 14020)  
8.04.050 - Council review of environmental impact report. 
A.  When an environmental impact report is submitted to the city council by the environmental review commission, the council shall review the report and determine if an additional public hearing is required to adequately inform the council of the facts regarding the project. 
B.  Should the city council determine, from the environmental impact report, that sufficient public hearing has been conducted by the commission during preparation of the report, and that unnecessary delay would result from an additional public hearing, the determinations listed in Section 8.04.070 shall be made without public hearing by the city council. 
(Prior code § 14030(1), (4))  
8.04.060 - Public hearing. 
If deemed necessary, the city council shall set the time and place for a public hearing on the report, and give notice thereof in the manner and for the time required by this code. At the time set for hearing, the city council shall proceed to hear viewpoints and recommendations from interested agencies, department heads, members of the environmental review commission, and from private organizations and persons affected. Such hearings may be continued from time to time. 
(Prior code § 14030(2))  
8.04.070 - Findings and determination. 
A.  At the conclusion of the hearing before the council, the hearing shall be declared closed and the council shall, within thirty (30) days thereafter, make its determination, findings, and determining: 
1.  Whether or not the proposed project will have any significant effect on the environment; 
2.  Approving, conditionally approving or denying approval of the proposed project. 
B.  In making its determination, the council shall be guided by the provisions of Chapter 1 of the Environmental Quality Act of 1970, provided, however, that determination by the council that the proposed project would have a significant adverse effect upon the environment shall not preclude the council from approving or conditionally approving the project. 
(Prior code § 14030(3))  
8.04.080 - Limitation of time for bringing legal action. 
Any action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void or annul any decision upon matters covered by this chapter, or concerning any of the proceedings, acts or determinations taken or done prior to such decision, or to determine the reasonableness, legality or validity of any condition attached thereto, shall not be maintained by any person unless such action or proceeding is commenced within thirty (30) days after final decision by the city council. Thereafter, all persons are barred from any such action or proceeding or any defense of invalidity or unreasonableness of such decision or of such proceedings, acts or determinations. 
(Prior code § 14040)  
Chapter 8.08 - OPEN BURNING 
Sections: 
 
8.08.010 - Burning of garbage prohibited. 
It is unlawful to burn or cause to be burned, in the city, any garbage. 
(Ord. 95-01 § 2: prior code § 6108)  
8.08.020 - Prohibition of all burning within incorporated city limits. 
A.  Outside burning of all kinds within the incorporated limits of the city is prohibited. The following exceptions shall apply: 
1.  Cooking of food products within appropriate barbecue on public or private residential property; 
2.  Fire department training exercises which include burn-down of buildings or other structures when under the supervision of fire chief or his/her designee. 
B.  Violation of this section shall constitute an infraction and shall be punishable in accordance with Section 1.12.020 of this code. 
(Ord. 95-01 § 3: prior code § 4102)  
Chapter 8.12 - GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
Sections: 
 
8.12.010 - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
"Contract agent" means and includes an agent or employee of the city, or any person, firm, corporation or association, or the agents or employees thereof with whom the city shall have duly contracted to collect, transport through the streets, alleys or public ways of the city, and dispose of refuse, garbage, wet garbage and rubbish produced within the limits of the city. 
"Garbage" means and includes kitchen and table refuse, offal, swill and also every accumulation of animal and vegetable refuse, and other matter that attends the preparation, consumption, decay or dealing in or storage of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits or vegetables. It shall also include crockery, bottles, tin vessels, ashes, and all refuse, save and excepting as defined in this section as rubbish or wet garbage. 
"Refuse" means and includes all matter and materials which are rejected by owners or producers thereof as offensive or useless, and which by their presence or accumulation may injuriously affect the health, comfort or safety of the community by increasing disease or hazard by fire. 
"Rubbish" means and includes all combustible and noncombustible waste and refuse matter, excepting garbage, ordinarily accumulating in and about residences, flats, buildings, apartment houses, lodging houses, hotels, stores, shops, offices and other public buildings. Among other things, it shall include tree trimmings, cut in length not to exceed three feet, grass cuttings, dead plants and weeds, and leaves but shall not include brick, mortar, or other debris incident to the construction of buildings. 
"Wet garbage" means all clean garbage, suitable for food for hogs, coming from restaurants, cafes, cafeterias, hospitals, hotels, boarding houses, clubs and all other like eating places in the city, and from butchershops and dealers in fresh vegetables, and shall consist of and include only kitchen and table refuse, offal and swill, and every accumulation of animal and vegetable scraps, refuse or waste, and other matter that attends the preparation or consumption, decay, or dealing in, or storage of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits or vegetables. Provided, however, that this definition is not intended to nor does it include the by-products of butchershops where such by-products have a commercial value and are not decomposed nor offensive, and where such by-products have not been rejected by the owners or producers thereof as offensive or useless. 
(Prior code § 6113)  
8.12.020 - Depositing rubbish in public places prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit, or cause to be thrown or deposited, any rubbish or refuse, as such terms are defined in this chapter (except brick, brickbats, cement, plaster, stones and gravel, and these only under a building permit), in or upon any vacant lot, or in any backyard, or in or upon any street, alley gutter, highway, park or other public place, in the city; or to deposit, or place or keep any rubbish or waste matter except in the manner prescribed in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6107)  
8.12.030 - Burying garbage. 
It is unlawful for any person or persons to bury garbage at any place within the city at a point which is closer than two hundred fifty (250) feet to a residence. 
(Prior code § 6109)  
8.12.040 - Accumulation of garbage unlawful—Receptacle standards. 
It is unlawful for any owner of real property or tenant thereon to keep, accumulate or permit to be accumulated, any garbage upon any lot or parcel of land, or on any public or private lane, place, street, alley or drive unless the same shall be in a standard commercial container supplied by contracting garbage service or in plastic or galvanized metal receptacles provided with handles. Such receptacles shall have a capacity of not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) gallons and such receptacles shall have close-fitting metal or plastic lids or covers which shall be kept closed at all times except when necessary to permit garbage to be taken therefrom or deposited therein. 
(Prior code § 6100)  
8.12.050 - Placement of receptacles for collection. 
All customers of contract agent using receptacles (not commercial containers) shall place those containers by the curbside in front of their residence or place of business, as the case shall be, for pickup by the city or contract agent at the dates and times designated by the city or contract agent. The containers shall not be kept or permitted to remain at curbside except on the date of a scheduled pickup and the night before such date. 
(Prior code § 6114)  
8.12.060 - Unauthorized disposal or collection of garbage prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person other than the city, or such garbage collectors as may be designated by the city under contract therefor or license, or its or his agents or employees, to collect, dispose of, transport, carry or convey through the streets, alleys or public thoroughfares of the city, any garbage, wet garbage, refuse or rubbish or other matters offensive to the sight, or to collect or dispose of the same. 
(Prior code § 6106)  
8.12.070 - Interference with collection and disposal of garbage prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person in any manner to interfere with the collection and disposal of refuse, garbage or rubbish by any person not authorized by license or contract to collect and dispose of same. 
(Prior code § 6112 (part))  
8.12.080 - Exemptions. 
A.  Refuse and Rubbish of Residents. Any resident of the city may dispose of, transport, carry or convey through the streets, alleys or public thoroughfares of the city refuse or rubbish property owned by or in the possession of such resident in a vehicle owned by or in the possession of such resident and to deposit such refuse and rubbish in a state of California licensed and approved landfill. 
B.  Wet Garbage from Business Houses, Hotels, Restaurants and Hospitals. Any business house, hotel, restaurant, hospital or other business establishment may contract or make independent arrangements with any person, other than a contract agent of the city, for the collection, transportation and disposal of wet garbage accumulated from the ordinary business operations of such business house, hotel, restaurant or hospital in which event, such business house, hotel, restaurant or hospital shall be exempt from the payment of the rates prescribed in this chapter as the same may be applicable to wet garbage, provided that the such business house, hotel, restaurant or hospital shall otherwise be subject to and shall comply with all other pertinent and applicable provisions of this chapter. Any person so contracting or arranging for the collection and disposal of wet garbage from any business house, hotel, restaurant or hospital may transport the same upon the streets, alleys or public thoroughfares of the city providing that such person otherwise complies with all of the provisions of Section 8.12.090. 
(Ord. 96-11 §§ 15, 16; prior code § 6111)  
8.12.090 - Standards for transportation of garbage. 
A.  Garbage and Rubbish Transportation. No garbage or rubbish shall be removed and carried on and along the streets and alleys of the city except that the same be carried, conveyed or hauled in conveyances so constructed as to be absolutely dustproof, and so arranged as not to permit dust or other matter to sift through or fall upon such streets and alleys. The contents of such conveyances must be further protected with appropriate covers so as to prevent the same from being blown on the streets, alleys and adjacent lands. 
B.  Wet Garbage Transportation. No wet garbage shall be removed or carried on or along any street or alley of the city except the same be transported in watertight containers with proper covers so that the garbage shall not be offensive and every such container shall be kept clean and the garbage shall be so loaded that none of it shall fall, drip or spill to or on the ground, sidewalk or pavement. 
(Prior code § 6101)  
8.12.100 - Exclusive right of contract. 
At such time as there is in force a contract entered into by the city with any person for the collection of garbage in the city, it is unlawful for any person, other than the persons in the employ of the contractor having such contract, to collect or transport any garbage within the city. Any person producing wet garbage as defined in this chapter shall place all such wet garbage in suitable containers apart from his dry garbage. It is unlawful for any such person to sell or dispose of such wet garbage and all of it must be delivered to the city, its agents or contractors, for removal and disposal. 
(Prior code § 6103)  
8.12.110 - Contract provisions. 
A.  For the collection and disposal of refuse, garbage, wet garbage and rubbish, a contract for a period not to exceed ten (10) years may be entered into by the city in accordance with and subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter. 
B.  Such contract shall provide that the contractor shall collect and dispose of the refuse, garbage, wet garbage and rubbish in the city in the manner in this chapter provided, and shall not charge any amounts in excess of the rates specified in this chapter. The contractor shall be required to furnish a cash or surety bond to the city in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and the provisions of this chapter. Such contractor shall have the sole and exclusive right, except as in this chapter otherwise provided, to collect all refuse, garbage, wet garbage and rubbish in the city and transport the same through the streets and public ways of the city. 
C.  Such contract shall also require that the contractor procure for the period covered by the proposed contract, full compensation insurance with an "industrial carrier," as defined by and in accordance with the provisions of those certain statutes enacted by the legislature of the state of California, known as the "Workman's Compensation Act" approved May 26, 1913, and as subsequently amended. 
D.  Such contract shall also require that the contractor carry public liability insurance to the extent of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for the death or injury of one person; one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for the death or injury of more than one person, and property damage insurance to the extent of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) upon each of the trucks or other vehicles used by him in carrying out the work called for in the contract; such insurance to cover both the city and the refuse collector. 
E.  The city council by resolution shall have the power to provide for the inclusion in such contract of such terms as it deems necessary to protect the interests of the city. 
F.  The contractor shall not be obligated to make any collections from any person who has not paid the charges in the amounts and at the times specified by the city. 
(Ord. 96-11 § 1; prior code § 6104)  
8.12.120 - Collection rates. 
Any person from whom garbage, wet garbage, rubbish or refuse is collected under the provisions of this chapter, shall pay to the city, or to the contract agent, at such place and in such manner as may be designated by the city fees for collection services. Fees for collection services shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 6105)  
8.12.125 - Required collection service. 
A.  Use of the City's Franchise Collection/Hauler Service is Required. 
1.  The periodic collection of garbage, recyclable items and other solid waste materials from improved properties in the city benefits occupants of places and premises in the city, and promotes and protects the health, safety and welfare of all residents of the city. Therefore, collection services provided by the city's franchise collector/hauler are required for all owners of improved property within the city in or from which solid waste is created, accumulated or produced. 
2.  Solid waste must be regulated to the extent necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, to conserve disposal capacity, to meet state laws and to ensure cost effective public service. To this end, the city council finds that to give practical effect to this policy, a universal collection ordinance to regulate the collection of waste, and a comprehensive system for the storage, collection, removal, transport, recovery of marketable and recyclable materials, and disposal of solid waste in the city is essential. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  Solid waste collection service is required for garbage, recyclable items and other solid waste materials generated on all occupied properties within the city, as identified in this section. 
2.  No provision herein contained shall be construed to conflict with any provision of the Integrated Waste Management Act, the Medical Waste Management Act, or any other state or federal law. In the event such a conflict exists, or shall exist in the future, state or federal law shall be controlling. This section is not intended, nor shall it apply to transfer stations or other solid waste disposal facilities. 
C.  Subscription to Collection Service. The property owner of each occupied premises shall assume responsibility for subscribing to collection service within seven days of either written notification from the city or occupancy of the premises, whichever is sooner 
D.  Property Owner Responsible for Securing Collection Service. The owner of any improved property in or from which solid waste and recyclable materials is created, accumulated or produced is responsible for subscribing to the collection service to be rendered to such property by the city's franchised collection service. It is the property owner's responsibility, not the tenant's, to secure and maintain collection services. 
E.  Payments on Behalf of Owner Permitted. Nothing in this section is intended to prevent an arrangement, or the continuance of an existing arrangement, under which payments for collection service are made by a tenant or tenants, or any agent on behalf of the owner. However any such arrangement will not affect the owner's obligation to the city or to the franchise collector/hauler for payment for such service. 
F.  Initial Notification of Required Collection Service. Within 90 days of adoption of an ordinance by the city requiring curbside collection service, the city shall notify by mail all affected property owners of the ordinance and the requirement for such property owners to subscribe to the collection service. This mailing list will then be provided to the city's franchise collector/hauler to monitor service subscriptions. Upon completion of the notification process, the city's franchise collector/hauler will deliver the appropriate service bins/carts to each property. The city will also attempt to notify landlords and property managers. 
G.  Written Notice Required for Non-Use. The city's franchise collector/hauler shall give written notice to the city manager or designated representative of the address of any occupied premises within the city which is not subscribing to the collection and disposal service provided by the collection service franchised by the city. 
H.  Failure to Subscribe. 
1.  If the city manager has reason to believe that any property owner required to subscribe for service has failed to subscribe or failed to maintain a subscription for service, the city manager may cause written notice to be mailed to the owner of the real property so affected directing the owner to subscribe for such service within ten days after the date of the notice. 
2.  Any such notice shall state that if the person to whom it is directed fails within the ten-day period to subscribe for such collection service, or fails to appear and show sufficient cause why such person should not be required to subscribe, the city manager may authorize such service and the charges therefore will be assessed against the real property upon which the premises served are located. 
3.  After notice and a public hearing, confirmed unpaid delinquent accounts shall constitute a lien on the property. The lien shall continue until the amount of the charges and interest thereon at the legal rate, computed from the date of confirmation of the charge, is paid in full or until it is discharged of record. 
4.  Alternatively or in addition, the confirmed amount may be made a personal obligation of the property owner of record. Alternatively, or in addition, the confirmed amount may be specially assessed against the real property involved, and collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary real property taxes. 
I.  Exemptions. 
1.  Property owned by federal, state or local governments shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-10)  
8.12.130 - Emergency removal. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the removal and hauling by an unlicensed person of materials considered by the health officer or police department to constitute a health menace of such nature as necessary to be ordered by either of such officers to be promptly removed. 
(Prior code § 6110)  
8.12.140 - Enforcement. 
A.  The chief of police and the city health officer are specifically required to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including the right of entry on any or all properties for the purpose of determining whether or not the provisions of this chapter are being conformed with and it is unlawful for any person to deny or obstruct such entry. 
B.  Any owner or tenant of real property may be cited for a violation of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6112 (part))  
Chapter 8.14 - REGULATION OF SMOKING AND SECONDHAND SMOKE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-04, adopted May 5, 2014, amended Ch. 8.14 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 8.14, §§ 8.14.010—8.14.060 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2012-01. 
 
8.14.010 - Purpose. 
In order to serve public health, safety and welfare, to reduce unwanted and unwelcome exposure to secondhand smoke, to assure a cleaner and more hygienic environment for the city, its residents, and visitors, to strike a reasonable balance between the needs of persons who smoke and the needs of nonsmokers, including children and persons with existing respiratory conditions, the declared purposes of this chapter are to prohibit smoking in certain areas which are used by or open to the public and to prohibit smoking waste in those areas. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04)  
8.14.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
"Business" means any sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation, or other business entity formed for profitmaking purposes, or for nonprofit purposes, including, but not limited to, retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered. 
"Common area at a shopping mall" means any indoor or outdoor common area of a shopping mall accessible to and usable by the occupants or customers of the establishment and including, but not limited to halls, lobbies, outdoor eating areas, play areas and parking lots. 
"E-cigarette" or "electronic cigarette" may be defined as including the following: any device that can provide an inhalable dose of nicotine by delivering a vaporized solution, as defined in California Health and Safety Code section 119405(b), as that section may be amended from time to time. 
"Entryway" means the primary place(s) of public access to a business, playground, recreational area, or shopping mall. 
"Playground" means any public or privately owned park or recreational area designed in part to be used by children that has play or sports equipment installed or has been designated or landscaped for play or sports activities, or any similar facility located on public or private school grounds, or on city property. 
"Person" means an individual. 
"Recreational area" means any area that is publicly or privately owned and open to the general public for recreational purposes, regardless of any fee or age requirement. The term "recreational area" includes but is not limited to parks, picnic areas, plazas, sports fields, golf courses, walking paths, gardens, hiking trails, bike paths, horseback riding trails, swimming pools, roller- and ice-skating rinks, stadiums and skateboard parks. 
"Service area" means any publicly or privately owned area designed to be used or is regularly used by one or more persons to receive a service, wait to receive a service or to make a transaction, whether or not such service or transaction includes the exchange of money. The term "service area" includes but is not limited to information kiosks, automatic teller machines (ATMs), ticket lines, bus stops or shelters, mobile vendor lines or cab stands. 
"Shopping mall" means any parcel of land zoned and used for retail sales by more than one retailer that is jointly operated or which includes shared parking facilities. 
"Smoke" means the gases, particles, or vapors released into the air as a result of combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization, when the apparent or usual purpose of the combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization is human inhalation of the resulting combustion products, including but not limited to tobacco smoke, cigarette smoke, marijuana smoke, gas, aerosol or vapor released by the ignition of e-cigarettes. "Smoke" does not include the products of combustion of incense or similar products when used solely for olfactory purposes and not containing tobacco or nicotine. 
"Smoking" means engaging in any act, conduct or process that generates tobacco "smoke", including but not limited to: a lighted pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind; hookah pipe, an operating e-cigarette, or a lighted smoke inhalation device of any kind that generates smoke of any kind, from tobacco, marijuana, or any other weed or plant. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04)  
8.14.030 - Smoking prohibited. 
Smoking is prohibited within twenty (20) feet of any entryway. 
Smoking is prohibited in any common area at a shopping mall, playground, recreational area or service area. 
Smoking is prohibited in and within twenty (20) feet of any building owned, controlled and/or maintained by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04)  
8.14.035 - Designated smoking areas. 
The city may designate areas of outdoor property under its control within which smoking is permitted. Such designated smoking areas shall be determined by the city council and shall be clearly marked. The city council shall have the authority to withdraw any such designation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04)  
8.14.040 - Smoking waste prohibited. 
No person shall dispose of lighted or unlighted cigars or cigarettes, or cigar or cigarette butts, or any other tobacco-related waste, within twenty (20) feet of any entryway. 
No person shall dispose of lighted or unlighted cigars, cigarettes, e-cigarettes or cigar or cigarette butts, or any other smoking-related waste in any common area at a shopping mall, playground, recreational area or service area except in a receptacle clearly provided and marked for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04)  
8.14.050 - Signage. 
A person or business that has legal or de facto control of an area in which smoking is prohibited may, but is not required to post a clear and unambiguous "No Smoking" or "Smokefree" sign at a conspicuous point within the non-smoking area. Signage exemplars will be made available by the city. 
To the extent practical, the city may post clear and unambiguous "No Smoking" or "Smokefree" signs at conspicuous points within non-smoking areas under its control. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04)  
8.14.060 - Penalties and enforcement. 
The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. Any peace officer or code enforcement official may enforce this chapter. 
Each incident of smoking in violation of this chapter is an infraction subject to a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fine. 
Each incident of prohibited disposal of smoking waste in violation of this chapter is an infraction subject to a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fine. 
Violations of this chapter are subject to a civil action brought by the city, punishable by a civil fine not less than twenty-five ($25.00) and not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as providing a private right of action. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04)  
Chapter 8.16 - TRAPS AND INTERCEPTORS[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 3(Exh. A) of Ord. No. 2010-01, adopted March 15, 2010, amended ch. 8.16 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 8.16, §§ 8.16.010—8.16.050, pertained to grease-sump traps and derived from Prior code §§ 6500—6504. 
 
8.16.010 - Definitions. 
"Gravity grease interceptor" means a plumbing appurtenance or appliance that is installed in a sanitary drainage system to intercept nonpetroleum fats, oils, and greases (FOG) from a wastewater discharge and is identified by volume, thirty-minute retention time, baffle(s), a minimum of two compartments, a minimum total volume of three hundred (300) gallons, and gravity separation. [These interceptors comply with the requirements of Chapter 10 of the California Plumbing Code or are designed by a registered professional engineer.] Gravity grease interceptors are generally installed outside. 
"Grease interceptor" means a plumbing appurtenance or appliance that is installed in a sanitary drainage system to intercept nonpetroleum fats, oils, and greases (FOG) from a wastewater discharge. 
"Grease removal device (GRD)" means any hydromechanical grease interceptor that automatically, mechanically removes non-petroleum fats, oils and grease (FOG) from the interceptor, the control of which are either automatic or manually initiated. 
"Grease trap" means a device designed to retain grease from one to a maximum of four fixtures. This term has been used in previous editions of this code. Refer to hydromechanical grease interceptor and gravity grease interceptor, GRD, and FOG disposal system. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3(Exh. A), 3-15-2010)  
8.16.020 - Installation. 
It is the duty of the owner and person or persons in possession of any commercial or business establishment to install an approved grease-trap interceptor, separator or FOG disposal system at each such establishment within one hundred twenty (120) days after the enactment of provisions of this chapter. Requirements for the need, approval, design, location, maintenance and discharge of traps, interceptors, separators or FOG disposal systems shall be in accordance with the California Plumbing Code as adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3(Exh. A), 3-15-2010)  
8.16.030 - Maintenance. 
It is the duty of the owner and person or persons in possession of any commercial or business establishment to adequately clean, maintain and repair every grease-trap, interceptor, separator, or FOG disposal system so installed at each such establishment to insure that grease does not enter the sewer system of the city. The maintenance and repair required for traps, interceptors, separators, FOG disposal systems or for any other means of FOG disposal shall be performed at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3(Exh. A), 3-15-2010)  
8.16.040 - Inspection. 
The officers, inspectors, and any duly authorized employees of the city shall, upon exhibiting the proper credentials and identification, be permitted to enter in and upon any and all buildings, industrial facilities and properties for the purposes of inspection, reinspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing or otherwise performing such duties as may be necessary to ensure the proper maintenance is being conducted for all grease traps, interceptors, separators, FOG disposal systems or for any other means of fog disposal. It is the duty of the Orland city department of public works to inspect each grease-trap, interceptor, separator or FOG disposal system at each establishment once every calendar month. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3(Exh. A), 3-15-2010)  
8.16.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
Every person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code. Each day's continuing violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3(Exh. A), 3-15-2010)  
Chapter 8.20 - NOISE CONTROL 
Sections: 
 
8.20.010 - Policy declaration. 
It is declared to be the policy of the city to prohibit unnecessary, excessive and annoying noises from all sources subject to its police power. 
(Prior code § 51000)  
8.20.020 - Offensive noise prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person on residential property or a public way to wilfully make or continue or cause to be made or continued by human voice, machine, animal or device, or any combination thereof, any offensive, excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise or any noise which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others on residential property or public ways within the city. 
(Prior code § 51010)  
8.20.030 - Determination of violation. 
The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of Section 8.20.020 exists shall include, but shall not be limited to the following criteria: 
A.  The frequency of the noise; 
B.  The intensity of the noise; 
C.  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual; 
D.  Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural; 
E.  The frequency and intensity of the background noise, if any; 
F.  The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities; 
G.  The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates; 
H.  The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates; 
I.  The time of the day or night the noise occurs; 
J.  The duration of the noise; 
K.  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant; and 
L.  Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. 
(Prior code § 51020)  
8.20.040 - Noise from audio equipment. 
A.  1.  No person shall use, operate or permit to be played, used or operated any radio, musical instrument, phonograph, stereo, tape player, compact disc player, television, or other machine or device for producing or reproducing sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring residential inhabitants at any time with volume louder than is necessary for convenient hearing for the persons who are in the room, vehicle, chamber, residence or building, in which such machine or device is operating. 
2.  The operation of any such machine or device between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the residential building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter. 
B.  1.  No person shall at any time use, operate or permit to be played, used or operated any radio, stereo, tape player, sound amplifier, compact disc player, or other machine or device for producing or reproducing sound from any motor vehicle on any public street with volume louder than is necessary for convenient hearing for the persons who are in the motor vehicle in which such machine or device is operating. 
2.  The operation of any such sound machine or device in such a manner as to be plainly audible at any time at a distance of ten (10) feet from the motor vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 51030)  
8.20.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate or refuse to abide by any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 1.12.020 of this code. 
(Prior code § 51040)  
Chapter 8.22 - REGULATION OF THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS 
Sections: 
 
8.22.010 - Findings. 
The city council of the city of Orland hereby finds and declares as follows: 
A.  State law prohibits the sale or furnishing of cigarettes, tobacco products and smoking paraphernalia to minors, as well as the purchase, receipt, or possession of tobacco products by minors (California Penal Code Section 308); 
B.  State law requires that tobacco retailers check the identification of tobacco purchasers who reasonably appear to be under eighteen (18) years of age (California Business and Professions Code Section 22956), and provides procedures for using persons under eighteen (18) years of age to conduct on-site compliance checks of tobacco retailers (California Business and Professions Code Section 22952); 
C.  State law prohibits the sale or display of cigarettes through a self-service display. This law, which applies only to cigarettes, explicitly provides that broader local requirements may be enacted (California Business and Professions Code Section 22962); 
D.  State law prohibits use of more than thirty-three (33) percent of the square footage of windows and clear doors of an alcohol retailer for advertising signs of any sort, including tobacco (California Business and Professions Code Section 25612.5(c)(7)); and 
E.  Despite these and other state and local laws related to tobacco, minors continue to obtain tobacco products at alarming rates. Each year, an estimated nine hundred twenty-four million (924,000,000) packs of cigarettes are consumed by minors twelve (12) to seventeen (17) years of age. 
It is the intent of the city council, in enacting this chapter, to discourage access to tobacco products by minors. 
(Ord. 2005-03 § 3 (part))  
8.22.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
"Alcohol retailer" means any on- or off-sale licensee, holding a license, a permit, a certification, or any other authorization issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
"Self-service display" means the open display of tobacco products in a manner that is accessible to the general public without the assistance of the retailer or employee of the retailer. 
"Tobacco product" means any substance containing tobacco leaf including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco. 
"Tobacco retailer" means any person who sells, offers for sale, or does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco or tobacco products. "Tobacco retailing" means the doing of any of these things. This definition is without regard to the quantity of tobacco or tobacco products sold, offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange. 
"Vending machine" means a machine, appliance, or other mechanical device operated by currency, token, debit card, or credit card that is designed or used for vending purposes including, but not limited to, machines or devices that use remote control locking mechanisms. 
(Ord. 2005-03 § 3 (part))  
8.22.030 - Sale of tobacco products by self-service display prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to display tobacco products by means of a self-service display or to engage in tobacco retailing by means of a self-service display. Tobacco retailing by means of a vending machine is prohibited by this section. 
(Ord. 2005-03 § 3 (part))  
8.22.040 - Advertising or signs on alcohol retailer premises. 
No more than thirty-three (33) percent of the square footage of the windows and clear doors of an alcohol retailer premises shall bear advertising or signs of any sort, including tobacco. 
(Ord. 2005-03 § 3 (part))  
8.22.050 - Enforcement. 
The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. 
A.  Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation. 
B.  This chapter shall be enforced by the city manager. 
C.  Violations of this chapter may, at the discretion of the city attorney, be prosecuted as infractions. 
D.  Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances. 
E.  Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be unfair business practices and are presumed to at least nominally damage each and every resident of the community in which the business operates. 
F.  In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter or by other law, any violation of this chapter may be remedied by a civil action brought by the city attorney, including, for example, administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief. 
G.  Any person aggrieved by a violation of this chapter may bring an action for injunctive relief to prevent future such violations or to recover such actual damages as he or she may prove. 
(Ord. 2005-03 § 3 (part))  
8.22.060 - Effective date and nonconforming uses. 
A.  The effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be thirty (30) days from the date of its enactment. 
B.  Self-service displays that were in place at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter was introduced may remain in place for no more than sixty (60) days after the effective date. 
(Ord. 2005-03 § 3 (part))  
Chapter 8.24 - NUISANCES 
Sections: 
 
8.24.010 - Findings. 
The city council finds, determines and declares as follows: 
A.  That this city has a reputation for well- kept property and strict enforcement of zoning restrictions and building regulations; and 
B.  That there is a need for emphasis on the maintenance of a number of real properties, in that certain conditions which appear to constitute nuisances, as set forth in this chapter, have been found to exist in the city; and 
C.  That the existence of any real property in a condition constituting a nuisance as defined in this chapter, is injurious and inimical to the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of this city; and 
D.  That the existence of public nuisances of the type referred to in this chapter, and the abatement thereof, is in protecting the health, safety and welfare of the public, and the exercise of such power by the city is authorized by the Constitution of this state and other applicable law; and 
E.  That the abatement procedures set forth in this chapter are reasonable and afford a maximum of due process and procedural guarantees as to affected property owners. 
(Prior code § 6600)  
8.24.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in this chapter: 
Appeals Board. The city council of the city is designated to act as the appeals board. 
Enforcement Officer. Unless otherwise specified, "enforcement officer" shall be the city administrator or his designee. 
"Highway" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Highway includes streets and alleys. 
"Marijuana" shall have the same meaning as that set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 11018. 
"Marijuana cultivation" means the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, or processing of all marijuana, including medical marijuana. 
"Medical marijuana" means marijuana that has been recommended by a licensed physician in strict accordance with California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.5 through Section 11362.83, inclusive, commonly referred to as the Compassionate Use Act and the Medical Marijuana Program. 
"Nuisance" means anything which is injurious to health, or is indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal or basin, or any public park, square, street or highway. 
"Private nuisance" means every nuisance not defined as a public nuisance in this section. 
"Public nuisance" means any nuisance affecting at the same time an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal. 
"Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Prior code § 6601) 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, § 2; Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 2)  
8.24.025 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 3, adopted Jan. 4, 2016, repealed former § 8.24.025, which pertained to regulation of location, development, and operation of medical marijuana cultivation and derived from Ord. No. 2012-03, § 3.  
8.24.030 - Public nuisances designated. 
It is declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises in the city to maintain upon such premises, or to permit, cause or allow to exist on such premises, any condition which is detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare or which constitutes a public nuisance as defined in Section 8.24.020 of this chapter. Such conditions shall include but shall not be limited to the following: 
A.  To maintain buildings or structures, or portions thereof, which are damaged, dilapidated, or inadequately or improperly maintained such that they are structurally unsafe, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or which are otherwise dangerous to human life or which in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to the public health, safety or general welfare. This includes any building, structure or property which has been constructed or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to the building, structure or property contained in the building regulations of this city or any law or ordinance of the city or state relating to the condition, location, maintenance or construction of buildings or property. Such buildings or structure shall include those which are abandoned, hazardously or inadequately boarded up, partially destroyed, or in a state of partial construction; or 
B.  To maintain other conditions related to buildings, structures, walls, fences or landscaping which are of a hazardous nature and require immediate correction, repair, or adequate and proper maintenance; including but not limited to the existence of broken glass in doors or windows which are located in an area of public access, surfaces showing evidence of dry rot, warping, termite infestation or graffiti; absence of paint, stain, varnish or similar coating intended to protect the weatherability of any structural member; doors, aisles, passageways, stairways, or other means of exit which do not provide a safe and adequate means of exit; any wall or other vertical structural member which lists, leans or is buckled to such an extent that a plumbline passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base; or any other condition which because of lack of proper sanitation or soundness, or as a result of dilapidation decay, damage or faulty construction or arrangement, is likely to cause sickness, disease or threat to the public health, safety or general welfare; or 
C.  To maintain land, the topography, geology or configuration of property which, whether in a natural state or as a result of grading operations, causes erosion, subsidence or surface water runoff problems of such magnitude to be injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety or general welfare; or 
D.  To maintain vegetation, including but not limited to trees, shrubbery or grass, cultivated or uncultivated, which is overgrown, dead, decayed or diseased such that it is likely to harbor rats, vermin, insects, or other nuisances which are dangerous to the public health, safety or general welfare or that constitutes a fire hazard; or 
E.  To store any materials, equipment, vehicles, broken or discarded furniture, boxes, lumber, junk, trash or debris in any yard area in such a manner or in such condition as to be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare; or 
F.  To store trash or garbage cans, bins, boxes, or other such containers in other than single-family residential areas which are unclean, uncovered or damaged in a front or side yard such that they may be visible from a highway as defined in Section 8.24.020 on other than regularly scheduled pickup days and are detrimental to health, safety or general welfare; or 
G.  To maintain attractive nuisances dangerous to children such as excavations, ponds, pools, or unenclosed or empty swimming pools; or 
H.  To store, discharge, hold, handle, maintain, use or otherwise deal with hazardous or extremely hazardous wastes as defined by California Health and Safety Code Sections 25117 and 25115. This includes the discharge or deposit of any source of hazardous or extremely hazardous waste into any sewer, storm drain or similar facility which will or may cause or result in the pollution of any underground or surface water. Examples include but are not limited to petroleum products, laboratory wastes, specimens (pathological or surgical), salt or equipment. Furthermore, any violation of federal, state or local laws or regulations, including but not limited to California Health and Safety Code Sections 25100 through 25185, and all their respective amendments, shall constitute a public nuisance under this part; or 
I.  To keep any animal, reptile or insect in such a manner as to pose a threat, disturbance, danger or menace to persons or property of another or in a public right-of-way; or 
J.  To keep, operate or maintain any machinery which by reason of its dust, exhaust, noise or fumes creates a health or safety hazard; or 
K.  To maintain or fail to maintain the property, or any building or structure thereon, in such condition so that it is defective, unsightly, or in such condition or deterioration or disrepair that it causes or will cause a health or safety hazard; or 
L.  To abandon or vacate any building or structure so that it becomes readily available to unauthorized persons; or 
M.  To maintain any building or structure in a state of partial construction where work is abandoned and for which a permit was issued and allowed to expire; or 
N.  To maintain on the property any accumulation of uncompacted fill over three feet in height over predominant grade and contrary to adjacent contour for any period of seventy-two (72) hours; or 
O.  To maintain any of the following in front or side yards open to view from the street: packing boxes, broken or discarded furniture, household equipment or construction equipment/materials; or 
P.  Operation of any commercial activity in any zone without a business license and in direct violation of zoning, licensing and building codes regarding locations, compatibility and occupancy. 
Q.  To maintain on the property medical marijuana, either visible to the public or neighboring property, or to permit the odor of which is detected by any member of the public. 
R.  To cultivate, maintain, process or store marijuana. 
(Ord. 96-11 § 17; prior code § 6602) 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, § 4; Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 4)  
8.24.040 - Methods of abatement. 
Public nuisances ordered to be abated under the provisions of this chapter may be abated by rehabilitation, repair, demolition, removal, or other appropriate action as determined by the city administrator after compliance by the city with the procedures set forth in the following sections. 
(Prior code § 6604)  
8.24.050 - Right of entry for enforcement officer. 
A.  Whenever an enforcement officer has reason to believe that a nuisance exists or that an inspection is necessary to enforce any provision of this chapter, the officer may enter the premises at any reasonable time to perform the inspection or any other duty imposed by this chapter. 
B.  The enforcement officer shall present proper identification, state the purpose of the visit and request permission of the owner or responsible person to enter the premises. If entry is refused, the enforcement officer shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
C.  When the enforcement officer has first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or responsible person shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as provided in this chapter to promptly permit entry therein by the enforcement officer for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6605)  
8.24.060 - Notice to abate. 
A.  Upon discovery of any public nuisance as defined in Section 8.24.030, the enforcement officer shall notify the owner and any responsible person that the nuisance shall be abated by the city at such person's expense unless they appear at the stated time and place to show cause why there should be no abatement. The enforcement officer may delegate this authority under this section to such city officers and employees he deems appropriate. 
B.  The notice to appear or abate shall be substantially in the following form: 
NOTICE TO APPEAR OR ABATE 
PUBLIC NUISANCE 
YOU ARE HEREBY NOTIFIED as the owner, agent, lessee or other person occupying or having control of the premises at (address), that pursuant to Section ___ of the Orland Municipal Code, the undersigned has determined that there exists upon the above-referenced premises a public nuisance, specifically (description of condition constituting nuisance). A copy of Section ___ is attached. 
You are hereby required to abate this condition to the satisfaction of the undersigned within days of the date of this notice or to appear at the office of the Enforcement Officer at 815 Fourth Street, Orland, California at _______;yrule;.m. to show cause, if any exists, why the condition or use should not be abated by the City, and the expenses thereof charged to you as a personal obligation and/or made a lien upon the property. 
Abatements to be accomplished in the following manner: (description of what needs to be done to remedy situation). 
(Name of Department and Department Head) 
By: 
C.  The enforcement officer shall post at least one copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the property in question. 
D.  After giving notice as required above, the enforcement officer shall file a copy of the notice, together with an affidavit or certificate stating the time and manner in which such notice was given in the office of the city clerk. The failure of the owner or any other responsible person to receive such notice shall not affect in any manner the validity of any proceedings pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6606)  
8.24.070 - Abatement of nuisance prior to scheduled hearing. 
Any owner or responsible person may, at their own expense and prior to the scheduled hearing, abate a declared nuisance in accordance with the provisions of the notice sent by the enforcement officer, provided that all necessary permits are first obtained. If the enforcement officer determines that the nuisance has been abated, the proceedings under this chapter shall be terminated. 
(Prior code § 6607)  
8.24.080 - Public hearing. 
A.  At the time and place designated in the notice, the hearing officer shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, including, but not limited to, applicable staff reports, oral, physical and documentary evidence regarding the alleged nuisance and proposed method of abatement. The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
B.  The enforcement officer shall bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that a public nuisance exists. 
C.  All oral evidence shall be heard only on oath or affirmation. 
D.  The owner or any responsible person may be represented by anyone of their choice or may represent themselves. 
E.  The hearing shall not be conducted according to the formal rules of evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which reasonable affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. However, irrelevant or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
F.  Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but hearsay evidence shall not be sufficient by itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objections in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. 
G.  The parties in the hearing shall have the following rights: 
1.  To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing; 
2.  To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing; 
3.  To impeach any witness regardless of which party first called such witness to testify; 
4.  To rebut evidence against such parties; 
5.  To request the hearing officer to take official notice of any fact which would be subject to judicial notice by the courts of this state. 
H.  1.  Within ten (10) days after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision and where applicable, an order of abatement. This decision shall set forth the factual findings made by the hearing officer, a conclusion as to whether a public nuisance exists, the manner and timing of the abatement. 
2.  If the hearing officer determines that a nuisance exists which is likely to recur after abatement, the owner may be directed to take adequate precautions for a period of time not to exceed one year so that the nuisance will not recur. Copies of the decision shall be sent to the owner, responsible person and the enforcement officer and the city clerk. 
(Prior code § 6608)  
8.24.090 - Appeal to city council. 
The property owner or other responsible person may appeal the decision of the hearing officer to the city council within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision by submitting an appeal in writing to the city clerk. In the event of an appeal, the city council shall follow the procedure provided in Section 8.24.080. Notice of the hearing shall be provided in accordance with the procedure set forth in Section 8.24.060. 
(Prior code § 6609)  
8.24.100 - Abatement after hearing. 
A.  Any owner or responsible person may, prior to action by the city and at their own expense, abate the nuisance in the manner directed by the order of abatement. All necessary permits shall be obtained before any such abatement is carried out. 
B.  If the enforcement officer determines that the owner or responsible person has completely abated the nuisance, all proceedings under this chapter shall be terminated. 
C.  If the enforcement officer determines that the nuisance still exists, it shall be abated by the city in the manner described in the order of abatement. 
(Prior code § 6610)  
8.24.110 - Notice of cost of abatement. 
A.  The enforcement officer shall keep an itemized statement of costs incurred by the city in inspecting and abating a public nuisance. Once the abatement is completed, the enforcement officer shall provide a copy of this statement to the owner of the property in question, to any responsible persons and the city administrator. 
B.  The owner or responsible person may request a hearing before the city council to contest the statement of costs. The request for a hearing shall be made within ten (10) days of receipt of the statement to the city clerk or the right to hearing shall be deemed waived. 
C.  The city council shall review the statement of costs and any information presented by the owner or responsible person. The city council's decision shall be mailed to the owner and all responsible persons. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Prior code § 6611)  
8.24.120 - Expenses a special assessment against the property. 
If the property owner does not pay the expense of abating the nuisance within thirty (30) days after the city council confirms the costs of abatement, the cost shall become a special assessment against the real property upon which the nuisance was abated. The assessment shall continue until it is paid. The assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All acts applicable to levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes apply to this special assessment. 
(Prior code § 6612)  
8.24.130 - Notice of special assessment. 
The city shall file in the office of the county recorder a certificate substantially in the following form: 
NOTICE OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT 
Under the authority of Government Code Section 38773.5 and Sections 8.24.010 through 8.24.120 of the Orland Municipal Code, the City did on , 19 , abate a nuisance upon the real property hereafter described and then on , 19 , did assess the cost of the abatement upon the real property. The City of Orland claims a special assessment on the real property for the expense of doing the work in the amount of $ . This amount is a special assessment against the real property until it is paid and discharged of record. The assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All acts applicable to levy, collection, and enforcement of municipal taxes apply to this special assessment. The real property referred to above, and upon which the special assessment is claimed is that certain parcel of land situated within the City of Orland, County of Glenn, State of California, more particularly described as follows: 
      CITY OF ORLAND 
Dated:       By: _____ 
(Prior code § 6613)  
8.24.140 - Summary abatement of immediate dangers. 
A.  Whenever any condition on or use of property causes or constitutes or reasonably appears to cause or constitute an imminent or immediate danger to the health or safety of the public, the condition or use may be summarily abated by the city without notice or hearing. Reasonable attempts to contact the owner by phone or in person shall be made. 
B.  When summary abatement is necessary, it shall be ordered only by the city administrator, the Orland police chief, or the person performing their duties. 
C.  Summary abatement shall be limited to those actions necessary to eliminate the immediate threat to the public health and safety. 
D.  Notice of the summary abatement shall be provided to the owner or other responsible parties as provided for in Section 8.24.060 as soon as practical. 
E.  The costs and expenses of a summary abatement shall be made a lien on the property and shall be collected pursuant to the procedure found in Section 8.24.120. 
(Prior code § 6614)  
8.24.150 - Alternative remedies. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city council from ordering the city attorney to commence a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance under applicable Civil or Penal Code provisions as an alternative to the proceedings set forth in this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from abating a nuisance pursuant to any other procedure established by city ordinance or state law. 
(Prior code § 6615)  
8.24.160 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to remove, deface or mutilate any notice, order, statement or resolution posted as required in this chapter. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, impede or interfere with any owner or his agent or with any representative of the city when engaged in performing any act reasonably necessary for the execution of the order of abatement. 
C.  Any person who shall violate this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
(Prior code § 6617)  
8.24.170 - Remedies for chronic violators. 
In addition to any remedies provided under this chapter, this code, or by law, remedies for chronic violators of this chapter, as defined, are provided herein. 
A.  Chronic Violator Defined. 
1.  Any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises in the city receiving more than one notice under Section 8.24.060 within any consecutive twenty-four-month period; and 
2.  Having received prior written notice of this section. 
B.  Remedies for Chronic Violators. The remedies available for chronic violators are as follows: 
1.  Imposition of a civil penalty of up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day, commencing from the issuance of the notice provided in Section 8.24.060. 
2.  Imposition of city enforcement costs incurred from the issuance of the notice provided in Section 8.24.060. 
( Ord. No. 2017-07 , § 2)  
Chapter 8.28 - GRAFFITI ABATEMENT 
Sections: 
 
8.28.010 - Graffiti defined. 
"Graffiti" means any drawing, inscription, figure or mark which alters or defaces any real or personal property of another through the use of paint, spray paint, markers, or other objects, without the consent of such person, or the act of altering or defacing any real or personal property of another through the use of paint, spray paint, markers, or other objects capable of leaving a drawing, inscription, figure or mark on any surface, which is offensive to a reasonable person of normal sensitivities. 
(Ord. 96-10 § 1 (part): prior code § 6800)  
8.28.020 - Graffiti prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person: 
A.  To apply graffiti without the permission of the owner, lessee or person in legal possession of the real or personal property in question; or 
B.  To have graffiti on property which can be seen from the public right-of-way or adjacent or neighboring property; or 
C.  To have graffiti on property which causes a depreciation of property values or is detrimental to the health and welfare of neighborhoods. 
(Ord. 96-10 § 1 (part): prior code § 6801)  
8.28.030 - Removal of graffiti. 
A.  Private property owners shall remove graffiti from their property within fifteen (15) calendar days after notification to the property owners by the city to remove such graffiti. Failure to remove graffiti within the time allowed shall automatically cause the building or property to be deemed a nuisance. 
B.  Notice to private property owners by the city shall be addressed to the name and address as it appears on the last tax assessment role or in other records maintained by the public agencies, by depositing a copy of the notice in the United States mail, certified with postage fully affixed, or personally delivering a copy of the notice to the owner of the property. The service is complete at the time of deposit in the mail or when personal service is effectuated. The failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any legal proceedings regarding removal of the graffiti. 
C.  In the event that the property owner fails to remove the graffiti after notice has been sent, the city may abate the graffiti as a nuisance as provided in this chapter. 
D.  The city may remove the graffiti of a property owner with the consent of the property owner and shall charge the property owner for the cost of removal. 
E.  In the event that the city removes graffiti with the consent of the property owner and the property owner fails to reimburse the city for the cost of removal within thirty (30) calendar days of notice of the amount of the cost, such amount shall become a special assessment or lien against the property as provided in Section 8.24.120 of this code. 
(Ord. 96-10 § 1 (part): prior code § 6802)  
8.28.040 - Nuisance declared. 
The existence of graffiti is declared to be obnoxious and a nuisance, and may be abated pursuant to Chapter 8.24 of this code, in addition to and not in lieu of any other available remedies. 
(Ord. 96-10 § 1 (part): prior code § 6803)  
8.28.050 - Reward. 
The city may pay to any person who provides information which leads to the arrest and conviction of any person who applies graffiti a reward as established by council resolution. 
(Ord. 96-10 § 1 (part): prior code § 6804)  
8.28.060 - Authorization of entry and release of liability. 
Prior to the entry onto private property by the city for the purpose of graffiti removal, written consent in a form acceptable to the city attorney shall be obtained from the property owner or designated agent for authorization of entry and release of liability. Notwithstanding the foregoing, consent of the property owner shall not be required if the city is authorized by court order to enter the property for the purpose of graffiti removal. 
(Ord. 96-10 § 1 (part): prior code § 6806)  
8.28.070 - Administrative fee. 
A reasonable administrative fee may be imposed against any person found in violation of this chapter as a part of any abatement hereunder in addition to and not in lieu of any other fine, charge, fee, cost, assessment or payment imposed in connection with any violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 96-10 § 1 (part): prior code § 6807)  
8.28.080 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  The violation of any section of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. 
B.  Community service in the city may be imposed in lieu of any penalties and punishments where there has been a conviction of guilty or nolo contendere plea to a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 96-10 § 1 (part): prior code § 6805)  
Chapter 8.32 - SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FEES 
Sections: 
 
8.32.010 - Dwelling unit defined. 
For the purposes of this chapter, a "dwelling unit" is defined to be, mean and designate a building, structure or enclosure, or a portion thereof, whether or not affixed to the land by a permanent-type foundation or footing, consisting of one or more habitable rooms which are occupied or which are intended or designated to be occupied by one or more persons as a family for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. A "mobilehome," as defined in Section 18008 of the Health and Safety Code, is a dwelling unit for the purposes of this chapter. A "recreational vehicle," a "commercial coach," and a "travel trailer," as defined in Sections 18011.5, 18012 and 18013 of the Health and Safety Code, are not deemed to be dwelling units for the purposes of this chapter. A hotel, motel, rooming house, lodging house or boardinghouse having only one kitchen or cooking facility shall be deemed to be a single dwelling unit. Two or more dwelling units may be located in a single building or structure commonly designated as a flat, duplex, triplex, multiplex, apartment house or apartment building. Two or more dwelling units may be located on a single parcel of land. 
(Prior code § 6114)  
8.32.020 - Classification of users. 
The city council determines that in the city, solid waste materials are created not only by persons who are residents of the city but also by businesses, industries, commercial enterprises, agricultural pursuits and land uses. It is found by the city council that there is a relationship between the volume of solid waste generated within the city and the number of not only the families residing within the city but the number of businesses, industries, commercial enterprises, agricultural pursuits and land uses. It is further determined that the cost and expense of acquiring, operating and maintaining a solid waste disposal site for city residents, businesses, industries, commercial enterprises, agricultural pursuits and land uses, needs to be borne by those persons who create waste. Therefore, for the purpose of solid waste disposal fees all lands within the city will be classified and charged according to the type of utilization of property without placing the burden solely on residential uses as heretofore established only. 
(Prior code § 6115)  
8.32.030 - Charges for waste disposal services. 
A.  Pursuant to law on or before July 1st of each year the city council by resolution shall impose an annual fee for the ensuing fiscal year upon each dwelling unit whether or not inhabited or occupied and located on land within the city. Any revenue derived from such annual fee shall be used only for the acquisition, operation and maintenance of disposal sites that necessitates utilization by the city residence. 
B.  Pursuant to law on or before July 1st of each year, the city council by resolution shall impose an annual fee for the ensuing fiscal year upon each commercial, business or industrial establishment listed in the Glenn County assessor's business property statement use code pursuant to Glenn County board of supervisors Resolution 87-36. All funds derived from this fee shall be used only for the acquisition, operation and maintenance of disposal sites necessitated by the utilization of city business, commercial and industrial users. 
C.  Any person may request an exemption under this section provided that such request shall be made in writing to the city public works director. The public works director may exempt any commercial or industrial establishment identified above from this fee if he determines that the establishment generates less than .50 cubic yards per month. The public works director's determination shall be final. 
(Prior code § 6116)  
8.32.040 - List of dwelling units. 
Pursuant to an agreement with the county, on or before September 1st of each year, the county assessor shall furnish the county tax collector a list showing the assessor's parcel number of each parcel of land upon which one or more dwelling units are located, the number of dwelling units located thereon as of March 1st of that year, and the name and address of the record owner thereof. 
(Prior code § 6117)  
8.32.050 - Billing by tax collector. 
Pursuant to an agreement with the county, the county tax collector shall prepare a bill or statement in appropriate form for each such parcel which will indicate the amount of the annual waste disposal fee, computed by multiplying the dwelling unit fee, as fixed by the city council, by the number of dwelling units located on the parcel, and enclose such statement with the regular property tax bill for such parcel for that fiscal year. 
(Prior code § 6118)  
8.32.060 - Payment of waste disposal charges. 
Waste disposal charges shall be payable to the county tax collector on or before the date fixed for the payment of the first installment of county property taxes. 
(Prior code § 6119)  
8.32.070 - Collection of delinquent charges. 
Not less than sixty (60) days after the date fixed for the payment of the first installment of county property taxes, the city council shall initiate the procedures provided for in Section 25831 of the Government Code for the collection of delinquent fees. 
(Prior code § 6120)  
Chapter 8.36 - MANURE 
Sections: 
 
8.36.010 - Covering and removal of manure. 
Any and all manure within the corporate limits of the city must be covered by a screen or other covering which will prevent the entry of, flies upon any quantity of manure for the hatching of eggs or larvae and any and all such quantities of manure must be removed from the premises or used for purposes of fertilization every seven days. 
(Prior code § 6200)  
8.36.020 - Larvae in manure. 
The discovery of the presence of larvae in manure situated on the property of any person, or member or employee of any firm or corporation having the control of any properties within the corporate limits of the city, shall be considered evidence of the violation of the provisions of Section 8.36.010. 
(Prior code § 6201)  
Chapter 8.38 - BURGLARY AND ROBBERY ALARM PROCEDURES 
Sections: 
 
8.38.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the burglary and robbery alarm procedures ordinance of the city of Orland. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 5-2-2011)  
8.38.020 - Purposes. 
The purposes of this chapter are to regulate the use of alarm systems and to reduce the incidence of false alarms at business and residential structures. This will give members of the police department more time to combat real crime, thereby furthering the health, safety and welfare of the people of Orland. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 5-2-2011)  
8.38.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  Alarm Company. The term "alarm company" shall be defined as any person, retail establishment, organization, answering service, central station, or modified central station that installs, connects, or monitors burglary, robbery, or other alarm security systems for profit or other consideration. Such companies must be licensed in accordance with Business and Professions Code Section 7590 et seq. 
B.  Alarm System. The phrase "alarm system" means any mechanical or electrical device which is designed or used for protection against an unauthorized entry into a building, structure, or facility, or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act within a building, structure, or facility, and which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when activated. The following devices shall not constitute an alarm system within the meaning of this chapter: 
1.  Alarm devices affixed to motor vehicles; and 
2.  Alarm devices installed on a temporary basis by the police department. 
C.  Alarm User. The phrase "alarm user" means any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity who uses an alarm system at its alarm site. 
D.  Answering Service. The phrase "answering service" means a telephone answering service which provides, among its services, the receiving on a continuous basis of emergency signals from alarm systems, and the subsequent immediate relaying of said messages based on such signals by live voice to the communications center of the police department. 
E.  Automatic Dialing Device. The phrase "automatic dialing device" means an alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. 
F.  Cancellation. An alarm cancellation means an alarm company has verified with the alarm user or responsible party that a false dispatch has occurred and that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring law enforcement agency response. 
G.  Central Station. The phrase "central station" means an office to which alarm systems are connected, where operators supervise the circuits, and where guards and/or service persons are continuously present to investigate signals. 
H.  Direct Line. The phrase "direct line" means a telephone line leading directly from a central station to the communication center of the police department where said line is used only to report emergency signals on a person-to-person basis. 
I.  Emergency. The word "emergency" means the commission or attempted commission of a robbery or burglary, or other imminent felony or felony-in-commission. 
J.  Excessive False Alarms. An alarm system shall be deemed to actuate excessive false alarms when there are four or more false alarms within a consecutive three hundred sixty-five-day period. If a permittee presents sufficient proof that a particular false alarm was caused by an event or act specified in subsection K. of this section, said false alarm shall not be counted against the permittee in determining whether the permittee's alarm system actuated excessive false alarms. 
K.  False Alarm. The phrase "false alarm" means the activation of an alarm system which results in a response by the police department where an emergency does not exist. False alarms which fall into the following four categories shall not be counted against a permittee under Section 8.38.140 for the purpose of revocation of an alarm system permit: 
1.  False alarms which the permittee can demonstrate were proximately caused by severe storms, earthquakes, or other violent acts of nature; and 
2.  False alarms which the permittee can demonstrate were actually caused by the act of some person other than: 
a.  The permittee. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "permittee" shall include the officers, agents, employees, independent contractors, and any other persons subject to the direct or indirect control of the permittee. 
b.  The person who installed, connected, operated, maintained, or serviced the alarm system. 
c.  The manufacturer of the alarm system, including the manufacturer's officers, agents, employees, independent contractors, and any other persons subject to the direct or indirect control of the manufacturer. 
3.  False alarms which occur during the fifteen (15) days following the installation date of new alarm systems. 
4.  An alarm response which is canceled prior to officers arriving at the alarm location. 
L.  Felony. The word "felony," as defined in California Penal Code Section 17, means a crime which is punishable by death or by imprisonment in the state prison. 
M.  Interconnect. The term "interconnect" means to connect an alarm system to a telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a standard telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit an emergency message upon the activation of the alarm system. 
N.  Liaison. The word "liaison" means the person designated by the chief of police to be available to alarm companies to help resolve disputed false alarms. 
O.  Modified Central Station. The phrase "modified central station" means an office to which alarm systems are connected, where operators supervise the circuits, but where guards are not present to investigate alarm signals. 
P.  Panic Alarm. The phrase "panic alarm" means any electrical or mechanical device designed to enable an individual, twenty-four (24) hours a day, to instantly alert others of the existence of an emergency (as defined in subsection I. of this section) by the sounding of an audible alarm or transmitting a signal or message when activated. 
Q.  Permittee. With the exception of the definition of permittee in subsection K.2.a. of this section, the word "permittee" means the person to whom an alarm system permit is issued. 
R.  Primary Trunk Line. The phrase "primary trunk line" means a telephone line leading directly into the communication center of the police department, including 911 emergency lines, for the purpose of handling emergency calls on a person-to-person basis, which is identified as such by a specific number included among the emergency numbers listed in the telephone directory issued by the telephone company covering the service area within the police department's jurisdiction. 
S.  Robbery Alarm System. The phrase "robbery alarm system" means any device or system designed to operate night or day to instantly transmit a silent signal to alert others of an actual armed robbery or holdup in progress. 
T.  Siren. The word "siren" means any audible noise similar to that which must be sounded by an authorized emergency vehicle under the conditions set forth in Section 21055 of the California Vehicle Code. 
U.  Special Trunk Line. The phrase "special trunk line" means a telephone line leading into the communication center of the police department and having the primary purpose of handling emergency signals or messages originating through a central station, modified central station, or answering service. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 5-2-2011)  
8.38.040 - Alarm company duties. 
A.  Comply With Chapter. Alarm companies as defined in this chapter shall not provide, install, nor maintain any alarm system unless it complies with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Alarm Verification. Alarm companies shall attempt to verify every alarm signal, except robbery and panic alarm activations, before requesting a law enforcement response to that signal. An alarm signal found to be a false signal shall be canceled. 
C.  Alarm User Records. Alarm companies shall maintain current information on alarm users to include, but not be limited to, the name, complete address, and telephone numbers of the user; and the names and telephone numbers of at least two individuals who are able and willing to respond within thirty (30) minutes to the alarm site, are able to grant access to the alarm site, and can deactivate the alarm system should it be necessary. Any alarm company that fails to maintain such current information on alarm users is guilty of an infraction as provided in Subsection 8.38.180A.1. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 5-2-2011)  
8.38.050 - Audible alarm systems—Automatic dialing devices. 
A.  Siren Limitations. 
1.  No alarm system which emits the sound level of an emergency vehicle siren shall be installed or connected on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the use of certain electronic horns or howlers that may be approved by the police chief or a designated representative. 
2.  Any alarm system which emits the sound level of an emergency vehicle siren and which is installed and in operation prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be disconnected within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
3.  Anyone who installs or permits the installation of, or uses such an alarm system, is guilty of an infraction as provided in Section 8.38.180A.1. 
B.  Automatic Shut-off Required. Any alarm system installed or connected on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter that when activated generates an audible sound on the exterior of the structure in which the system is maintained, shall have as part of the alarm system an automatic shut-off device which shuts off the alarm system within fifteen (15) minutes of initial activation. Any alarm system installed and in operation prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter that when activated generates an audible sound on the exterior of the structure in which the system is maintained, shall have such an automatic shut-off device, as described above, installed and in operation within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
1.  Any person who uses or causes the installation of an audible alarm system without the required shut-off is guilty of an infraction as provided in Section 8.38.180A.1. 
2.  Any alarm company who installs an audible alarm system without the required shut-off is guilty of an infraction as provided in Section 8.38.180A.1. 
C.  Automatic Dialing Devices Prohibited. 
1.  No automatic dialing device shall transmit a signal directly to the police department after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Any person who makes or permits the transmission of a signal directly to the police department is guilty of an infraction as provided in Section 8.38.180A.1. 
2.  Persons owning or leasing an automatic dialing device may have the device transmit a signal to a telephone line directly to: 
a.  A central station; 
b.  A modified central station; or 
c.  An answering service. 
3.  The relaying of messages to the police department by a modified central station or an answering service shall be over a special trunk line, unless a special trunk line is unavailable. The relaying of messages by a central station may be over a direct line. 
4.  No automatic dialing device shall transmit a signal directly to a telephone company operator, a city telephone number, or a 911 emergency center operator. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 5-2-2011)  
8.38.060 - Robbery and panic alarm system. 
A.  Robbery Alarm System. A robbery alarm system is to be activated only in the event of a robbery. Any other use is prohibited. Any person who violates this subsection is guilty of either an infraction or a misdemeanor as provided in Section 8.38.180A.2. 
B.  Panic Alarm. The indiscriminate activation of a panic alarm by any person for reason other than signifying an emergency as defined in Section 8.38.030I. is prohibited and is punishable in accordance with Section 8.38.180A.1. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 5-2-2011)  
8.38.070 - Permit applications and reapplications—Confidentiality. 
A.  Permit Applications and Reapplications. 
1.  Applications and reapplications for an alarm system permit shall be filed with the chief of police on such forms as may be prescribed. Such applications and reapplications shall contain the name, address, and telephone number of the person who will respond to the alarm, or render service or repairs to the alarm, during any hour of the day or night, and such additional information as the chief of police shall deem reasonably necessary for the evaluation and proper processing of the permit application. Every alarm permit shall be kept on the premises where the alarm system is installed for use. 
2.  Any person who operates or maintains more than one alarm system upon any business or residential property may, at his option, apply for a single permit for that particular property, or for separate permits for each alarm system operated or maintained on said property; provided, however, that if such person chooses to secure a separate permit for each alarm system, a separate application shall be submitted for each such system. If one permit is obtained for a number of alarm systems at one location, false alarms by any combination of those systems shall be counted toward the determination of excessive false alarms as provided in Section 8.38.030J. Where multiple permits exist for multiple systems at one address, false alarms will be charged to the proper permit or alarm system. 
B.  Confidentiality. The information furnished and secured pursuant to this chapter shall be confidential in character, shall not be subject to public inspection, and shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not be disclosed except to persons charged with the administration of this chapter. It is hereby declared that the public interest served by not making the information public clearly outweighs the public interest served by disclosure of any information. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 5-2-2011)  
8.38.080 - Permit required. 
A.  Individual Users. 
1.  No property owner or person in possession of property shall cause an alarm system to be installed, connected, operated, or maintained upon any parcel of real property within the city without first obtaining an alarm system permit. Said permit shall be issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Any such person who causes an alarm system to be installed, connected, operated, or maintained without first obtaining a permit as required by this section is guilty of an infraction as provided in Section 8.38.180A.3. 
B.  Alarm Companies: Installation or Connection of Alarm Systems. 
1.  No alarm company shall install or connect an alarm system upon any real property within the city without first performing whichever of the following acts is most feasible: 
a.  Obtaining a copy of the alarm system permit from the alarm system user or the city; 
b.  Notifying the city by written declaration executed under penalty of perjury that the permit application has been mailed or personally delivered to the city; the declaration shall be signed by an authorized agent of the alarm company; or 
c.  Obtaining from the user of the alarm system a written declaration executed under penalty of perjury that said user has previously mailed the permit application to the city. The declaration shall be witnessed by the signature of an authorized agent of the alarm company. This declaration shall also be personally delivered or mailed to the city by the alarm company. 
2.  The declarations listed in subsections B.1.b. and B.1.c. of this section shall be served or given to the city within three business days of installing or connecting an alarm system. 
3.  Any alarm company who installs or connects an alarm system without complying with one of the requirements listed in subsection B.1.a. through B.1.c. of this section is guilty of an infraction as provided in Section 8.38.180A.1. 
C.  Alarm Companies: Maintenance of Alarm Systems. 
1.  Once an alarm company has established that the user of an alarm system to be installed or maintained by the alarm company has a valid permit or has complied with the provisions of Section 8.38.080B., the alarm company may maintain the alarm system until such time as it has been notified by certified mail of a revocation of the permit by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Where the servicing alarm company has been notified of a revocation of a permit by the city, said company shall place the alarm system in a nondispatch status, and the police shall not be requested to respond to alarms from the system. Any alarm company that fails to comply with this section is guilty of an infraction as provided in Section 8.38.180A.1. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 5-2-2011)  
8.38.100 - Issuance of permit. 
A.  By Whom Issued. The chief of police or his or her designated representative may issue an alarm system permit after the requirements of this chapter have been met. The chief of police may deny any application and any reapplication or revoke any alarm system permit used to provide security for any illegal activity. 
B.  To Whom Issued. An alarm system permit may be issued to the owner or person in possession of the real property which the alarm system is designed to protect. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 5-2-2011)  
8.38.110 - Terms of permit—Notice to alarm companies. 
A.  Terms of Permit. Each alarm system permit issued shall remain valid until such time one or more of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The location of the premises changes; 
2.  The ownership of the premises changes; 
3.  The alarm company changes; 
4.  The alarm system permit is revoked. 
B.  Notice to Alarm Companies. Notice of revocation of alarm system permits shall be served on the servicing alarm company. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 5-2-2011)  
8.38.120 - Transfer or assignment of permit. 
Any alarm system permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be valid only as to the permittee named on the permit, the premises identified on the permit, and only for the particular system or alarm systems specified on the permit. No alarm system permit shall in any manner be transferred or assigned without the written consent of the chief of police. Any request to transfer an alarm system permit shall be in writing. False alarms previously charged to the transferor shall not be charged to the transferee; provided, however, that the chief of police may deny any request to transfer an alarm system permit where, after investigation, it appears that the transfer is requested for the purpose of allowing the transferor to evade responsibility for prior false alarms. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 5-2-2011)  
8.38.130 - Reapplication for permit—Background investigation—Reissuance of permit. 
Any person whose alarm system permit(s) is/are revoked may reapply for a new alarm system permit, but only in accordance with the procedure set forth in this section. 
A.  Reapplication for Permit. All reapplications shall be submitted directly to the chief of police or his or her designee on such forms as may be prescribed. 
B.  Background Investigation. The chief of police or his or her designated representative shall investigate each reapplication to determine whether the grounds for the prior revocation have been eliminated, or are not likely to occur again in the future. Such investigation may include, but shall not be limited to, an on-site investigation of the alarm system; an examination of the alarm system and any specifications, diagrams, or descriptions pertaining thereto; and a prescribed test period of reasonable duration. 
C.  Reissuance of Permit. If after investigation and in his sole discretion the chief of police or his or her designated representative determines that the grounds for the prior revocation have been eliminated, or that such grounds are not likely to occur again in the future, an alarm system permit shall be issued to the owner or person in possession of the parcel of real property which the alarm system is designed to protect. The chief of police or his or her designated representative may impose such conditions on the alarm system permit as he deems reasonably necessary to insure that the permittee will comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 5-2-2011)  
8.38.140 - Police review of false alarms. 
A.  Any alarm permittee who has four through fourteen (14) false alarms within a consecutive three hundred sixty-five-day period shall be subject to fees and/or revocation as provided herein. 
B.  For each false alarm recorded between four and fourteen (14) within a consecutive three hundred sixty-five-day period: 
1.  The police department shall notify both the alarm permittee and the alarm company by mail of such fact, and direct a report to the chief of police. 
2.  Upon review of the report by the chief of police or his or her designee, a determination will be made, based on all the information available, whether a fee will be assessed against the alarm permittee. If a finding to assess a fee is made, a notice of the fee shall be mailed to both the alarm permittee and the alarm company, if any. The notice shall specify the details of all excessive false alarms. 
3.  The fee(s) imposed pursuant to this subsection B shall be in accordance with Section 8.38.180A.4. 
C.  For each false alarm recorded beyond fourteen (14), within a consecutive three hundred sixty-five-day period: 
1.  The police department shall direct a report to the chief of police. 
2.  Upon review of the report by the chief of police or his or her designee, a determination will be made, based on all the information available, whether to revoke the alarm permit. If a finding to revoke is made, a notice of revocation shall be mailed by certified mail to both the alarm permittee and the alarm company, if any. 
3.  If the chief of police or his or her designee decides not to revoke the alarm permit, a determination will be made, based on all the information available, whether a fee will be assessed against the alarm permittee. The fee(s) imposed pursuant to this subsection C. shall be in accordance with Section 8.38.180A.5. If a finding to impose a fee is made, a notice of the fee shall be mailed to both the alarm permittee and the alarm company, if any. The notice shall specify the details of all excessive false alarms. 
4.  Unless there is a separate indication that a crime is in progress, the chief of police or his or her designee may refuse police response to an alarm dispatch request from an alarm site for which the alarm permit has been revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 5-2-2011)  
8.38.150 - Alarm system prohibition. 
Upon a final determination to impose a fee pursuant to Sections 8.38.140 and 8.38.180A. of this chapter for the fourth and any subsequent false alarms within a consecutive three hundred sixty-five-day period, the responsible party shall tender the fee assessed within thirty (30) days of the date ordered. In the event the fee is not tendered, the continued operation of the alarm system by the alarm permittee is unlawful, and the unpaid balance will be subject to a charge of one and one-half percent per month, compounded monthly, in addition to the fee. The chief of police or his or her designee may revoke the alarm permit(s) of an alarm permittee who has failed to tender any fee within thirty (30) days of the date ordered. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 5-2-2011)  
8.38.160 - Appeal procedures. 
A.  Any party aggrieved by a decision of the chief of police or his or her designee made pursuant to Section 8.38.140 may, within ten (10) days of receipt of notice of the decision, appeal to an administrative hearing officer so designated by the city manager by filing a written appeal with the chief of police or his or her designee. The administrative hearing officer shall be a person other than the chief of police or his or her designee. 
B.  The written appeal shall set forth the specific objections to the decision of the chief of police which form the basis of the appeal. 
C.  The administrative hearing officer shall set a time and place for the hearing as soon as practicable. 
D.  The hearing process shall be conducted in an informal process: 
1.  The administrative hearing officer shall not be bound by the technical rules of evidence in the conduct of such hearings. 
2.  All parties to the hearing shall have the right to present evidence in support of or in opposition to the decision of the chief of police or his or her designee. 
E.  The decision of the administrative hearing officer shall be based upon the evidence presented, and it shall either: 
1.  Affirm the decision of the chief of police or his or her designee, in which case any fee imposed or permit revoked pursuant to Sections 8.38.140 and 8.38.180A. shall be sustained; or 
2.  Reverse the decision of the chief of police or his or her designee, in whole or in part, in which case no fee, no revocation, or a lesser fee shall be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 5-2-2011)  
8.38.170 - Notices. 
Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, any notice or other written proof required by this chapter to be served on or given to any person shall be in writing and shall be duly served and given when personally delivered to the person to whom it is directed, or when deposited in the United States mail, first class, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the person to whom it is directed. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 5-2-2011)  
8.38.180 - Violations—Penalties and enforcement. 
A.  Penalties. Except where punishment is specifically provided elsewhere in this code, any person who violates any provision of this chapter is subject to the following terms and penalties: 
1.  Violations of Sections 8.38.040C., 8.38.050A.1., 8.38.050A.2., 8.38.050B.1., 8.38.050B.2., 8.38.050C.1., 8.38.060B., 8.38.080B.1., and 8.38.080C.1. are infractions punishable by (1) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second violation within one year of a prior violation; and (3) a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the third and each successive violation within one year of a prior violation. 
2.  A violation of Section 8.38.060A. may be filed as either a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six months, or both, or an infraction punishable in accordance with Section 8.38.180A.1. 
3.  A violation of Section 8.38.080A.1. is an infraction punishable as provided in Section 8.38.180A.1. or by a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each false alarm, or both. 
4.  Permittees in violation of Section 8.38.140B. are liable to the city for a fee of sixty-five dollars ($65.00) per false alarm upon the fourth through ninth false alarms, and one hundred thirty dollars ($130.00) per false alarm upon the tenth through fourteenth false alarms, for the cost of providing a police response where an emergency does not exist. The alarm permittee is responsible for payment of any fees imposed. 
5.  For the fifteenth or more false alarms, permittees in violation of Section 8.38.140C. are liable to the city for a fee of two hundred sixty dollars ($260.00) per false alarm, for the cost of providing a police response where an emergency does not exist. The alarm permittee is responsible for payment of any fees imposed. 
B.  Enforcement. All remedies shall be cumulative, and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. The amount of any fee due and owing shall be deemed a debt to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent fee. All fees shall be deemed delinquent thirty (30) days from the date they are due and payable. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 5-2-2011)  
8.38.190 - Severability. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this chapter are, and are intended to be, severable. If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 5-2-2011)  
8.38.200 - Applicability to existing alarm systems. 
The provisions of this chapter shall also apply to all alarm systems which were installed, connected, operated, or maintained on or prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 5-2-2011)  
Chapter 8.40 - BUTANE RESALE REGULATION 
 
8.40.010 - Legal authority and title. 
Under the authority granted in Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution and Government Code Sections 36900 and 36901, the City of Orland, by and through its council, does enact this chapter of its Municipal Code, which shall be known as the "Butane Resale Regulation." 
( Ord. No. 2016-06 , § 1)  
8.40.020 - Findings and purpose. 
A.  The northern region of our state has experienced a recent increase in explosions caused from the manufacture of honey oil (also known as hash oil) in clandestine labs using five times refined (5X) butane. These incidents have caused considerable property damage, personal injury and even death to those participating in the manufacturing process and to innocent bystanders. 
B.  5X refined butane is used to dissolve the tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) resin, which concentrates into a liquid/oil form as a result of the butane's stripping process. The stripping of the THC through use of refined butane causes flammable butane vapors to accumulate low to the ground and remain exposed to ignition sources. Studies suggest that 99.5 percent of the extracted THC butane mixture will volatilize into the immediate area and find an ignition source if 5X refined butane and higher is used. 
C.  A honey oil lab using 5X refined butane and higher presents a serious hazard for first responders as the gas has no odor and can only be detected by a combustible gas instrument. Such conditions present grave risk of loss where devices such as a TASER are capable of igniting the gas resulting in an explosion. 
D.  The resale of 5X refined butane occurs at levels sufficient to aid the manufacture of honey oil. Such sales and possession of butane should be regulated to prevent the use of butane in the manufacture of honey oil where such activity presents grave dangers to the people of the city of Orland and the first responders therein. 
( Ord. No. 2016-06 , § 1)  
8.40.030 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions apply: 
"Butane" means five times refined (5X) or higher of any of the following: iso-butane, n-butane, and butane. 
"Canister" means a single container in which butane is stored or collected or from which butane is dispensed. 
"Code" means the Orland Municipal Code. 
"Customer" means any person who is sold or acquires during a transaction products from any reseller. 
"Day" means calendar day. 
"Package" means butane offered for sale at quantities of two or more canisters. 
"Person" means a corporation, co-partnership, or association as well as a natural person. 
"Reseller" means any business, company, corporation, person, employee or associate that sells, offers to sell, or distributes products to any customer within the city of Orland. It does not include any wholesaler engaged in a wholesale transaction. 
"Sell" means to furnish, give away, exchange, transfer, deliver, surrender, distribute or supply, whether for monetary gain or other consideration. 
"Transaction" means a purchase, sale, trade, loan, pledge, investment, gift, transfer, transmission, delivery, deposit, withdrawal, payment, exchange of currency, extension of credit, purchase or sale of any monetary instrument, or an electronic, magnetic or manual transfer between accounts or any other acquisition or disposition of property by whatever means effected. 
"Wholesaler" means a person whose business is the selling of goods in gross to retail stores for purposes of resale. 
( Ord. No. 2016-06 , § 1)  
8.40.040 - Unlawful sale, purchase and handling of butane. 
A.  It is unlawful for any reseller to sell, offer to sell, or distribute to a customer in the city of Orland any number of butane canisters that exceed a combined total storage quantity of 600 ml (20.3 oz.) of butane at any one time. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person that is not a reseller or wholesaler to have in their possession, custody or control in the city of Orland any number of butane canisters that exceed a combined total storage quantity of 600 ml (21.3 oz.) of butane at any one time. 
C.  It is unlawful for any customer to purchase or acquire in the city of Orland any number of butane canisters that exceed a combined total storage quantity of 600 ml (21.3 oz.) of butane per calendar month, whether sold individually or by the package. 
( Ord. No. 2016-06 , § 1)  
8.40.050 - Tracking of butane sales. 
A.  For every sale of butane, every reseller shall prepare a bill of sale that identifies the date of sale, quantity of butane purchased, and the customer's identification. The customer's identification as used herein shall mean a person's first and last name as verified from a valid driver's license or other official and valid state-issued identification that contains a photograph of the customer and a residential or mailing address. Resellers shall retain a copy of the bill of sale in readable form for a period of two years. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any reseller to sell butane to any customer without complying with this Section 8.40.050 of the code. 
C.  Upon written request, a reseller shall provide copies of the records described in this section to the city of Orland. 
( Ord. No. 2016-06 , § 1)  
8.40.060 - Penalties, strict liability, and nuisance. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided in this chapter or by state law, a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1.12 of this code. A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor and subject to a one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) penalty, per violation (Government Code Section 36901). A separate violation shall exist for every single canister sold or possessed in violation of this chapter. 
B.  This chapter is a regulatory provision necessary for the protection of the public health, welfare and safety. In any criminal prosecution for a violation of this chapter, it is not necessary to prove knowledge or criminal intent. 
C.  A violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a public nuisance. 
( Ord. No. 2016-06 , § 1)  
8.40.070 - Cumulative remedy. 
Nothing herein is intended to limit the city from pursuing any other remedy available at law or in equity against any person or entity maintaining, committing, or causing a public nuisance or any other violation of the code or state or federal law. 
( Ord. No. 2016-06 , § 1)  
Chapter 8.42 - WATER WELL REGULATION 
 
8.42.010 - Purpose. 
The city of Orland relies on ground water as its sole source of public drinking water. Protection of the quantity of ground water is essential to ensure future prosperity and health. The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations for the location of all water wells and to require hydrologic analysis of wells other than domestic wells. 
( Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 2)  
8.42.020 - Applicability. 
The standards set forth in this chapter apply to all new, rehabilitated or modified water wells of any depth within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. 
( Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 2)  
8.42.030 - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
"City" shall mean the city of Orland. 
"Director" shall mean the public works director of the city of Orland. 
"Domestic well" shall mean an individual domestic well with a pumping capacity no greater than two hundred (200) gallons per minute. 
"Inspector" shall mean a person designated by the director and authorized to ensure that the provisions of this chapter are enforced. 
"Permittee" shall mean any person, association, firm, corporation, special district or public agency. 
"Well" shall mean all water wells as defined in Section 13710 of the California Water Code, including community water supply wells, individual domestic wells, industrial wells, and agricultural wells. 
( Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 2)  
8.42.040 - Permit application procedure. 
A.  Permits required by this chapter shall be subject to conditions set forth in this chapter or as required by law. 
B.  No person shall construct, rehabilitate, or modify a well in the city unless a written permit therefore has been obtained from the department of public works. 
C.  Applications for permits shall be made by filling out a well permit form and filing same with the department of public works. Complete drawings and specifications for any proposed work shall accompany the well permit application and shall be of sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance with all standards. When required, the complete hydrologic analysis shall be submitted with the application. 
D.  Any person who commences any work for which a permit is required by this chapter without having obtained a permit shall be required, if subsequently granted a permit for this work, to pay double the standard permit fee. 
( Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 2)  
8.42.050 - Well location standard. 
No well shall be permitted within three hundred (300) feet of any existing or permitted city of Orland well. However, this provision shall not apply to the replacement of a domestic well with a capacity of less than two hundred (200) gallons per minute, provided the new well capacity is less than two hundred (200) gallons per minute. 
( Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 2)  
8.42.060 - Hydrologic demonstration of no impairment. 
No well, other than a domestic well, shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the director and based upon a written analysis by a geologist, geophysicist or engineer licensed in the state of California, that the proposed well will not result in a reduction in either quality or quantity of the city's water supply. Said analysis shall determine the minimum spacing between nearby wells and the proposed well utilizing a maximum drawdown of twenty-five (25) feet and no more than a five-percent reduction in flowrate of the nearest city well when both the city well and the proposed well are pumping concurrently. The nonequilibrium formula (Theis) or one of its modified versions shall be utilized in the submitted analysis with a clear explanation of the derivations for the coefficient of transmissibility of the aquifer and the coefficient of storage of the aquifer along with the background data of existing wells used in the analysis. 
( Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 2)  
8.42.070 - Conditions imposed for future connection to city water system. 
The director may condition the grant of a well permit upon the applicant's installation of reasonable well improvements necessary for the future connection of the well to the city's water system. 
( Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 2)  
8.42.080 - Fees. 
The following fee schedule shown is established to cover the administrative costs of issuing a permit. 
A.  Domestic well: $100.00 
B.  All other wells: $350.00 
( Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 2)  
8.42.090 - Inspections. 
A.  A well site and surrounding property must be inspected by the director or designee before the construction or rehabilitation of any well and at any time during the work authorized under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter to insure that compliance with the permit and all applicable standards are met. 
B.  A permittee or the drilling contractor must make a request for an inspection at least twenty-four (24) hours (one full regular city work day) before the time any inspection is needed. 
( Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 2)  
8.42.100 - Terms of permit. 
A.  Work authorized by a permit pursuant to this chapter shall begin within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance. The permit authorizes work for a period of one year from the date of issuance or as otherwise stated on the permit. 
B.  If work has not begun within ninety days or completed within one year, or within the time interval specified on the permit, from the date of issuance, the permit shall be void. A sixty-day extension of the permit may be granted by the director upon written request from the permittee. Upon the expiration of the extension, no further work shall be permitted unless and until a new permit is issued. 
C.  The contractor or owner shall notify the director at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the commencement of work. 
( Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 2)  
8.42.110 - Review of permits and inspections. 
A.  Any person aggrieved by the refusal to issue a permit, the terms of the permit, or any decision made by the inspector may, upon written request submitted within ten (10) days of any such denial, conditional granting, or other decision, have the matter reviewed by the director. 
B.  Upon receipt of written request for review, the director shall schedule the matter for review within three weeks and give the applicant at least ten (10) days' written notice of the time and place of the review, unless the applicant agrees to a lesser time. 
C.  The director will notify the person requesting the review in writing of his decision within two weeks of the review. 
( Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 2)  
8.42.120 - Liability. 
As a condition of all permits, the permittee shall assume all liability imposed by law for personal injury or property damage resulting from any work performed by the permittee or agent under a permit, or resulting from the failure of the permittee to perform the obligation under a permit. If any claim of such liability is made against the city, its officers, employees, or agents, the permittee shall defend, indemnity and hold them, and each of them, harmless from such claims. 
( Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 2)  
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 9.04 - CURFEW FOR MINORS 
Sections: 
 
9.04.010 - Curfew designated. 
Every person under the age of eighteen (18) years who loiters about the public streets, avenues, alleys, parks or public places between the hour of ten p.m. and the hour of six a.m. the following day, when not accompanied by parent or legal guardian, or spouse (spouse being twenty-one (21) years of age or over) of such person, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 96-11 § 19: prior code § 5100(a))  
9.04.020 - Parental responsibility. 
Every parent, guardian, or other person having the legal care, custody or control of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, who allows or permits such person to violate any provision of this code, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 5100(b))  
Chapter 9.08 - TRESPASS 
Sections: 
 
9.08.010 - Trespass upon private property prohibited. 
A.  No person shall remain on any private property or business premises after being notified by the owner or lessee or other person in charge to leave. 
B.  No person, without permission, express or implied, of the owner or lessee or other person in charge, shall enter upon private property or business premises after being notified by the owner or lessee or other person in charge to keep off or keep away therefrom. 
C.  Notification by the owner or lessee or other person in charge as provided in subsections A and B of this section may be satisfied by direct verbal or written communication by such person or his agent, including a peace officer or private patrolman, or by sign conspicuously posted on the property or premises giving notice of the prohibition of the particular form of trespass involved. 
(Prior code § 5200)  
9.08.020 - Trespass—Fenced areas. 
A.  It is unlawful for a person, without the permission of the owner, person in charge or his authorized representative, to enter public or school property that is surrounded by a locked or barred fence or wall, or to enter private residential or business property surrounded by a fence, wall, hedge or combination thereof. 
B.  This section shall not apply to persons who enter unlocked fenced areas for the purpose of a social or business visit with the occupant of the property. 
(Prior code § 5201)  
9.08.030 - Trespass—Swimming pools. 
It is unlawful for a person to enter or use a public or private swimming pool without the permission of the owner, person in charge or his authorized representative. 
(Prior code § 5202)  
9.08.040 - Trespass—Parking lots. 
It is unlawful for a person other than an owner, employee, person in charge, agent thereof, or with permission of the owner or person in charge, to enter or be present upon a public or private off-street parking lot or parking facility between the hours of eleven p.m. and six a.m. This section shall not apply to a twenty-four (24) hour rest area or during such hours that a parking lot or facility is specifically held open to the public by an owner, employee, person in charge or agent thereof. 
(Prior code § 5203)  
9.08.050 - Trespass—Public buildings. 
It is unlawful for a person to enter or remain in a public building or school building without the permission of the building superintendent, his authorized representative, or an employee supervisor, when such building is closed to the public. 
(Prior code § 5204)  
9.08.060 - Trespass on public property—Nighttime. 
It is unlawful for a person other than an employee on business and those with the permission of administrative personnel or an agent thereof, to enter or be present upon school or public park property between eleven p.m. and six a.m., not in response to a function to which members of the public are invited, and without obtaining permission to be on the property from administrative personnel in charge of the property. 
(Prior code § 5205)  
9.08.070 - School trespass—Daytime. 
A.  It is unlawful for a person who is not a teacher, student or employee at the school, to enter or be present upon the school grounds on a school day between eight-thirty a.m. and four p.m., not in response to a school function to which members of the public are invited, and without obtaining permission to be on the grounds from administrative or teaching personnel, and refuses to leave the grounds immediately when ordered to do so by an administrative or teaching staff member or an agent thereof or to leave and return without permission and not in response to a school function to which members of the public are invited, after having been ordered to leave. 
B.  This section is not intended to limit the right of any parent, relative or member of the general public in a nondisruptive manner, to enter school property and observe classes and school functions not open to the public, provided that such person has announced his presence to administrative personnel upon entry of the school grounds and receives permission to do so. A reasonable request for access shall not be denied. 
(Prior code § 5206)  
9.08.080 - Applicability. 
None of the provisions of this chapter shall apply when and if: 
A.  It violates a federal or state civil rights act or any other provision of law relating to the prohibited discrimination against any person on account of color, race, religion, creed, ancestry or national origin; 
B.  It results in or is coupled with an act prohibited by Section 365 of the California Penal Code or any other provision of law relating to duties of innkeepers and common carriers; 
C.  It results in an interference with or inhibition of peaceful, lawful labor picketing or other lawful labor activities; 
D.  It results in an unlawful interference with or inhibition of any other exercise of a constitutionally protected right of freedom of speech; 
E.  The person who is upon another's property is there under reasonable claim or color of legal right. 
(Prior code § 5207)  
9.08.090 - Violation—Penalty. 
A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable under the provisions of Section 1.12.010 of this code. Alternatively, a violation of any of the above-mentioned code sections may be charged as an infraction punishable under the provisions of Section 1.12.020 of this code. 
(Ord. 96-11 § 20: prior code § 5209)  
Chapter 9.12 - WEAPONS 
Sections: 
 
9.12.010 - Discharge of firearms, airguns, and other weapons or devices. 
It is unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to discharge at any time within the city limits, any firearms of any kind, or any airgun, air rifle, pellet gun, slingshot, bean shooter, blowgun, or other weapon or device which fires, discharges or impels BB shot, rocks, pebbles, pellets, or other missiles with sufficient force to cause injury to any person, animal or living creature, or damage to property of any kind or nature, except by permit from the city council or the chief of police. 
(Prior code § 5300)  
Chapter 9.16 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 
Sections: 
 
9.16.010 - Glass containers in park. 
It is unlawful for any person to possess any glass beverage container in any city park or city parking lot within the city. "Beverage" means any liquid intended for human consumption. Violation of this section shall be an infraction. 
(Prior code § 5700)  
9.16.020 - Skateboards prohibited. 
A.  No person shall ride, operate, utilize or permit to be used or operated a skateboard or similar device in any of the following areas: 
1.  City tennis courts; 
2.  The municipal swimming pool and/or the concrete deck surrounding pool facilities. 
B.  Violations of this section shall be deemed infractions under Section 1.12.020 of this code. Additionally, any person convicted of violating this section may also be held responsible for any damages caused by such unlawful activity and restitution as established by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Prior code § 5900)  
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters:  
Chapter 10.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.04.010 - Short title. 
This title shall be known and may be cited as the Orland uniform traffic code. 
(Prior code § 13000)  
10.04.020 - Motor Vehicle Code definitions shall apply. 
Whenever any words or phrases used in this title are not defined, but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state of California and amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply. 
(Prior code § 13011)  
10.04.030 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases when used in this title shall for the purpose of this title have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. 
"Bicycle" means a light vehicle without a motor, having two wheels, handlebars, and a seat or seats, and propelled by the operator. 
"Coach" means any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley or passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers. 
"Council" means the council of the city of Orland. 
"Curb" means the lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb be marked by curbing construction, or not so marked; the word "curb" as used in this title shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a street, nor from tracks or rights-of-way of public utility companies. 
"Divisional island" means a raised island located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic. 
Holidays. Within the meaning of this title, holidays shall be those listed in Government Code Section 6700. 
"Loading zone" means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
Official Time Standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time, as may be in current use in this city. 
"Park" means to stand or leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
"Parkway" means that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk. 
"Passenger loading zone" means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
"Pedestrian" means any person afoot. 
"Police officer" means every officer of the police department of this city or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
"Stop," when required, means complete cessation of movement. 
"Stop or stand," when prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or official traffic-control device. 
"Vehicle Code" means the Vehicle Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 96-11 § 21; prior code §§ 13010, 13012—13027)  
10.04.040 - Applicability to bicycles or animals. 
Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a highway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this title, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Prior code § 13044)  
10.04.050 - Applicability to public employees. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this state, any county or city, and it is unlawful for any such operator to violate any of the provisions of this title except as otherwise permitted in this code or by the Vehicle Code. 
(Prior code § 13046)  
10.04.060 - Exemption of certain vehicles. 
A.  The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the police or fire department, any public ambulance, or any public utility vehicle, or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified by the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call. 
B.  The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, relieve the operator of any such vehicle from obligation to exercise due care for the safety of others or the consequences of his wilful disregard of the safety of others. 
C.  The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work, or any vehicle owned or operated by the United States Post Office Department while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail. 
(Prior code § 13047)  
Chapter 10.08 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
10.08.010 - Police administration. 
The administration of traffic shall be a part of the general duties of the chief of police and officers under his supervision. 
(Prior code § 13030)  
10.08.020 - Enforcement duties. 
It shall be the duty of the members of the police department to enforce the street traffic regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate traffic accidents, and to cooperate with the city traffic director and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed by this title and the traffic ordinance of this city. 
(Prior code § 13031)  
10.08.030 - Department of public works approval. 
A.  Any provision of this code which regulates traffic or delegates the regulation of traffic upon state highways in any way for which the approval of the department of public works is required by state law, shall cease to be operative six months after receipt by the city council of written notice of withdrawal of approval of the department of public works. 
B.  Whenever this code delegates authority to a city officer, or authorizes action by the city council to regulate traffic upon a state highway in any way which by state law requires the prior approval of the department of public works, no such officer shall exercise such authority nor shall such action by the city council be effective with respect to any state highway without the prior approval in writing of the department of public works when and to the extent required by the Vehicle Code. 
(Prior code § 13005)  
10.08.040 - Interference with or obstruction of enforcement prohibited. 
No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of this city in their enforcement of the provisions of this title. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of this city in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this title shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provision of this title, constitute such interference or obstruction. 
(Prior code § 13045)  
10.08.050 - Traffic accident studies. 
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the police department shall conduct studies of such accidents and determine remedial measures. 
(Prior code § 13032)  
10.08.060 - Traffic accident reports. 
The police department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the city traffic director. 
(Prior code § 13033)  
10.08.070 - Annual traffic safety report. 
The chief of police shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the city council. Such a report shall contain information on traffic matters in this city as follows: 
A.  The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data; 
B.  The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police; 
C.  The plans and recommendations of the police department for future traffic safety activities. 
(Prior code § 13034)  
10.08.080 - Authority to direct traffic. 
A.  Officers of the police department and such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, except that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department or members of the fire department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions to the contrary contained in this title or the Vehicle Code. 
B.  No person other than an officer of the police department or members of the fire department, or a person authorized by the chief of police, or a person authorized by law, shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as herein provided, any mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the city traffic director. 
(Prior code §§ 13040, 13041)  
10.08.090 - Failure to comply with traffic direction prohibited. 
No person shall fail or refuse to comply with or to perform any act forbidden by any lawful order, signal or direction of a traffic or police officer, or a member of the fire department, or a person authorized by the chief of police or by law. 
(Prior code § 13042)  
10.08.100 - Report of damage to certain property. 
A.  The operator of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or owned by a public utility, including but not limited to any fire hydrant, parking meter, lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, or resulting in damage to any tree, traffic-control device or other property of a like nature located in or along any street, shall within twenty-four (24) hours after such accident make a written report of such accident to the police department of this city. 
B.  Every such report shall state the time when and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning and of the person operating or in charge of such vehicle or animal, the license number of every such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property damage in such accident. 
C.  The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this section if and during the time he is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event he shall make a report as required in subsection A of this section within twenty-four (24) hours after regaining ability to make such report. 
(Prior code § 13048)  
10.08.110 - Removal of vehicles from streets when. 
Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the police department of this city may remove or cause to be removed: 
A.  Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway for seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours; 
B.  Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m. when such parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution of this city and signs are posted giving notice of such removal; 
C.  Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or for the installation of underground utilities, or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic, or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicles would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the removal. 
(Ord. 96-11 § 25; prior code § 13049)  
10.08.120 - Shrubbery obstructing visibility of intersections. 
Whenever the traffic director finds that any hedge, shrubbery or tree growing in a parkway obstructs the view of any intersection, or any traffic upon the streets approaching such intersection, he shall cause the hedge, shrubbery or tree to be immediately removed or reduced in height. 
(Prior code § 13172)  
Chapter 10.12 - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES 
Sections: 
 
10.12.010 - Traffic-control devices— Installation. 
A.  The city traffic director shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic-control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this title. 
B.  Whenever the Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic-control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law the city traffic director is authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto. 
C.  The city traffic director may also place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained such additional traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigation and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as may be set forth in this chapter or as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the council. 
(Prior code § 13050)  
10.12.020 - Traffic-control signs required for enforcement purposes. 
No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Prior code § 13051)  
10.12.030 - Obedience to traffic-control devices required. 
The operator of any vehicle or train shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device placed in accordance with this title unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized person subject to the exceptions granted the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls. 
(Prior code § 13052)  
10.12.040 - Traffic signals—Installation. 
A.  The city traffic director is directed to install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard. 
B.  The city traffic director shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by field investigation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent and his determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the California Maintenance Manual issued by the Division of Highways of the State Department of Public Works. 
C.  Whenever the city traffic director installs and maintains an official traffic signal at any intersection, he shall likewise erect and maintain at such intersection street name signs visible to the principal flow of traffic unless such street signs have previously been placed and are maintained at any such intersection. 
(Prior code § 13053)  
10.12.050 - Lane marking. 
The city traffic director is authorized to mark centerlines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the highway. 
(Prior code § 13054)  
10.12.060 - Distinctive roadway markings. 
The city traffic director is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code on those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such markings or signs and markings. Such marking or signs and marking shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the State Department of Public Works pursuant to provisions of the Vehicle Code. 
(Prior code § 13055)  
10.12.070 - Traffic-control devices— Removal, relocation and discontinuance. 
The city traffic director is authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic-control device not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or this chapter whenever he shall determine in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist or obtain. 
(Prior code § 13056)  
10.12.080 - Traffic-control devices— Hours of operation. 
The city traffic director shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic-control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 13057)  
10.12.090 - Unauthorized painting of curbs. 
No person, unless authorized by this city, shall paint any street or curb surface; provided, however that this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or ordinance of this city pertaining thereto. 
(Prior code § 13058)  
10.12.100 - Turn lane markings. 
A.  The city traffic director is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections and indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the city traffic director is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right- or left-hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. 
B.  When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
(Prior code § 13060)  
10.12.110 - No-turn signs. 
A.  The city traffic director is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
B.  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Prior code §§ 13061, 13062)  
10.12.120 - No-right-on-red signs. 
A.  No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn against a red or stop signal at any intersection which is signposted giving notice of such restriction as hereinafter provided in this section. 
B.  The city traffic director shall post appropriate signs giving effect to this section where he determines that the making of right turns against a traffic signal "stop" indication would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic. 
(Prior code § 13063)  
10.12.130 - Signing of one-way streets and alleys. 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates any one-way street or alley, the city traffic director shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Prior code § 13070)  
10.12.140 - Stop signs. 
A.  Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the city traffic director shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows: A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances of other intersections where a stop is required and at any railroad grade crossing so designated. Every such sign shall conform with, and shall be placed as provided in, the Vehicle Code. 
B.  Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the council are declared to be through streets for the purposes of this section. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall also apply at one or more entrances to the intersections as such entrances and intersections are established by resolution of the council. 
D.  The provisions of this section shall apply at those highway railway grade crossings as established by resolution of the council. 
(Prior code §§ 13080, 13081)  
10.12.150 - Yield signs. 
A.  Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof which is not a through street, or any intersection where one of the intersecting streets is not a through street, at which vehicles are required to yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from an intersecting street or which are approaching so closely on the intersecting street as to constitute an immediate hazard, the city traffic director shall erect and maintain yield right-of-way signs, as follows: A yield right-of-way sign shall be erected at one or more approaches to an intersection of streets, but such yield right-of-way signs shall not be erected upon the approaches to more than one of the intersecting streets and shall be located at or near the entrance to the intersection where motorists are required to yield the right-of-way. Every such sign shall conform with and shall be placed as provided in the Vehicle Code. 
B.  1.  Those streets and parts of streets, which are not through streets, established by resolution of the council are declared to be streets where intersecting traffic shall yield the right-of-way for the purposes of this section. 
2.  The provisions of this section shall also apply at one or more entrances to the intersections as such entrances and intersections are established by resolution of the council. 
(Prior code §§ 13083, 13084)  
10.12.160 - Marked crosswalks. 
A.  The city traffic director shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway as follows: Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at all intersections where the city traffic director determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway subject to the limitation contained in subsection B of this section. 
B.  Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than four hundred (400) feet in length and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at mid-block. 
C.  The city traffic director may place signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall not cross in the crosswalk so indicated. 
(Prior code § 13100)  
10.12.170 - Use of crosswalk required when. 
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in any business district. 
(Prior code § 13101)  
Chapter 10.16 - MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES 
Sections: 
 
10.16.010 - Emerging from alley, driveway or building. 
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway. 
(Prior code § 13082)  
10.16.020 - Driving through funeral procession or parade. 
No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or a parade, provided that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over which such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to the orders of the police department. 
(Prior code § 13090)  
10.16.030 - Clinging to moving vehicle. 
No person shall attach himself with his hands, or to catch on, or hold onto with his hands or by other means, to any moving vehicle or train for the purpose of receiving motive power therefrom. 
(Prior code § 13091)  
10.16.040 - Commercial vehicles using private driveways. 
No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on or across any private driveway approach or sidewalk area or the driveway itself without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property, if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited. For the purpose of this section a "commercial vehicle" means a vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of one-half ton. 
(Prior code § 13092)  
10.16.050 - Riding or driving on sidewalk. 
No person shall ride, drive, propel or cause to be propelled any vehicle, bicycle or animal across or upon any sidewalk excepting over permanently constructed driveways and excepting when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk; provided, further, that such sidewalk area be substantially protected by wooden planks two inches thick, and written permission be previously obtained from the city traffic director. Such wooden planks shall not be permitted to remain upon such sidewalk area during the hours from six p.m. to six a.m. 
(Prior code § 13093)  
10.16.060 - New pavement and markings. 
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier sign, cone marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when any such device is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. 
(Prior code § 13094)  
10.16.070 - Limited access roadways. 
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established. 
(Prior code § 13095)  
10.16.080 - Restrictions on use of freeways. 
No person shall drive or operate any bicycle, motor-driven cycle, or any vehicle which is not drawn by a motor vehicle upon any street established as a freeway, as defined by state law, nor shall any pedestrian walk across or along any such street so designated and described except in space set aside for the use of pedestrians, provided official signs are in place giving notice of such restrictions. 
(Prior code § 13096)  
10.16.090 - Barriers and signs. 
No person, public utility or department in the city shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the city traffic director or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility or by any department of this city. 
(Prior code § 13097)  
10.16.100 - Obstruction of intersection prohibited. 
No operator of any vehicle shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Prior code § 13098)  
10.16.110 - Crossing fire hose. 
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the chief of the fire department or the assistant in command. 
(Prior code § 13099)  
10.16.120 - Advertising vehicles. 
No person shall operate or drive any vehicle used for advertising purposes or any advertising vehicle equipped with a sound-amplifying or loudspeaking device upon any street at any time within the central traffic district, without the permission of the chief of police. 
(Prior code § 13150)  
10.16.130 - Railway gates. 
No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Prior code § 13160)  
10.16.140 - Trains blocking crossings— Time limit. 
No person shall cause or permit any railway train or railway cars or similar vehicle on rails to stop or stand or be operated in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for the purpose of travel for a period of time longer than ten (10) minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to railway trains, cars or similar vehicles on rails while blocking or obstructing a crossing because of an accident which requires the operator of the train, car or similar vehicle on rails to stop at or near the scene of the accident. 
(Prior code § 13161)  
10.16.150 - Intoxicated persons in or about vehicles. 
It is unlawful for any person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs to be in or about any vehicle to which he has right of access or control while such vehicle is in or upon any street or any other public place in the city, unless the same is under the immediate control or operation of a person not under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs. 
(Prior code § 13170)  
10.16.160 - Vehicles on private property. 
No person shall operate or drive or leave any vehicle in, over or upon any private property without express or implied permission of the owner thereof, or the person entitled to the possession thereof, for the time being, or the authorized agent of either except that this section shall not apply to public or private parking lots. 
(Prior code § 13173)  
Chapter 10.20 - TRUCK ROUTES 
Sections: 
 
10.20.010 - Commercial vehicles over four tons permitted when. 
A.  It is unlawful for commercial vehicles weighing or carrying a load in excess of four tons to utilize city streets in commercial and residential zones, except as follows: 
1.  For purposes of delivery and pickup in the normal operation of a commercial business; 
2.  Upon designated truck routes within the city limits. For the purpose of this chapter truck routes are as follows: 
a.  State Route 32 as existing within the city limits, 
b.  County Road 99 (Sixth Street), 
c.  County Road 16 (South Street) between Interstate 5 and the eastern boundary of Railroad Avenue, 
d.  Railroad Avenue from South Street to County Road 18, 
e.  County Road 200 from Papst Avenue to County Road N, 
f.  Commerce Lane, 
g.  Ide Street, 
h.  Hoff Way. 
3.  Any deviation from established truck routes shall only be for necessary traversing of streets for purposes of repair, fueling, travel to and return from established or permitted truck yards. For the purpose of this chapter an established or permitted truck yard is one which is legally in operation under city code or possesses a current, valid use permit; 
4.  As hereinafter exempted; needing State Department of Transportation approval, or as permitted by the city council. 
B.  When such limits that are established herein are designated by appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle exceeding the maximum gross weight shall drive only upon those routes permitted and no others, provided however, that nothing shall prohibit the operator of any such vehicle exceeding the maximum gross weight utilizing restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups and deliveries of goods, wares and/or merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such streets which are restricted for which a building permit has been previously obtained. 
(Ord. 2000-03 § 1; prior code § 13151(A), (B)) 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 2)  
10.20.020 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to those vehicles specifically exempted by action of the California Public Utilities Commission or any owned by public utilities while necessarily in the use of installation or construction or repair of any public utility or appurtenance thereto. 
(Prior code § 13151(C))  
10.20.030 - Signs. 
Appropriate signs shall be erected. 
(Prior code § 13151(D))  
10.20.040 - State Highway 32. 
State Highway 32 shall not be affected until this ordinance has been approved by the State Department of Transportation in writing as provided for in the California Vehicle Code Section 35702. 
(Prior code § 13151(E))  
10.20.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violation shall be punished in accordance with Section 1.12.020 of this code. 
(Prior code § 13151(G))  
Chapter 10.21 - PARKING RESTRICTIONS ON HOFF WAY 
Sections: 
 
10.21.010 - Purpose. 
It is recognized that the commercial park surrounding Hoff Way in the city is developing slowly. During this transition period from vacant land to commercial use, it is intended that less restrictive parking and access rules be enforced. 
(Ord. 2000-05 § 1 (part))  
10.21.020 - Parking regulations and signing. 
All vehicles using the north side of Hoff Way for parking shall be limited to two hours from five a.m. to nine p.m. Parking is prohibited on the south side of Hoff Way. The director of public works shall install appropriate signs noting these restrictions prior to enforcement. 
(Ord. 2000-05 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 2) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-06, § 2, adopted Nov. 16, 2015, changed the title of § 10.21.020 from "Parking limitation during day hours and signing" to read as herein set out.  
10.21.030 - No parking. 
No vehicles shall be allowed to park on Hoff Way from nine p.m. to five a.m. The director of public works shall install appropriate signs noting this restriction prior to enforcement. 
(Ord. 2000-05 § 1 (part))  
10.21.040 - Sunset provision. 
Chapter 10.21 shall be of no further force or effect at five years from date of adoption by the city council or upon completion of development of all adjacent and surrounding commercial parcels on Hoff Way. 
(Ord. 2000-05 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 10.24 - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
Sections: 
 
10.24.010 - Applicability. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or the ordinances of this city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Prior code § 13110)  
10.24.020 - Curb markings and signs— Maintenance. 
The city traffic director is authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking areas and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 13112 (part))  
10.24.030 - Curb markings and signs— Violation prohibited. 
When such curb markings or signs are in place no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 13112 (part))  
10.24.040 - Curb markings designated. 
The city traffic director is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this chapter to place, and when required in this chapter shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and such curb markings shall have the meanings as set forth in this section. 
A.  Red means no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone. 
B.  Yellow means no stopping, standing or parking at any time between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials, provided that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty (20) minutes. 
C.  White means no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox, which shall not exceed three minutes and such restrictions shall apply between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays and except as follows: 
1.  When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox the restrictions shall apply at all times. 
2.  When such zone is in front of a theater the restrictions shall apply at all times except when such theater is closed. 
D.  When the city traffic director as authorized under this chapter has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the provisions of this section. 
(Prior code § 13141)  
10.24.050 - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited when. 
No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park or leave standing such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or other authorized officer, or traffic sign or signal: 
A.  Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings; 
B.  On either side of any street between the projected property lines of any public walk, public steps, street or thoroughfare terminating at such street, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
C.  In any area where the city traffic director determines that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
D.  In any area established by resolution of the council as a no parking area, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
E.  Upon, along or across any railway track in such manner as to hinder, delay or obstruct the movement of any car traveling such track; 
F.  In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property; 
G.  On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice of such no parking are erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the effective time of such no parking; 
H.  At any place within twenty (20) feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the mid-block end of a safety zone, when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
I.  At any place within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection in any business district when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop. 
J.  Within twenty (20) feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign or official electric flashing device. 
(Prior code § 13113)  
10.24.060 - No stopping zones. 
A.  The city traffic director shall designate established no stopping zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that stopping of vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and days when stopping is prohibited. 
B.  During the hours and on the days designated on the signs, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop the vehicle on any of the streets or parts of streets established by resolution of the council as no stopping zones. 
(Prior code § 13137)  
10.24.070 - Stopping or standing in parkways prohibited. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. 
(Prior code § 13111)  
10.24.080 - Use of streets for storage of vehicles prohibited. 
No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two (72) hours. 
(Ord. 96-11 § 26: prior code § 13114)  
10.24.090 - Loading zones and passenger loading zones. 
A.  The city traffic director is authorized to determine and to mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows: 
1.  At any place in any business district; 
2.  Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly. 
B.  In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes. 
C.  Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all curbs within such zones. 
D.  Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon the top of all curbs in such zones. 
(Prior code § 13140)  
10.24.100 - Effect of permission to load or unload. 
A.  Permission granted in this chapter to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than twenty (20) minutes. 
B.  The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages and United States mail. 
C.  Permission in this chapter granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage, but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three minutes. 
D.  Within the total time limits specified in this section the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading, but without permitting abuse of the privileges hereby granted. 
(Prior code § 13142)  
10.24.110 - Standing in loading zones. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material for such time as is permitted in Section 10.24.100. 
(Prior code § 13143)  
10.24.120 - Standing in passenger loading zones. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time as is specified in Section 10.24.100. 
(Prior code § 13144)  
10.24.130 - Standing in any alley. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley. 
(Prior code § 13145)  
10.24.140 - Coach zones. 
A.  The city traffic director is authorized to establish bus zones opposite curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof. 
B.  Coach zones shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection. 
(Prior code § 13146)  
10.24.150 - Taxicab stands. 
A.  The city traffic director shall establish taxicab stands and determine the locations thereof. 
B.  The curb surface within each taxicab stand shall be painted white and marked "taxicab stand" in red lettering, or shall be designated by signs of a type and size approved by the city traffic director. 
C.  No operator of any vehicle, other than a taxicab or automobile for hire shall park the vehicle in such taxicab stand. 
(Prior code § 13147)  
10.24.160 - Parking for demonstration prohibited. 
No operator of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street in this city for the principal purpose of advertising or displaying it for sale, unless authorized by resolution of the council. 
(Prior code § 13115)  
10.24.170 - Repairing or greasing vehicles on public streets prohibited. 
No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street. 
(Prior code § 13116)  
10.24.180 - Washing or polishing vehicles prohibited when. 
No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be polished any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city, when a charge is made for such service. 
(Prior code § 13117)  
10.24.190 - Parking adjacent to schools. 
A.  The city traffic director is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
B.  When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Prior code § 13118)  
10.24.200 - Parking prohibited on narrow streets and alleys. 
A.  The city traffic director is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street or alley when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty (20) feet, or upon one side of a street or alley as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty (30) feet. 
B.  When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets or alleys as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street or alley in violation of any such sign or marking. 
(Prior code § 13119)  
10.24.210 - Parking—Peddlers and vendors—Permits. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this section no person shall stand or park any vehicle, wagon or pushcart from which goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables or foodstuffs are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for sale or bartered or exchanged, or any lunch wagon or eating car or vehicle, on any portion of any street within this city except that such vehicles, wagons or pushcarts may stand or park only at the request of a bona fide purchaser for a period of time not to exceed ten (10) minutes at any one place. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons delivering such articles upon order of, or by agreement with a customer from a store or other fixed place of business or distribution. 
B.  No person shall park or stand on any street any lunch wagon, eating cart or vehicle, or pushcart from which tamales, peanuts, popcorn, candy or other articles of food are sold or offered for sale without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the city traffic director which shall designate the specific location in which such cart shall stand. 
C.  No person shall park or stand any vehicle or wagon used or intended to be used in the transportation of property for hire on any street while awaiting patronage for such vehicle or wagon without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the city traffic director which shall designate the specific location where such vehicle may stand. 
D.  Whenever any permit is granted under the provisions of this section and a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no person shall park or stand any vehicle, wagon or pushcart on any location other than as designated in such permit. In the event that the holder of any such permit is convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the provisions of this section, such permit shall be forthwith revoked by the city traffic director upon the filing of the record of such conviction with such officer and no permit shall thereafter be issued to such person until six months have elapsed from the date of such revocation. 
(Prior code § 13120)  
10.24.220 - Emergency no parking signs. 
A.  Whenever the city traffic director shall determine that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for other reasons, the city traffic director shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the city traffic director shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the city traffic director shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter. 
B.  When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. 
(Prior code § 13121)  
10.24.230 - Ten-minute parking. 
Green curb marking means no standing or parking for a period of time longer than ten (10) minutes at any time between nine a.m. and six p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays. When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic director to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign or parking meter in violation thereof. 
(Prior code § 13130)  
10.24.240 - Thirty-minute parking. 
When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic director to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays, for a period of time longer than thirty (30) minutes. 
(Prior code § 13131)  
10.24.250 - One-hour parking. 
When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic director to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays, for a period of time longer than one hour. 
(Prior code § 13132)  
10.24.260 - Two-hour parking. 
When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic director to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays, for a period of time longer than two hours. 
(Prior code § 13133)  
10.24.270 - Parking parallel on one-way streets. 
A.  Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within eighteen (18) inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing. 
B.  In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking. 
C.  The city traffic director is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways and shall erect signs giving notice thereof. 
D.  The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this section shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case such vehicle may be backed up to the curb, provided that such vehicle does not extend beyond the centerline of the street and does not block traffic thereby. 
(Prior code § 13134)  
10.24.280 - Diagonal parking. 
A.  On any of the streets or portions of streets established by resolution of the council as diagonal parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such diagonal parking, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle except: 
1.  At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of such allotted space; 
2.  With the front wheel nearest the curb within six inches of the curb. 
B.  The provisions of this section shall not apply when such vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight or goods, in which event the provisions applicable in Section 10.24.280 of this chapter shall be complied with. 
(Prior code § 13135)  
10.24.290 - Parking space markings. 
A.  The city traffic director is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where authorized parking is permitted. 
B.  When such parking space markings are placed on the highway, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible. 
(Prior code § 13136)  
10.24.300 - All-night parking. 
A.  Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates any street or alley upon which all-night parking is prohibited, or upon which nighttime parking is limited, or upon which all-night parking is prohibited or limited to a certain class or type of vehicles, the city traffic director shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. 
B.  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on any street which is designated by the council as one where all-night parking is prohibited, or where all-night parking is limited to a particular designated class of vehicles, for a period of time longer than thirty (30) minutes between the hours of two a.m. and five a.m. of any day; provided, that this section shall not apply to a vehicle of any legally licensed physician when actually engaged in making professional calls. 
(Prior code § 13138)  
Chapter 10.28 - PARKING VIOLATION ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
10.28.010 - Civil penalties. 
With the enactment of AB408, parking violations are removed from the court system and enforced via civil penalties, hereinafter referred to as fines. These fines may include but are not limited to administrative fees, assessment fees (court/jail construction), late payment penalties and costs of collection. The city council has the sole authority for setting penalties but will as much as possible attempt to maintain uniformity within the county. 
(Prior code § 17174)  
10.28.020 - Fine schedule. 
From time to time, the city council may review and reset the schedule of penalties or fines. This will be by resolution, and a current copy will be maintained in the city clerk's office, in the office of the parking program hearing officer, and in the Orland police department. 
(Prior code § 17175)  
10.28.030 - Assessments. 
A.  Assessments required by Section 76000 et seq. of the California Government Code will be forwarded to the county. This assessment will be submitted to the county no later than forty-five (45) days after the last day of the month in which the fine is collected. 
B.  Assessments Shared by State. For those assessments which are required to be shared with the state, the amounts due will be forwarded to the State Comptroller in the same manner as provided for the county. 
(Prior code § 17176(A), (B))  
10.28.040 - Administrative fees. 
An additional administrative fee by the city will be added to each citation. This fee will defray the cost of the program. The amount of the fee will be established by resolution and deposited in the city's general fund. 
(Prior code § 17176(C))  
10.28.050 - Late payment penalty. 
Any fine not paid by the required date (within ten (10) days of the date of the notice of violation), as fixed on the notice of violation, shall incur an additional late payment penalty of fifty (50) percent of the basic fine. 
(Prior code § 17176(D))  
10.28.060 - Delinquent fines and collection costs. 
Any fine not paid within fifteen (15) days of a delinquent notice, will incur an additional delinquent fine of fifty (50) percent of the basic fine. Costs of collection of delinquent fines may also be added to this total. 
(Prior code § 17176(E))  
10.28.070 - Payment procedures. 
A.  Fines may be paid in person by cash, check or money order at Orland City Hall during normal working hours. 
B.  Fines may also be paid by check or money order by mail. 
C.  Termination of Action. Once fines have been received by the city, no further actions will be taken concerning the notice of violation. The terminated notices will be placed on file at the Orland police department as with other public records. 
(Prior code § 17177)  
10.28.080 - Administrative review— Hearing. 
A.  For a period of twenty-one (21) days from the issuance of the notice of violation a person may request an administrative review of the violation by written request, by telephone or in person. 
B.  Included with delinquent notices will be a statement that renewal of the registration of the vehicle, receipt of state income tax returns and payment of state lottery winnings will be contingent upon payment of fines due to the city. 
C.  Photostatic or electronic copies of violations may be ordered by violators who have lost or claim nonreceipt of notices. The police department may charge a fee sufficient to cover the cost of such copies, not to exceed two dollars ($2.00) each. 
D.  If the person is dissatisfied with the results of a requested administrative review, he or she may contest the violation by depositing with the city the amount of the fine along with a written request for an administrative hearing, detailing an explanation for the reason to contest the violation. This request must be filed within ten (10) days of city's mailing of the results of the administrative review. 
(Prior code § 17178)  
10.28.090 - Alteration or violation of parking restrictions— Authority. 
No person, except the chief of police through the placement of temporary authorizing signs, may alter the provisions of any parking restrictions. No person, especially an enforcement officer, may authorize anyone to violate parking rules or regulations. 
(Prior code § 17179)  
10.28.100 - Notice of violation— Issuance. 
A.  If a vehicle is attended during the time the enforcement officer is issuing the notice of violation, the officer will deliver the notice in person. 
B.  If the vehicle is unattended, the officer will affix the completed notice either under the windshield wiper or in another conspicuous place so as to be observable by the driver upon the return of that person. The citation must be affixed to the vehicle so that it will not be blown away and will be visible to the driver when he or she returns. 
C.  If, for any reason, the driver removes the vehicle and leaves the area while the officer is in the process of issuing the notice, it shall be mailed upon receipt of an address from Department of Motor Vehicles. The notice will indicate these circumstances. 
D.  No person, including the issuing officer, is authorized to alter, conceal or destroy any notice once it has been initiated. 
(Prior code § 17180)  
10.28.110 - Notice of violation—Form. 
Notices lacking required information or incorrect essential information may be dismissed outright by a hearing officer. This is called summary dismissal and occurs because the city has failed to adequately establish a prima facie case. The notice of violation will as a minimum provide the following statutorily required information: 
A.  Violation identification; 
B.  Approximate time; 
C.  Location; 
D.  Vehicle license number; 
E.  Registration expiration date; 
F.  Last four digits of VIN; 
G.  Color of vehicle; 
H.  Make of vehicle. 
(Prior code § 17181)  
10.28.120 - Prima facie case. 
A notice of violation that contains the statutorily required information (as outlined above) is considered to establish a prima facie case. To rebut this, a respondent must be able to present credible and sufficient evidence to create doubt about the validity of the information listed. 
(Prior code § 17182)  
10.28.130 - Seizure of vehicle. 
Any vehicle cited five or more times within any period of five or more days and to which the owner has not responded may be seized or immobilized. 
(Prior code § 17183)  
10.28.140 - Notice of delinquency. 
A registered owner must be notified whenever a violation issued to the vehicle is delinquent. This may be satisfied when the processing agency mails a notice to the last known address of the owner on file at the Department of Motor Vehicles. 
(Prior code § 17184)  
10.28.150 - Leased and rented vehicles. 
The registered owner of a vehicle may transfer responsibility for the violation to a lessee or renter but only if the name, address and California driver's license number are provided to the processing agency within thirty (30) days of the mailing date of the delinquent notice. If this is not done, there is no requirement to transfer responsibility. 
(Prior code § 17185)  
Chapter 10.32 - ABANDONED VEHICLES 
Sections: 
 
10.32.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Inoperative vehicle" means and includes all vehicles which, through absence of or deteriorated condition of mechanical parts including but not limited to: engine, transmission, driving axle, tires and wheels is unable to be driven upon a highway. Furthermore, vehicles which are without current vehicle registration pursuant to Section 4000 et seq. of the California Vehicle Code shall also be considered inoperative. 
B.  "Abandoned vehicle" means and includes those vehicles, operative or inoperative, which: 
1.  Have been left by their operators upon public or private property for over seventy-two (72) consecutive hours; and 
2.  Whose owners cannot be located or contacted by reasonable means to move the vehicle in a timely fashion. 
(Prior code § 6603(B), (C))  
10.32.020 - Public nuisance declared. 
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof, except as expressly permitted in this title, on private or public property (not including highways) is found to create a condition tending to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects, and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof, on private or public property (not including highways), except as expressly permitted in this title, shall be declared to constitute a public nuisance and abated as such in accordance with the provisions of Sections 8.24.040 et seq. of this code. 
(Prior code § 6603(A))  
10.32.030 - Exceptions. 
Section 10.32.020 shall not apply to: 
A.  A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
B.  A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise; or 
C.  A vehicle which has remained inoperative for less than seventy-two (72) hours accumulated; provided, however, that this exception shall not apply to vehicles stored or parked in front yard areas; 
D.  A vehicle classified as a genuine antique and licensed as such under applicable state law. 
(Prior code § 6603(E))  
10.32.040 - Parking in yards, sidewalks or parkways prohibited. 
Any vehicle, operative or inoperative, parked in yard areas, sidewalks or parkway areas shall constitute a public nuisance and may be cited by a law enforcement officer as an infraction. 
(Prior code § 6603(D))  
10.32.050 - Maintenance of nuisance prohibited. 
Nothing in this chapter shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code. 
(Prior code § 6603(F))  
10.32.060 - Administration and enforcement. 
This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the police chief or his designee. 
(Prior code § 6603(G))  
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 12.04 - CURB, GUTTER AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION 
Sections:  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
12.04.010 - Permits. 
No curb, gutter or sidewalk shall be constructed within the public rights-of-way of the city until and unless the person or persons intending to do the work have obtained a permit to do such work from the superintendent of streets of the city. 
(Ord. 96-11 § 29: prior code § 8100)  
12.04.020 - Standards. 
Standard specifications, dimensions, alignments and grades for curbs, gutters and sidewalks in each block within the city, shall be prepared by the city engineer for approval by the city council. Such standards, when approved, shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. A suitable record of such standards adopted by the city council shall be maintained in the council chambers. A copy of that portion of such standards applicable to the work proposed shall be furnished to each applicant for permit. 
(Prior code § 8101)  
12.04.030 - Grade and alignment. 
The city engineer shall establish grade and alignment for curbs, gutters and sidewalks at the site of proposed work, prior to the construction of forms. 
(Prior code § 8102)  
12.04.040 - Inspection of forms. 
The city engineer shall inspect and approve all forms for curbs, gutters and sidewalks, before the placing of concrete. 
(Prior code § 8103)  
12.04.050 - Curb and gutter and/or sidewalk fund established. 
There is established a fund in the city treasury to be known as the curb and gutter and/or sidewalk revolving fund, and there is transferred to the fund, from the general fund of the city, the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(Ord. 96-08 § 1 (part): prior code § 8105)  
12.04.060 - Petition for improvement— Procedure. 
At any time that the owner or owners of real property with one hundred (100) or more feet of contiguous lineal frontage in any one block petition the city council to construct along the block curbs and gutters and/or sidewalks, and agree to pay the cost of such improvement, as provided in this chapter, the city council may order the improvement to be made, under the direction of the director of public works, the costs of the improvement to be taken from the curb and gutter and/or sidewalk revolving fund. In those cases where less than one hundred (100) lineal feet remain unimproved with curb and gutter on any one block, the owner or owners thereof may petition the city council to construct the curb and gutter as provided in this section. No petition to construct only sidewalks shall be approved where curb and gutter improvements have not been completed or requested concurrently therewith. 
(Ord. 96-08 § 1 (part): prior code § 8106)  
12.04.070 - Cost of improvement— Schedule. 
At such time as all the owners of unimproved property along any block have joined in asking that the improvement be made, they shall severally agree in writing that they will pay the cost of construction, proportionately as the improvement is made abutting their property, within five days after the completion of such construction and notification of their share of the costs, or alternatively that they will pay the same in the following manner: 
Cost of 
Improvement 	Period of 
Payment 
$100.00 or less 	Within five days after completion of improvement. 
$100.01 to $200.00 	$100.00 within five days after completion of work, balance within one year. 
$200.01 to $300.00 	$100.00 within five days after completion of work, balance in two equal annual installments. 
$300.01 to $400.00 	$100.00 within five days after completion of work, balance in three equal annual installments. 
$400.01 to $500.00 	$100.00 within five days after completion of work, balance in four equal annual installments. 
$500.01 or over 	$100.00 within five days after completion of work, balance in five equal annual installments. 
 
(Ord. 96-08 § 1 (part): prior code § 8107)  
12.04.080 - Cost of improvement— Payment and interest— Annual installments. 
At the time of payment of any annual installment, the owner is to pay interest upon the unpaid balance of costs of construction, in addition to the principal payment, at a rate of interest set by resolution of the city council. Concerning improvements consisting of curbs and gutters, upon completion of the improvement, the procedure set forth in Sections 5881, 5882 and 5883 of the Streets and Highways Code shall be followed; collection of the cost of improvement shall be made as provided by Sections 5890 through 5894, inclusive, of the Streets and Highways Code of California, as the same may from time to time be amended. The city council shall from time to time, fix a rate of interest which shall at all times be not less than the highest rate of interest paid to the city on its investments of surplus or unneeded funds. 
(Ord. 96-08 § 1 (part): prior code § 8108)  
12.04.090 - Cost of improvement— Bimonthly installments. 
Alternatively to the method of payment set forth in Section 12.04.080 of this chapter, the owners of real property of any parcel of land which is improved may elect to pay the cost of such improvement in six equal bimonthly payments, which bimonthly payments shall include interest on the unpaid balance of costs of construction at the rate of six percent per year. Such payments shall commence on the first month following completion of the improvement and notification of the share of costs to be paid; and such installment payment shall be included as a separate item on the city water and sewer statement sent to the landowner bimonthly. In the event that the landowner does not have city water and sewer service, a separate billing shall be made to the landowner. In the event that payments are not made within forty-five (45) days after installments are due, the total unpaid balance shall be collected in the manner set forth in Sections 5890 through 5894, inclusive, of the Streets and Highways Code of California, as the same may from time to time be amended. In the event of hardship, and upon application to the city council, payment of the costs of improvement may be made in bimonthly installments numbering more than six, but not more than twelve (12). The city council shall, in its sole discretion, authorize payment of costs of improvement in more than six bimonthly installments. 
(Ord. 96-08 § 1 (part): prior code § 8109)  
12.04.100 - Petition for improvement— Excessive costs— Determination. 
In the event that petitions are received for the making of improvements which will exceed in cost the sums available in the revolving fund, the city council shall, at its sole discretion, determine the priority of improvement to be made, giving primary consideration to the health and welfare of the citizens of the city, and secondary consideration to the order of receipt of the petitions. 
(Ord. 96-08 § 1 (part): prior code § 8110)  
12.04.110 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any owner, builder, contractor, agent, or any other person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code. In addition, any such person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable for the cost of removing and/or replacing any curbs, gutters or sidewalks not in conformance with the standards adopted by the city council; and the city shall have the right to institute in a court of competent jurisdiction, an action at law against the violator for recovery of such cost. 
(Prior code § 8104)  
Article II. - New Home Construction 
 
12.04.120 - New home construction defined. 
"New home construction," as referred to in this article, means the construction or reconstruction of a dwelling not in a subdivision. It does not include repairs, alterations or modifications of an existing dwelling. 
(Prior code § 8300)  
12.04.130 - Installation required— Standards. 
Every property owner or person in possession of property, and every builder, contractor or agent engaging in or allowing new home construction shall install adequate curbs, gutters and sidewalks in accordance with the standards adopted and approved by the city council of the city pursuant to Section 12.04.020 of this code. 
(Prior code § 8301)  
12.04.140 - Inspection of forms. 
The city engineer shall inspect and approve all forms for curbs, gutters and sidewalks before the placing of concrete. 
(Prior code § 8302)  
12.04.150 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any property owner, or person in possession of property, builder, contractor, agent, or any other person violating any of the provisions of Section 12.04.130 of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with Section 1.12.010 of this code. In addition, any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable for the cost of removing and or replacing any curb, gutters or sidewalks not in conformance with the standards adopted by the city council, and the city shall have the right to institute in a court of competent jurisdiction, an action at law against each and every violator jointly and severally, for recovery of such costs. 
(Prior code § 8303)  
Article III. - Commercial Construction 
 
12.04.160 - Commercial construction defined. 
"Commercial construction," as referred to in this article, means the construction, reconstruction or change of use of any building or structure to be used for business, commercial or industrial purposes. It does not include minor repairs or alterations to existing structures when the use or function of such structure is not changed. 
(Prior code § 8400)  
12.04.170 - Installation required— Standards. 
Every property owner or person in possession of property, and every builder, contractor or agent engaging in or allowing construction of, or change of use of, a commercial building, shall install curbs, gutters and sidewalks on all street frontage to be developed in accordance with the standards adopted and approved by the city council of the city pursuant to Section 12.04.020 of this code. 
(Prior code § 8401)  
12.04.180 - Modification of existing curbs, gutters and sidewalks required. 
Should curbs, gutters and sidewalks exist along the street frontage of the property upon which a commercial building is to be constructed, or its use changed, then any deficiencies in those existing curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be modified to achieve conformance with above-mentioned standards. 
(Prior code § 8402)  
12.04.190 - Inspection of forms. 
The city engineer shall inspect and approve all forms for curbs, gutters and sidewalks before the placing of concrete. 
(Prior code § 8403)  
12.04.200 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any property owner, or person in possession of property, builder, contractor, agent, or any other person violating any of the provisions of Section 12.04.170 or 12.04.180 of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment as provided for in Section 1.12.010 of this code. In addition, any such person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable for the cost of removing and or replacing any curbs, gutters or sidewalks not in conformance with the standards adopted by the city council, and the city shall have the right to institute in a court of competent jurisdiction, an action at law against each and every violator jointly and severally, for recovery of such costs. 
(Ord. 96-11 § 28; prior code § 8404)  
Chapter 12.08 - EXCAVATIONS 
Sections: 
 
12.08.010 - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person to break, excavate, dig up or in any manner interfere with the surface of any street, sidewalk or alley for any purpose without first obtaining a written permit for such work from the superintendent of streets; and the superintendent shall not give such permit until satisfactory security or pledge shall be given to the superintendent that immediately after the completion of such work, the street, sidewalk or alley, shall be put into condition fully as good as before such interference. 
(Prior code § 8200)  
12.08.020 - Permanent patch deferred with deposit for residential new construction. 
Use of cold mix patch material will be authorized during cold periods when hot mix is unavailable. Contractor or property owner shall be required to make a cash deposit with city treasurer totaling one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of estimated amount to complete the job. If the work is not completed within ninety (90) days of granting of occupancy, the deposit is deemed forfeit and the director of public works is directed to have the work completed. 
(Ord. 96-06 § 1: prior code § 8205)  
Chapter 12.10 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT 
Sections: 
 
12.10.010 - Purpose and findings. 
A.  It is the intent of the city of Orland (city), in enacting Chapter 12.10, to streamline and simplify the process of installing and upgrading telecommunications equipment throughout the city, and to encourage deployment, improvement and modernization of telecommunications infrastructure. 
B.  The objectives of Chapter 12.10 are the following: 
a.  Minimize disruption of the city's public infrastructure, such as paved roads and sidewalks, and ensuring efficient, non-duplicative placement of infrastructure in the city's right-of-way. 
b.  Reducing infrastructure deployment barriers by reducing costs of all underground work in the city's right-of-way for utility companies. 
C.  Access to modern telecommunications infrastructure is vital for communication, education, healthcare, economic development and emergency response. 
D.  It is the desire of the city to foster a fair and level playing field for all market competitors that does not disadvantage or advantage one service provider or technology over another. 
E.  The city seeks to promote widespread access to the most technologically advanced telecommunications services for all city residents and businesses in a nondiscriminatory manner regardless of socioeconomic status. 
F.  It is the responsibility of the city to protect and control access to public rights-of-way. 
G.  The city has a duty to ensure that all service providers utilizing city property, facilities or rights-of-way comply with all applicable state and local health, safety and other laws. 
H.  It is consistent with the city's goals and values to encourage investment in telecommunications infrastructure to help close the digital divide. 
I.  It is necessary to update city policies and practices to recognize the authority of the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) as established in state and federal statutes. 
J.  It is the desire of the city to assess fees sufficient to recover the actual costs of providing services but not to discourage improvement of necessary infrastructure. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § I)  
12.10.015 - Definitions. 
A.  For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply: 
1.  "Company" refers to any utility company that is authorized by any government entity or law to provide services or operate in the city of Orland. 
2.  "Conduit" refers to a tube, duct or other device or structure designed for enclosing telecommunication wires or cables. 
3.  "Director" refers to the director of the city's department of public works or his or her designee. 
4.  "Excavation" refers to any process which removes material from the ground through digging, drilling, boring or other activity for the purpose of installing utilities, infrastructure or other structures or equipment. 
5.  "Facilities" and "infrastructure" refers to wires, cables, conduit, switches, transmission equipment or other equipment for use in transmitting or processing telecommunications services or for providing support or connection to such equipment. 
6.  "Feasible" refers to capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account appropriate environmental, physical, legal, economic and technological factors. 
7.  "Incremental cost" refers to the cost associated with adding telecommunications cable, conduit and other related equipment to an excavation project, including the cost of the materials needed and any additional labor cost. 
8.  "Reconstruction" refers to any project which repairs or replaces fifty (50) percent or more of an existing road, highway or rail line. 
9.  "Rights-of-way" ("ROW") refers to the area upon or adjacent to any city-owned road, highway or rail line or along or across any of the waters or lands owned or controlled by the city. 
10.  "Encroachment permit" refers to a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
11.  "Telecommunications" refer to data, voice, video or other information provided by copper wire, coaxial cable, fiber optic cable or other technology. 
12.  "Telecommunications service providers" refers to any person, company, corporation or other entity providing data, voice, cable, video or other information services by wire, fiber optic cable or other technology. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § I)  
12.10.020 - Telecommunications infrastructure improvement. 
In recognition of the need to provide local residents and businesses within the community with the infrastructure required to meet their telecommunications needs, this chapter requires the following: 
A.  No company may undertake any construction, reconstruction, or repaving project involving excavation of the city ROW without first obtaining [an] encroachment permit pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  No fewer than thirty (30) days prior to a company's intended construction, reconstruction or repaving start date, a written application for a city encroachment permit, along with payment of any fees or deposit required by the city, shall be filled with the director of public works, in the form and manner required by the director. 
C.  The encroachment permit application shall contain, at a minimum, all of the following information: 
1.  General information regarding any infrastructure and/or equipment that the company plans to apply for permits to install within the ROW in the next six months, regardless of whether a permit is currently sought for those infrastructure and/or equipment. 
2.  Site plan of the infrastructure and/or equipment proposed to be located within the ROW, including a map in digital and/or other form required by the city, including digital geographical information system (GIS) formats. 
3.  Estimated project start and completion dates. 
4.  A traffic control plan, if required, that complies with guidelines established by the director. 
D.  Companies leading construction, reconstruction or repaving projects involving excavation of city rights-of-way shall advise and coordinate with other utility companies (i.e., communications or telecommunications service providers) regarding construction work to install telecommunications infrastructure in the right-of-way, to the extent reasonably practical and feasible. This coordination shall be conducted through city-sponsored coordination meetings. As a result of the coordination, installation of or upgrades to telecommunications facilities or infrastructure will be included as needed. In new developments, a company shall contact the developer to determine whether any surplus conduit is available in the areas that the company plans to install facilities or infrastructure, and whether any joint trenching or boring projects are feasible. 
E.  When utility companies participate or join in a construction, reconstruction or repaving project, which involves excavation in the city ROW, by installing telecommunications facilities or infrastructure in such projects, these companies shall be responsible for the encroachment permit applicant's incremental costs for installing these facilities and infrastructure. 
F.  Where appropriate, telecommunications facilities and infrastructure shall be installed in or adjacent to city ROW in conformance with current city standards and specifications. Copies of the "City of Orland Land Division Standards and Improvement Standards" are available from city hall and online at www.cityoforland.com/_documents/landdivstandards.pdf. 
G.  The director of public works will work with utility companies and contractors to identify cost-effective approaches consistent with city requirements. 
H.  All installations shall conform to the technical specifications associated to this ordinance and shall be approved by the director of public works. Copies of the "City of Orland Land Division Standards and Improvement Standards" are available from City Hall and online at www.cityoforland.com/_documents/landdivstandards.pdf. 
I.  In order to verify that a company has carried out the construction, reconstruction or repaving project in the city ROW pursuant to this chapter, the city reserves the right to inspect the project, as well as to inspect all necessary documents related to said project. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § I)  
12.10.025 - Implementation. 
No less than sixty (60) days before this ordinance takes effect, the city of Orland shall e-mail, fax, mail or deliver a copy of it to all telecommunications service providers and other affected entities doing business within the city of Orland. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § I)  
12.10.030 - Exemptions. 
A.  The director of public works, or the directors' designee, may exempt construction, reconstruction or repaving projects from the requirements of this chapter where compliance is found to be not practical or feasible. requests for an exemption shall be in writing, and the director's or the director's designee's decision shall be final. 
B.  An exemption request shall include all information necessary for the director of public works or the director's designee to make a decision, including but not limited to documentation showing factual support for the requested exemption. 
C.  The director of public works or director's designee may approve the exemption request in whole or in part, with or without conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § I)  
12.10.035 - Enforcement. 
Enforcement of this ordinance shall be as follows: 
A.  The director of public works, or designee, shall have primary responsibility for enforcement of this ordinance and shall have authority to issue citations for violation of this chapter. The director, or designee, is authorized to establish regulations or administrative procedures to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
B.  A person or entity violating or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. 
C.  The city of Orland may seek legal, injunctive, or any other relief to enforce the provisions of this chapter and any regulation or administrative procedure authorized by it. 
D.  The remedies and penalties provided in this chapter are cumulative and not exclusive of one another. 
E.  The director of public works or designee may inspect the premises of any construction, reconstruction, repaving or excavation project to verify compliance with this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § I)  
12.10.040 - Violations. 
Violations of this ordinance shall be enforced as follows: 
A.  Violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Any violation described in the preceding paragraph shall be subject to abatement by the city of Orland, as well as any other remedies that may be permitted by law for public nuisances, and may be enforced by injunction, upon a showing of violation. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § I)  
12.10.045 - Severability. 
If any word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion of this chapter, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance is declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid for any reason, then such word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion, or the proscribed application thereof, shall be severable, and the remaining provisions of this chapter, and all applications thereof, not having been declared void, unconstitutional or invalid, shall remain in full force and effect. The city of Orland hereby declares that it would have passed this title, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § I)  
12.10.050 - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall become effective three months after the date of final passage by the council of the city of Orland. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § I)  
12.10.055 - No conflict with federal or state law. 
Nothing in this ordinance shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any requirement, power, or duty in conflict with any federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § I)  
12.10.060 - Preemption. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be null and void if state or federal legislation, or administrative regulation, takes effect with the same or substantially similar provisions as contained in this chapter. The council of the city of Orland shall determine whether or not identical or substantially similar statewide legislation has been enacted or regulations issued. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § I)  
Chapter 12.12 - OBSTRUCTIONS 
Sections: 
 
12.12.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Obstruction" means any item which impedes or obstructs substantially, the sidewalk so as to prevent or deter the uninterrupted flow of pedestrian traffic. 
"Sidewalk" means that strip of property in commercial and residential areas of the city which is used as a conveyance for pedestrians, or if unconstructed that path or property which would normally be traveled upon by pedestrians. 
"Substantial impediment" means a seventy-five (75) percent or more interference with the entire sidewalk which prevents normal pedestrian traffic. 
(Prior code § 4201)  
12.12.020 - Obstruction prohibited— Exceptions. 
It is unlawful for any persons to obstruct or otherwise impede pedestrian traffic on any sidewalk or like strip of conveyance for pedestrian traffic in the city, except as provided in this chapter without a permit. Telephone poles, mailboxes, or other like objects shall not be considered to be in violation of this code section. 
(Prior code § 4202)  
12.12.030 - Permits. 
Permits to utilize sidewalks in a manner inconsistent with this chapter (e.g., sidewalk sales) are obtainable from the chief of police. 
(Prior code § 4203 (part))  
12.12.040 - Loading or unloading of merchandise. 
It is unlawful for any person to load or unload merchandise, goods or wares, except at the back or side door of the store or establishment where such goods are sold. If it is impossible to so load or unload at any side or back door, loading or unloading may be done at the front door, provided that boxes, barrels, packages, other containers, merchandise or other impediments shall be allowed only as provided by Section 12.12.050. 
(Prior code § 4200.1)  
12.12.050 - Required clearances. 
All sidewalks shall be kept clear, at all times, except as provided in this chapter, for a distance of four feet from the edge of the sidewalk on the street side. All sidewalks shall be kept entirely clear and free of obstruction during the hours of midnight to six a.m. daily. 
(Prior code § 4200.2)  
12.12.060 - Doors in sidewalks. 
Doors in sidewalks used to cover an opening for an elevator, stairway or chute must be kept in such a condition that they will not endanger persons or property, and it is unlawful for any person owning or being in charge or control of any such doors in sidewalks used for covering entrances to elevators, stairways or chutes, or other openings in the sidewalk leading to the basement, to allow such doors to remain open, except when such elevator, stairway or chute is being used for loading or unloading or transferring of merchandise or materials. 
(Prior code § 13171)  
12.12.070 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violation of this chapter shall be punished by a fine for a first offense of seventy-five dollars ($75.00), any subsequent offenses shall be fined with successive increases in the amount equal to seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(Prior code § 4203 (part))  
Chapter 12.16 - MAINTENANCE DISTRICTS* 
Sections: 
 
12.16.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted for the purpose of providing an alternative procedure for levying assessments against property specially benefited by public improvements to fund the cost of operating and maintaining such improvements which complies with Article XIII C of the California Constitution as set forth in Proposition 218, adopted by the voters at the general statewide election on November 5, 1996, and Senate Bill 919 signed by the Governor July 1, 1997. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.020 - Definitions. 
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions shall govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this chapter: 
"Assessment district" means an area containing all parcels which will receive a special benefit from public improvements as determined by the city council. 
"City engineer" means such competent person designated or approved by the city council or city administrator to perform the duties imposed on the city engineer by this chapter. 
"Cost of operating and maintaining public improvements" means all costs of rent, repair, replacement, rehabilitation, fuel, power, electric current, care and supervision necessary to properly operate and maintain a permanent public improvement. 
"Property owner" or "owner of property" means any person owning the fee title to a parcel of real property, or owning an interest in any portion of the fee title to a parcel of real property. In addition, the term "property owner" or "owner of real property" shall also include any person renting or leasing real property where such person is directly liable to pay any assessment levied pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
"Special benefit" means a particular and distinct benefit over and above general benefits conferred on real property located in an assessment district or to the public at large. "Special benefit" does not include a general enhancement of property values. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.030 - Manner of serving notices and other documents. 
Any notice or other document required to be served on an owner of property pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be typed or printed in at least 10-point type, and shall be deemed served either when personally delivered to such person, or when deposited in the first class United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his or her address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll or supplemental roll of the county of Glenn, whichever is more current, or at his or her address at it appears on a notice of intention to file property owner petition where maintenance assessment district proceedings are being initiated by a property owner petition in the manner hereinafter provided by this chapter. Service by mail of a notice or other document in the manner provided for in this chapter shall be effective on the date of mailing, and any failure of any person to receive such notice or other document shall not affect the validity of the notice or other document. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.040 - Initiation of assessment district proceedings by council resolution. 
Proceedings to establish a maintenance assessment district pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be commenced by the city council by adoption of a resolution of intention. Such resolution shall include a description of the proposed maintenance assessment district boundaries and a description of the public improvements to be maintained with assessment district revenues. In addition, such resolution shall direct the city engineer to promptly prepare a city engineer's report on the proposed maintenance assessment district in the manner hereinafter required by this chapter. Immediately following the adoption of such resolution of intention, the city clerk shall forward a copy of same to the city engineer. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.050 - Initiation of assessment district proceedings by property owner petition— Generally. 
Proceedings to establish a maintenance assessment district pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may also be initiated by petition of the owner or owners of all the property specially benefited by the public improvements to be maintained with assessment district revenues in the manner hereinafter provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.060 - Initiation of assessment district proceedings by property owner petition— Notice of intention to file property owner petition. 
Prior to filing a petition to establish a maintenance assessment district, the person or persons proposing to circulate and/or file such petition shall file a notice of intention to file a property owner petition with the city clerk. Such notice of intention shall include a description of the proposed assessment district boundaries, a description of the public improvements to be maintained with assessment district revenues, and the name, mailing address, E-mail address, if any, and telephone number of the person or persons filing such notice. In addition, such notice shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount equal to the estimated costs of preparing and reviewing the engineer's report required for the establishment of a maintenance assessment district in the manner provided for by this chapter, all as determined or calculated from the maintenance assessment district fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council. Immediately following the filing of such notice of intention, the city clerk shall forward a copy of same to the city engineer. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.070 - Initiation of assessment district proceedings by property owner petition— Execution and filing of petition. 
A petition to establish a maintenance assessment district pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be executed by the person or persons owning all of the property or properties within the proposed boundaries of the assessment district and shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. In addition to requesting establishment of the maintenance assessment district, such petition shall describe the boundaries of the proposed assessment district, shall describe the public improvements to be maintained with assessment district revenues, shall set forth the total amount of the annual assessments necessary to maintain such improvements, shall describe the method by which such annual assessments will be apportioned according to estimated benefits among the various lots or parcels then located or thereafter established within the assessment district boundaries, all in the manner provided for in the report of the city engineer, and shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. 
A petition to establish a maintenance assessment district pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may also include a waiver of the right of the petitioner or petitioners to any notice of the protest hearing on the assessment district to be convened before the city council at the time and in the manner hereinafter required by this chapter, and may also authorize the city clerk, upon receipt of the petition, to record the petition as the vote of the petitioner or petitioners in favor of establishment of the assessment district at such protest hearing, all at the option of the petitioner or petitioners. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.080 - Preparation of city engineer's report. 
Promptly following the adoption of a council resolution of intention to establish a maintenance assessment district or promptly following the filing of a property owner notice of intention to file a petition to establish such an assessment district in the manner provided by this chapter, the city engineer shall prepare a report setting forth all of the following information: 
A.  A map of the proposed assessment district which shall indicate by a boundary line the extent of all property which will be specially benefited by the public improvements to be operated and maintained with annual assessment district revenues; 
B.  A detailed description of the type and location of the public improvements to be operated and maintained with such revenues; 
C.  The total annual assessments required to operate and maintain such public improvements, as well as the reasons for such assessments; 
D.  The method used to calculate the assessment against any lot or parcel of property within the boundaries of the assessment district according to such lot or parcel's proportional benefit from such public improvements, as well as the annual assessment to be levied against any existing or proposed lot or parcel within the boundaries of the assessment district, calculated in accordance with such method of apportionment; 
E.  A statement of the method of calculating any increase in the amount of the total annual assessment as well as any increase in an annual assessment levied against a particular lot or parcel within the boundaries of the assessment district to account for inflation as hereinafter required by this chapter; 
F.  A statement that if the actual cost of operating and maintaining such public improvements during any year the assessment district remains in effect is less than the assessment levied for that year, the difference between the actual cost of operating and maintaining the public improvements and the assessment levied for that year shall be credited against the assessments levied during the next succeeding year in the manner hereinafter required by this chapter; and, 
G.  The termination date of such assessment district if of limited duration, or a statement that the assessment district will continue from year to year until dissolved by the city council if the assessment district is not one of limited duration. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.090 - Disposition of city engineer's report—Proposed assessment district initiated by resolution of the city council. 
Upon completion of the city engineer's report on a proposed maintenance assessment district prepared in response to a resolution of intention to establish a maintenance district adopted by the city council, the city engineer shall file the original report with the city clerk who shall present copies of the report to the city council for its consideration at the time of the initial hearing on the maintenance assessment district, and make copies of the report available to any owner of property located within the boundaries of the proposed assessment district requesting same. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.100 - Disposition of city engineer's report—Proposed assessment district initiated by property owner petition. 
Upon completion of the city engineer's report on a proposed maintenance assessment district prepared in response to a notice of intention to file a petition for the establishment of a maintenance assessment district, the city engineer shall file the original report with the city clerk who shall promptly serve a copy or copies of the report on the person or persons who filed the notice of intention. If, following consideration of such report by the person or persons having filed the notice of intention, such persons proceed to file a petition to establish such assessment district, the city clerk shall present copies of the city engineer's report to the city council at the time of the protest hearing on the proposed assessment district. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.110 - Hearing on establishment of assessment district— Proposed assessment district initiated by resolution of the city council. 
Immediately following receipt of the report of the city engineer on a proposed maintenance assessment district initiated by a resolution of intention adopted by the city council, the city clerk shall schedule the matter for public hearings before the city council as follows: 
A.  The city clerk shall schedule the matter for an initial public hearing on the proposed assessment district before the city council no earlier than forty-five (45) days nor later than ninety (90) days after the receipt of such report and serve a notice of proposed assessment on each owner of property within the boundaries of the proposed assessment district in the manner hereinafter required by this chapter. 
B.  The city clerk shall also schedule the matter for a final protest hearing no earlier than seven days nor later than forty-five (45) days after the initial public hearing on the proposed assessment district conducted in the manner hereinafter required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.120 - Hearings on establishment of assessment district— Proposed assessment district initiated by property owner petition. 
Immediately following receipt of a petition to establish a maintenance assessment district executed and filed in the manner required by this chapter, the city clerk shall ordinarily cause the matter to be scheduled for a protest hearing before the city council at the first regular meeting of the city council occurring not less than forty-five (45) days following the filing of such petition. However, if the petition to establish the maintenance assessment district includes a waiver of the right of the petitioner or petitioners to any notice of such protest hearing, and authorized the city clerk to record the petition as the vote of the petitioner or petitioners in favor of the assessment district, the city clerk shall cause the matter to be scheduled for a protest hearing before the city council as soon as practical. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.130 - Notice of proposed assessment and hearing on proposed assessment. 
At the time of setting a hearing or hearings on the establishment of a maintenance assessment district in the manner required by this chapter, the city clerk shall serve each owner of property within the boundaries of the proposed assessment district with a written notice of proposed assessment. Such notice shall set forth the date, time and place of such hearing or hearings, and shall include all of the following information bearing on the proposed maintenance assessment district and proceedings to establish such assessment district: 
A.  A map of the assessment district; 
B.  A description of the type and location of all of the public improvements to be operated and maintained with annual assessment district revenues; 
C.  The total annual assessment chargeable to the entire district as well as the reasons for such assessment; 
D.  A statement of the method used to calculate the annual assessment against any lot or parcel of property within the boundaries of the assessment district according to such lot or parcel's proportional benefit from such public improvements, as well as the annual assessment to be levied against each and every existing or proposed lot or parcel within the boundaries of the assessment district, calculated in accordance with such method of apportionment; 
E.  A statement of the method of calculating any increase in the amount of the total annual assessment as well as any increase in an annual assessment levied against a particular lot or parcel within the boundaries of the assessment district to account for inflation as hereinafter required by this chapter; 
F.  A statement that if the actual cost of operating and maintaining such public improvements during any year the assessment district remains in effect is less than the assessment levied for that year, the difference between the actual cost of operating and maintaining the public improvements and the assessment levied for that year shall be credited against the assessments levied during the next succeeding year in the manner hereinafter required by this chapter; 
G.  The termination date of such assessment district is of limited duration, or a statement that the assessment district will continue from year to year until dissolved by the city council if the assessment district is not one of limited duration; and 
H.  An explanation of the right of each property owner within the boundaries of the proposed assessment district to cast a ballot in favor of or against such assessment district, a summary of the procedures applicable to the completion and return of ballots, the last day for returning ballots, a description of the manner in which ballots will be weighted and tabulated, and a statement that if, after the ballots are weighted and tabulated in the manner described therein, a majority of the ballots submitted in opposition to the proposed assessment district exceeds the ballots submitted in favor of the proposed assessment district, proceedings on the proposed assessment district will be abandoned. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.140 - Preparation and distribution of assessment district ballots. 
At the time of setting a hearing or hearings on the establishment of a maintenance assessment district in the manner required by this chapter, the city clerk shall also serve each owner of property within the boundaries of the proposed assessment district with an assessment district ballot. Such ballot shall include a place where a property owner may set forth his or her name, reasonable identification of the lot or parcel within the boundaries of the proposed assessment district which is owned by such person, and such person's vote in favor of or in opposition to the proposed assessment district. Along with such ballot, the city clerk shall serve each owner of property within the boundaries of the proposed assessment district with a ballot envelope containing the address where such ballot may be mailed or personally delivered to the city clerk for tabulation. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.150 - Return of ballots. 
All ballots cast by an owner of property within the boundaries of a proposed maintenance assessment district must be received by the city clerk no later than the conclusion of the protest hearing thereon, regardless of whether such ballot is personally returned to the city clerk or returned to the city clerk by mail. Any ballot delivered to the city clerk after such date or time shall be deemed invalid. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.160 - Tabulation and certification of ballot results. 
Upon receipt of a ballot cast by the owner of property within the boundaries of a proposed assessment district, the city clerk shall determine the weight of such ballot based on a proportion equal to the ratio between the amount of the proposed annual assessment to be borne by the owner of the property casting such ballot and the total amount of the proposed annual assessments to be borne by all owners of property within the boundaries of the proposed assessment district. At the conclusion of the protest hearing, the city clerk shall tabulate the total vote cast in favor of the proposed assessment district and those cast against the proposed assessment district after weighting such ballots in the manner hereinbefore provided by this section, and shall certify the results of such tabulation in writing to the city council. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.170 - Conduct of initial hearing on proposed assessment district initiated by resolution of the city council. 
At the initial hearing on a proposed maintenance assessment district initiated by resolution of the city council, the city council shall receive and consider the city engineer's report on the proposed assessment district, as well as all comments on such report or any other matter relevant to the establishment of the proposed assessment district made by the owners within the boundaries of the proposed assessment district. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall either approve the city engineer's report as presented, approve the city engineer's report with such modifications to such report as the city council determines to be necessary in order to comply with the requirements of law, or abandon further proceedings on the proposed maintenance assessment district if the council determines that the district cannot be established in a manner that complies with the requirements of law or that establishment of the assessment district is not otherwise warranted. 
If, at the conclusion of such hearing, the city council determines to modify any provision of the city engineer's report bearing on the reasons for the proposed maintenance assessment district, the total amount of the annual assessment chargeable to the entire assessment district, the method used to calculate the annual assessment against any lot or parcel of property within the boundaries of the assessment district, the amount of the assessment levied against any lot or parcel within the assessment district, or the duration of the assessment district, the city clerk shall promptly cause notice of such modification to be served on each owner of property within the assessment district affected by such modification prior to the protest hearing on the assessment district. Similarly, if at the conclusion of such hearing, the city council determines to abandon further proceedings on the proposed maintenance assessment district, the city clerk shall promptly serve notice thereof on all property owners within the boundaries of the proposed assessment district. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.180 - Conduct of protest hearing—Proposed assessment district initiated by resolution of the city council. 
At the protest hearing on a proposed maintenance assessment district initiated by resolution of the city council, the city council shall receive copies of all ballots for and against the assessment district and the city clerk's tabulation of such ballots. In addition, the council shall hear further comments from the owners of property within the boundaries of any proposed maintenance assessment district on any matter bearing on the establishment of the proposed assessment district or the administration thereof. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.190 - Conduct of protest hearing—Proposed assessment district initiated by property owner. 
At the protest hearing on a proposed maintenance assessment district initiated by a property owner petition, the city council shall receive the city engineer's report, the property owner's petition requesting formation of the assessment district, all ballots for an against the assessment district and the city clerk's tabulation of such ballots. In addition, the council may, but shall not be required to, hear the comments made by any owner of property within the boundaries of the proposed maintenance assessment district bearing on the establishment of the assessment district or the administration thereof. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.200 - Conduct of protest hearing—Final determination. 
If, at the conclusion of the protest hearing, the city council finds that the votes cast by property owners within the boundaries of the proposed maintenance assessment district in favor of the assessment district exceed the votes cast by property owners against the assessment district when weighted in the manner required by this chapter, and, in addition, finds that establishment of the district otherwise complies with the requirements of law and is warranted, the city council shall adopt a resolution approving and establishing the assessment district, and such findings shall be final and conclusive as to all persons. If, on the other hand, the city council finds either that the votes cast by property owners within the boundaries of the proposed maintenance assessment district against the assessment district exceed the votes cast by property owners in favor of the assessment district when weighted in the manner required by this chapter, that establishment of the assessment district does not comply with the requirements of law, or that establishment of the assessment district is otherwise not warranted, the city council shall, by motion, abandon further proceedings on the assessment district. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.210 - Recordation of notice of assessment. 
Upon adoption of a resolution approving the establishment of a maintenance assessment district pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the city clerk shall provide a notice of the assessment, substantially in the form provided for by subsection A through F of Section 12.16.130 of this chapter to be recorded in the office of the Glenn County recorder whereupon all persons shall be deemed to have notice of the establishment of the assessment district. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.220 - Assessment district modifications—Generally. 
At any time following the establishment of a maintenance assessment district in the manner provided by this chapter, the city council may modify such assessment district either by changing the boundaries of the assessment district, by changing the type or scope of public improvements to be operated and maintained with annual assessment district revenues, or by changing the method of apportioning the costs of operating and maintaining such improvements among the various lots and parcels within the boundaries of the assessment district. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.230 - Assessment district modifications—Initiation of modification proceedings. 
Proceedings to modify a maintenance assessment district following establishment of the assessment district in the manner provided by this chapter shall be initiated by the city council by the adoption of a resolution of intention to make such modification. In such resolution, the city council shall identify the maintenance assessment district being modified, shall describe, with particularity, the nature of the modification, shall set a time and place for a hearing on the modification, and shall include a statement that all owners of property which are or will be included within the boundaries of the modified assessment district may protest or otherwise be heard on the modification. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.240 - Assessment district modifications—Conduct of modification proceedings. 
Proceedings to modify a maintenance assessment district established by the city council in the manner provided by this chapter shall be conducted in the same manner provided by this chapter for the initial establishment of an assessment district following adoption by the city council of a resolution of intention to establish the assessment district. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.250 - Dissolution of assessment district. 
At any time following the establishment of a maintenance assessment district in the manner hereinbefore provided by this chapter, the city council may dissolve such district. Proceedings to dissolve a maintenance assessment district shall be initiated by the city council by adoption of a resolution of intention to dissolve the assessment district. In such resolution of intention, the city council shall identify the maintenance assessment district being dissolved, shall set forth the reasons for the dissolution, and shall set forth the date, time and place for a hearing at which any owner of property within such district may object to such dissolution. At least ten days prior to the date of a hearing on the dissolution of a maintenance assessment district, the city clerk shall serve a notice of the hearing on each owner of property within the boundaries of the assessment district. If, at the conclusion of the hearing on the proposed dissolution of a maintenance assessment district, the city council determines that dissolution of the assessment district is warranted, the council shall adopt a resolution ordering the assessment district dissolved. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.260 - Adjustment to annual assessments based on increases in consumer price index. 
If, on the first day of the city fiscal year commencing on July 1st following the establishment of a maintenance assessment district in the manner provided in this chapter, and on the first day of each fiscal year thereafter that the assessment district remains in effect, there is an increase in the cost of operating and maintaining the public improvements to be funded with assessment district revenues, as measured by an increase in the consumer price index during such period of time, then the total annual assessment levied against all properties within the assessment district, as well as the proportional annual assessment levied against each lot or parcel within the boundaries of the assessment district shall also be increased in proportion to the increase in such costs. The determination of whether there has been an increase in such costs and the amount of the increase in such assessments which is proportional to the increase in such costs shall be made by the director of public works and shall be based exclusively on the percentage increase during such period of time in the consumer price index published by the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics for all Urban Consumers—U.S. Cities Average (all items) or such other measure employed by the U.S. Department of Labor Statistics in lieu of such consumer price index which measures the cost of living in U.S. cities. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.270 - Credits against annual assessments based on prior year maintenance costs. 
If, on the first day of the city fiscal year commencing on July 1st following the establishment of a maintenance assessment district in the manner provided by this chapter, and on first day of each fiscal year thereafter that the assessment district remains in effect, the total annual assessment levied during the preceding fiscal year exceeded the actual cost of operating and maintaining the public improvements to be funded with assessment district revenues during such preceding fiscal year, then the total annual assessment levied against property within the assessment district during the ensuing fiscal year shall be reduced by a credit equal to the difference between the total annual assessment levied during the preceding fiscal year and the actual cost of operating and maintaining the public improvements to be funded with assessment district revenues during such preceding fiscal year. In particular, the total annual assessment levied against all property within the maintenance assessment district shall be reduced during the ensuing fiscal year, and only during the ensuing fiscal year, by an amount equal to the difference between the total annual assessment levied during the preceding fiscal year and the total cost of operating and maintaining the public improvements to be funded with assessment district revenues during such preceding fiscal year, and the annual assessment levied against each individual lot or parcel within the boundaries of the assessment district shall be reduced during the ensuing fiscal year, and only during such ensuing fiscal year, by a portion of such amount which is calculated by the director of public works using the method of apportionment set forth in the city engineer's report as approved by the city council at the time the district was established. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.280 - Preparation of annual register of maintenance district assessments. 
On July 1st of each year following the establishment of a maintenance assessment district pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or as soon thereafter as practical, the director of public works shall prepare a register of all assessments having been levied within an assessment district established pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Such register shall identify each maintenance assessment district established pursuant to the provisions of this chapter by its number or other designation, and shall set forth the assessor's parcel number of every lot or parcel of real property within the boundaries of each such assessment district, the name and address of the owner or owners of such lot or parcel if required by the Glenn County auditor, and the amount of the annual assessment levied against such lot or parcel during the current tax year as adjusted for inflation and prior year credits in the manner required by this chapter. Upon completion of such register, the director of public works shall file same with the Glenn County auditor with a request that the assessments be added to the secured tax roll for the current fiscal year. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
12.16.290 - Collection of maintenance district assessments on secured tax roll. 
Upon receipt of the annual register of maintenance district assessments prepared by the director of public works in the manner required by this chapter, the county auditor shall cause the maintenance district assessments set forth in the annual register to be added to the secured tax roll of the county. Thereafter, all such maintenance district assessments shall be paid and collected in the same manner and at the same time as the general taxes of the county on real property are paid and collected, and such assessments shall become delinquent at the same time and bear the same proportionate penalties and interest after delinquency as do the general taxes of the county on real property. 
(Ord. 98-01 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 12.20 - PARK AND RECREATION FACILITIES 
Sections: 
 
12.20.010 - Closing hours. 
The Orland city parks shall be closed to public use every night between the hours of eleven p.m. and six a.m. the following morning. 
(Prior code § 5105 (part))  
12.20.020 - Permit to use city parks after closing hours. 
A person who represents any nonprofit, tax- exempt organization, or any recognized, organized athletic group, may obtain a permit from the Orland city clerk authorizing such organization or group to use one or more of the Orland city parks between the hours of eleven p.m. and six a.m. the following morning. Prior to issuing such permit, the Orland city clerk shall determine that the organization or group is as it purports to be. Any person refusing or failing to divulge the information required by the Orland city clerk shall be denied the permit requested 
(Prior code § 5105 (part))  
12.20.030 - Horses prohibited—Exception. 
Horses are prohibited and no person may possess or use a horse inside the confines of Orland city parks. For good cause on special occasions the city park's superintendent may waive the provision of this section. Such waiver must be requested prior to entering any Orland city park 
(Ord. 99-01 § 2)  
12.20.035 - Golfing prohibited—Exception. 
The activity of golfing is prohibited inside the confines of all Orland city parks. Golfing is broadly defined as both the striking of a golf ball with any object and the use of a golf club to strike any object. For good cause on special occasions, the city parks superintendent may waive the prohibition of this section. Such waiver shall be in writing, and must be obtained prior to engaging in the activity. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02 )  
12.20.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as set forth in Section 1.12.010 of this code by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 99-01 § 3: Ord. 96-11 § 30: prior code § 5106)  
Chapter 12.22 - LOLLIPOP LAND 
Sections: 
 
12.22.010 - Territory included. 
Lollipop Land is a playground recreational area designed for young children and more particularly described as follows: 
 All that certain real property situate in the city of Orland, Glenn County, California, described as follows: A Portion of the Northeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 22, Township 22 North, Range 3 West, M.D.B.&M., more particularly described as follows: COMMENCING at the Northeast corner of Block 19 of the City of Orland; THENCE North 89° 56' 10? West, along the North line of said Block 19, a distance of 165.0 feet; THENCE North 0° 03' 50? East, a distance of 176.5 feet to the True Point of Beginning for this description; THENCE 89° 48' 31? West, a distance of 124.08 feet; THENCE North 0° 28' 42? East, a distance of 198.33 feet; THENCE North 89° 44' 41? East, a distance of 237.57 feet; THENCE North 45° 59' 06? East, a distance of 70.61 feet; THENCE South 2° 03' 17? West, a distance of 177.43 feet; THENCE North 88° 49' 31? West, a distance of 158.85 feet; THENCE South 0° 34' 49? West, a distance of 73.97 feet to the True Point of Beginning. 
(Ord. 99-01 § 1 (part); prior code § 5600)  
12.22.020 - Vehicles prohibited. 
Except as engaged in a city-approved event, motorized bicycles and motor vehicles are prohibited and no person may possess, use or cause to possess or use any vehicle described herein inside the Lollipop Land playground area described in Section 12.22.010. 
(Ord. 99-01 § 1 (part); prior code § 5601) 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 1)  
12.22.030 - Riding of bicycles and skateboards prohibited. 
The riding of bicycles and skateboards is prohibited inside the Lollipop Land playground area described in Section 12.22.010. Bicycles shall be walked and skateboards carried within Lollipop Land. 
(Ord. 99-01 § 1 (part); prior code § 5602) 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 2) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-05, § 2, adopted Sept. 21, 2015, changed the title of § 12.22.030 from "Skateboards prohibited" to read as herein set out.  
12.22.040 - Animals prohibited. 
A.  All animals of whatever nature are prohibited and no person may possess, use or cause to possess or use an animal inside the Lollipop Land playground area described in Section 12.22.010. 
B.  For good cause on special occasion the Orland city parks superintendent may waive the provisions of this section. Request for such waiver must be made prior to entering the Lollipop Land playground area. 
(Ord. 99-01 § 1 (part); prior code § 5603)  
12.22.050 - Age limitation. 
Except with the prior permission of the park superintendent, persons ten (10) years of age and older may not enter Lollipop Land playground area except when accompanying a child of less than ten (10) years of age. 
(Ord. 99-01 § 1 (part); prior code § 5604)  
12.22.060 - Hours of operation. 
Lollipop Land shall be open to the public except during the hours eleven p.m. to six a.m. daily. 
(Ord. 99-01 § 1 (part); prior code § 5605)  
12.22.070 - Closure. 
The Orland city chief of police and/or the Orland city park superintendent may close Lollipop Land any time such action is necessary for the protection of public safety or public property. During such closure no person may enter, use or occupy any portion of Lollipop Land. 
(Ord. 99-01 § 1 (part); prior code § 5606)  
12.22.080 - Ejection of persons. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter may be removed from Lollipop Land upon order of the Orland city park superintendent, any Orland city police officer, and/or any authorized employee, or officer of the city. When ordered to leave, such person may not re-enter Lollipop Land for a period of at least twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Ord. 99-01 § 1 (part); prior code § 5607)  
12.22.090 - Violation—Penalty. 
In addition to the penalties set forth in Section 12.22.080, any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as set forth in Section 1.12.010 of this code by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 99-01 § 1 (part); Ord. 96-11 § 12: prior code § 5608)  
Chapter 12.24 - LIBRARY PARK 
Sections: 
 
12.24.010 - Territory included. 
Library Park is located within the city and bounded by the city streets of Yolo on the south; Fourth Street on the west; Mill Street on the north; and Third Street on the east. 
(Prior code § 5800)  
12.24.020 - Vehicles prohibited. 
Except as engaged in a city-approved event, motorized bicycles, motorcycles and motor vehicles other than emergency vehicles are prohibited and no person may possess, use or cause to possess or use any such vehicle described in this section inside the confines of Library Park as described in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 5801) 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 3)  
12.24.030 - Riding of bicycles and skateboards prohibited. 
The riding of bicycles and skateboards is prohibited inside the confines of and upon any sidewalks of Library Park as described in this chapter. Bicycles shall be walked and skateboards carried within Library Park. 
(Prior code § 5802) 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 4) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-05, § 4, adopted Sept. 21, 2015, changed the title of § 12.24.030 from "Skateboards prohibited" to read as herein set out.  
12.24.040 - Horses prohibited— Exception. 
Horses are prohibited and no person may possess or use a horse inside the confines of Library Park as described in this chapter. For good cause on special occasions the city park's superintendent may waive the provision of this section. Such waiver must be requested prior to entering of the Library Park. 
(Prior code § 5803)  
12.24.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be punished pursuant to Chapter 1.12 of this code. Violation may be deemed to be either a misdemeanor or an infraction. 
(Prior code § 5804)  
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 13.04 - WATER AND SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM 
Sections:  
Article I. - Purpose and Definitions 
 
13.04.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of adopting standards, regulations and procedures for the use and operation of, connection to and extension of the city water and sewer systems, and to establish fees and charges for service and connections. 
(Prior code § 9100)  
13.04.020 - Definitions. 
The following terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the following respective meanings: 
"Acreage" means gross acreage of real property, excluding existing public streets. 
"City engineer" means the person so designated by the city council. 
"Commercial use" means any land use which is not residential, industrial or institutional. 
"Director" means the director of public works of the city, as designated by the city council. 
"Domestic sewage" means the waterborne wastes derived from the ordinary living processes and of such character as to permit satisfactory disposal, without special treatment, into the sewer system. 
"Dwelling unit" means any dwelling of one or more rooms, having one or more plumbing fixtures, suitable for residential occupancy by any number of persons living together as a single family, including single-family dwelling structures and each group of rooms constituting a dwelling unit for a single family in any multiple-dwelling structure. 
"Family" means any one or more persons comprising a single-family unit. 
"Front footage" means the dimension of that portion of a lot or parcel of land abutting a public street or proposed public street. 
"Industrial use" means any land use in which any manufacturing activity is involved, including the manufacturing or processing of agricultural products, animals, poultry, goods, wares, or other products or materials. 
"Industrial waste" means any and all liquid or waterborne wastes from any industrial or commercial processes, except domestic sewage. 
"Institutional use" means any use of land by any public or private owner, including any public corporation, for operation of a public or nonprofit school, college, church, hospital, lodge, club, fire department, library, memorial building or other public or nonprofit activity. 
"Lateral sewer" means that part of any sewer piping beginning at the junction thereof with a building plumbing system at not closer than two feet outside the foundation wall of the building serviced and terminating in any main sewer. 
"Main extension" means the extension of any water main, main sewer or main trunk sewer, by construction of additional length thereof, beyond existing facilities in streets. 
"Main sewer" means any sewer constructed in any street to accommodate more than one lateral sewer. 
"Main trunk sewer" means any sewer constructed in any street to accommodate a system of main sewers. 
"Multiple-dwelling structure" means a structure containing two or more dwelling units in any single building or structure or group of buildings or structures, including any apartment house or apartment court, but excepting dormitories, boardinghouses, hotels and motels. 
"Occupant" means any person actually occupying any premises, whether as owner or tenant or under contract or otherwise. 
"Owner" means the person owning fee title to any premises, as shown by the official records of the county recorder. 
"Person" means any person, firm, company, corporation, partnership, association, or any public corporation. 
"Premises" means any lot, place or parcel of land, or any building or other structure or any part of any building or structure used or useful for human habitation or gathering for carrying on a business or occupation or any commercial or industrial or institutional activity. 
"Public corporation" means the city or any political subdivision, city, county, district, the state, or the United States of America, or any department or agency of any thereof. The singular in each case shall include the plural. 
"Residential use" means any use of land for solely residential purposes by one or more persons. 
"Sewage" means any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in suspension, including liquids containing chemicals in solution. 
"Sewage service" means the services and facilities for collection, treatment and disposal of sewage furnished or made available to premises by the sewer system. 
"Sewer system" means the municipal sanitary sewer system of the city. 
"Street" means any public highway, road, street, avenue, alley, way, easement or right-of-way. 
"Utility services" means all utility services that the city provides or otherwise makes available for use and/or bills for under the provisions of Title 13 of this code, including water and sewer service. 
"Water main" means any water pipeline constructed in any street to accommodate more than one water service line. 
"Water service" means the provision of potable water, under pressure, to premises by the water system. 
"Water service line" means that part of any water piping beginning at the junction thereof with a building plumbing system at not closer than two feet outside the foundation wall of the building serviced and terminating at any water main. 
"Water system" means the municipal water system of the city. 
(Prior code § 9101) 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 3)  
Article II. - Operating Regulations 
 
13.04.030 - Area to be served. 
The area served by the water and sewer systems shall be all territory within the boundaries of the city and such other premises as meet any of the following conditions: 
A.  The owners of the premises have signed agreements to annex to the city; or 
B.  The premises are commercial, industrial or institutional in nature and the council shall first have approved the application therefor. The approval of such application may be upon the condition that the owners of the commercial, industrial or institutional premises sign agreements to annex to the city, and on such other conditions as the council may determine; or 
C.  Premises located within territory which is of such an unusual nature that, in the determination of the council, the annexation thereof would create an undue burden upon the city and yet which is entitled to sewage service as being within the region to be served by the city's sewage system, acting as a regional sewage disposal facility. 
(Prior code § 9200)  
13.04.040 - No free service. 
No facilities or services of the water or sewer systems shall be furnished to any premises or to any owner or other person free of charge, except the city. Any owner, other person or entity taking water from the city's water service without prior city authorization approval shall be subject to a fine set forth in the city's water and sewer rate schedule. This fine shall be subject to all of the collection and lien procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 9201 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1)  
13.04.050 - Separate connections required. 
Separate premises under single control or management shall be furnished the facilities and services of the water system through separate individual connections. Separate connections shall be in accordance with the California Plumbing Code. 
(Prior code § 9201 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3(Exh. A), 3-15-2010)  
13.04.060 - Operating rules. 
A.  The city council shall adopt, by resolution, a set of operating rules and regulations for each of the water system and sewer system. Such rules and regulations shall be revised from time to time, as deemed necessary by the council, with all revisions adopted by resolution. 
B.  Violation of such operating rules and regulations shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 9202)  
13.04.070 - Service discontinuance for violation. 
In the event of violation, other than nonpayment of billed service charges, of any provision of this chapter, or of the operating rules and regulations, the director may shut off the water service and disconnect the sewer service to any premises, after first notifying in writing the person causing, allowing or committing such violation. Such notice shall specify the violation and, if applicable, the time after which (upon failure of such person to prevent or rectify the violation) the director will exercise his authority to disconnect the premises from the water and sewer systems; provided, however, that such time shall not be less than five days after the date of presentation of such notice; provided further, however, that in the event such violation results in a public hazard or menace, then the director may enter upon the premises without notice and do such things and expend such sums as may be necessary to abate such hazard, and the reasonable value of the things done and the amounts expended in so doing shall be a charge upon the person so in violation. 
(Prior code § 9203)  
13.04.080 - Service discontinuance for nonpayment. 
Upon failure of the owner of any premises to pay any billed water or sewer service charges prior to delinquency or if the owner or occupant of any premises shall violate any other provision of this chapter, any one or more of the following actions authorized by this section may be taken by the city to enforce such payment: 
A.  In each case where any bill for water or sewer service remains unpaid after such bill becomes delinquent, and such delinquency shall continue for a period of thirty (30) days, the city shall authorize disconnection of the premises from the water and sewer system, subject to the giving of five days' notice as provided in Section 13.04.070. Whenever premises have been disconnected from the sewer or water system for nonpayment of service charges, such premises shall not be reconnected to the systems until all delinquent and current charges have been paid and until a connection permit has been obtained and until such of the following charges as are applicable shall have been paid: a sewer disconnection fee equal to the actual cost to thecity of such disconnection, a water disconnection fee equal to the actual cost to the city of such disconnection, a sewer reconnection fee equal to the actual cost to the city of such reconnection, and a water reconnection fee equal to the actual cost to the city of such reconnection; and until the owner or occupant of such premises shall otherwise have complied with this chapter. 
B.  In each case where premises are disconnected from the water and/or sewer system, the council shall cause the city to take, or to request any authorized public officer to take, such steps as may be legally taken to prohibit occupancy of such premises until they shall be reconnected to the water and/or sewer systems. 
(Prior code § 9204)  
13.04.090 - Enforcement remedies cumulative. 
The city, the council and all proper city officers, agents or employees shall promptly, efficiently and economically take all steps, actions or remedies necessary for the collection of charges as provided in this chapter which are now or may hereafter be provided for in law. Such remedies for collecting and enforcing such charges are cumulative and may be pursued alternately, or any thereof may be used consecutively when the council so determines. 
(Prior code § 9204.1)  
13.04.100 - Refusal of service. 
The city may refuse to furnish water or sewer service, and may discontinue all services, to any premises where apparatus, appliances or equipment using water is found by the director to be dangerous or unsafe, or where the use of water on such premises is found by the director to be detrimental or injurious to the sewer or water service furnished by the city to other premises, or where the director finds that negligent or wasteful use of water exists on any premises which affect the city's services. The city shall have the right to refuse or discontinue service to any premises if necessary to protect itself against fraud or abuse. 
(Prior code § 9205)  
Article III. - Service Charges, Billing and Collection[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-01, §§ 1, 2, adopted Jan. 7, 2013, repealed the former art. III, §§ 13.04.110—13.04.130, and enacted a new art. III as set out herein. The former art. III pertained to service charges and derived from the prior code §§ 9300—9302. 
 
13.04.110 - Service rates. 
The city council shall adopt, by resolution, a schedule of service rates to be charged for water and sewer service by the city systems. Such schedule of rates shall be periodically reviewed by the council, and revised by resolution, as the council shall deem necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 2)  
13.04.112 - Manner of payment. 
All water and sewer rates and charges shall be due and payable monthly or bi-monthly or such other manner as the city council may from time to time prescribe. All rates and charges are payable to the city at the office of the city treasurer. All rates and charges are due within thirty (30) days of the billing date, and shall be delinquent if not paid within thirty (30) days of the billing date. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 2)  
13.04.114 - Billing start date for new development. 
Billing for utility services serving new development on any parcel of real property shall commence on the date that usage of utility services begins, the date the development is first occupied, or the date the development is given final approval by city officials in accordance with applicable provisions of this code, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 2)  
13.04.116 - Owner liability for payment. 
A.  Water and sewer services will be provided to any premises only upon application of the owner of such premises, who shall be responsible for payment of all rates and charges for such service. 
B.  The owner of any premises supplied with utility service shall be responsible for payment for such service from the time such service is commenced until the city is notified in writing by the premises owner to discontinue the service. 
C.  Nothing in this section is intended to prevent an arrangement, or the continuance of an existing arrangement, under which payments for utility service are made by a designated property manager or any agent on behalf of the premises owner. However any such arrangement will not affect the premises owner's obligation to the city for payment for such service. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 2; Ord. No. 2014-09, § 1) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2014-09, adopted Nov. 17, 2014, changed the title of § 13.04.116 from "Liability for payment" to read as herein set out.  
13.04.118 - Owner liable for charges. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this code to the contrary, the owner of a parcel to which one or more utility services are rendered shall be responsible and liable for the payment of all utility service charges for the utility services, and the city may utilize any and all procedures available under this code or state law to collect payment. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 2; Ord. No. 2014-09, § 2) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 2014-09, adopted Nov. 17, 2014, changed the title of § 13.04.118 from "Owner/applicant liable for charges" to read as herein set out.  
13.04.119 - Liability for tampering of water system metering. 
The owner of a parcel to which one or more utility services are rendered, or the applicant receiving service under this chapter, shall be responsible and liable for any tampering of the water system metering and subject to a fine therefore set forth in the city's water and sewer rate schedule. This fine shall be subject to all of the collection and lien procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 2)  
13.04.120 - Cumulative remedies. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this code to the contrary, the remedies specified in this article or elsewhere in this code for the delinquent payment or nonpayment of utility service charges, including but not limited to the lien provided for in Section 13.04.122 and the termination of service provided for in Section 13.04.080, are separate, distinct, and cumulative remedies that may be pursued separately or in combination. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 2)  
13.04.122 - Delinquent utility service charges constitute a lien. 
Utility service charges are due upon presentation of the bill for services. Rates and charges unpaid thirty (30) days after the billing date shall become past due (delinquent). Charges that remain unpaid five days following the past due date shall be assessed a basic penalty as set forth in the rate schedule as delinquent charges. A "final notice" will be issued by mail as part of the late charge notice, with shut-off of service scheduled for no earlier than noon of the day following the five-day delinquency period. No further notices need be provided. In the case of service provided to a premises not occupied by the premises' owner, the premises owner may request notice of delinquencies at additional expense charged to the premises owner. 
Beginning five days following the past due date, an additional penalty of one and one-half percent per month shall be added for any portion of the delinquent charges and basic penalty that remains unpaid. Any portion of the delinquent charges and penalties that remains unpaid sixty (60) days following the past due date shall become a lien on the parcel of real property to which the utility services were rendered, subject to the procedural requirements specified in Section 13.04.124. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 2; Ord. No. 2014-06, § 3)  
13.04.124 - Lien recorded; procedure. 
Any utility service charges that have been delinquent for sixty (60) days or more shall be subject to having the lien provided for in Section 13.04.122 recorded with the Glenn County Recorder pursuant to the procedures in this section. 
Thereafter, such lien shall not be released unless and until it is fully paid or rendered invalid by operation of law, provided that the city manager may release a lien if the city manager determines that the lien was recorded in error. The minimum amount of delinquency for recording a lien is sixty (60) days. City staff is authorized to write off as uncollectible accounts which are past sixty (60) days and less than fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 2)  
Article IV. - Connections 
 
13.04.140 - Installation. 
A.  No person shall make, or cause to be made, a connection to the water system or sewer system without first obtaining a written permit from the public works director. All materials and workmanship involved in making connections shall comply with the "Land Division Standards and Improvement Standards" adopted by the city council, and shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the public works director or his authorized representative. 
B.  The connection of the building sewer to the public sewer shall be made at the termination of the sewer lateral, if such lateral is available. If an existing sewer lateral is unavailable, and a public sewer main is available, a sewer lateral will be constructed by the city from the sewer main to the right-of-way line. The building sewer may then be connected to the sewer lateral providing that all fees and connection charges are paid as required by this chapter. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and shall be tested if required by the building official, for leakage. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the building official when the building sewer is ready for connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be done by the applicant and it shall be inspected and approved by the building official or his authorized representative. 
C.  The requirement to connect to the public sewer system shall be in accordance with the California Plumbing Code. 
(Ord. 2005-05 (part): prior code § 9400) 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3(Exh. A), 3-15-2010) 
Editor's note— Section 3(Exh. A) of Ord. No. 2010-01, adopted March 15, 2010, changed the title of § 13.04.140 from "Permit required" to "Installation."  
13.04.150 - Connection fees. 
The city council shall adopt, by resolution, a schedule of fees to be charged for all future connections to the city water and sewer systems. Such schedule of rates shall be periodically reviewed by the council, and revised by resolution, as the council shall deem necessary. No person shall make, or cause to be made, any connection to the water or sewer system until all applicable fees have been paid to the city treasurer. 
(Ord. 2005-05 (part): Ord. 94-01 § 1: prior code § 9401) 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1)  
13.04.160 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 2014-08, adopted Nov. 3, 2014, repealed former § 13.04.160 which pertained to water system connection fee schedule, and derived from prior code § 9401(A); Ord. 94-01, § 2; Ord. 2005-05; and Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3(Exh. A).  
13.04.170 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 2014-08, adopted Nov. 3, 2014, repealed former § 13.04.170 which pertained to sewer system connection fee schedule, and derived from prior code § 9401(B); Ord. 94-01, § 3; Ord. 2005-05.  
13.04.180 - Service to large tracts. 
A.  When application is made for service to a large, undeveloped tract of land, the owner shall be required to pay connection charges for only the developed portion of the property, provided that all of the following conditions prevail: 
1.  That the connected portion shall totally contain the structure or facility to be served, including setbacks required by applicable zoning law; 
2.  The connected portion shall be of the minimum size permitted for a parcel under the city land division standards; 
3.  The unconnected portion shall be of adequate size to create one or more parcels under the requirements of the land division standards. 
B.  Separate application and payment of applicable charges shall be required for connection of additional portions of such tracts. 
(Ord. 2005-05 (part): prior code § 9402)  
Article V. - Illicit Discharges[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 3(Exh. A) of Ord. No. 2010-01, adopted March 15, 2010, amended the code by adding a new art. V, § 13.04.190 and renumbering former arts. V—VII as arts. VI—VIII. 
 
13.04.190 - Illegal connections to the public sewer system. 
A.  No person shall discharge, cause to be discharged or connect any source of stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, swimming pool drainage or any wastes described in the California Plumbing Code to the public sewer system. 
B.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer system: 
1.  Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, to create a public nuisance, or to create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant; 
2.  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater works or wastes with a pH high enough to cause alkaline incrustations in sewers and appurtenances; 
3.  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders; 
4.  Any water added for the purpose of diluting wastes which would otherwise exceed applicable maximum concentration limitations; 
5.  Any waste with an excessively high concentration of cyanide; 
6.  Any unreasonably large amounts, in the opinion of the director, of undissolved or dissolved solids; 
7.  Any wastes containing over 0.1 milligram/liter of dissolved sulfides; 
8.  Any substance promoting or causing the promotion of toxic gases; 
9.  Any wastes requiring an excessive quantity of chlorine or other chemical compound used for disinfection purposes; 
10.  Any excessive amounts of chlorinated hydrocarbon or organic phosphorus type compounds; 
11.  Any excessive amounts of deionized water, steam condensate or distilled water; 
12.  Any waste containing substances that may precipitate, solidify or become viscous at temperatures between fifty (50) degrees Fahrenheit and one hundred (100) degrees Fahrenheit; 
13.  Any blow-down or bleed water from cooling towers or other evaporative coolers exceeding one-third of the makeup water; 
14.  Any single pass cooling water; 
15.  Any excessive quantities of radioactive material wastes; 
16.  Discharge from salt (sodium chloride) regenerated water softeners. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3(Exh. A), 3-15-2010) 
Editor's note— Section 3(Exh. A) of Ord. No. 2010-01, adopted March 15, 2010, repealed former § 13.04.190, which pertained to approval of plans and derived from Prior code § 9501 and Ord. No. 2005-05.  
Article VI. - Main Extensions[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Section 3(Exh. A) of Ord. No. 2010-01, adopted March 15, 2010, amended and renumbered former art. V, §§ 13.04.190—13.04.250 as art. VI, §§ 13.04.200—13.04.260. 
 
13.04.200 - Design, plan approval and construction. 
A.  The plans, profiles, specifications, and design calculations, when required, for the extension of water or sewer mains shall be examined by the city engineer, who shall approve them as filed or require them to be modified as deemed necessary for proper installation. Plans, profiles and specifications shall comply with all applicable ordinances, rules and regulations of the city; shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer; and shall show all details of the proposed work based on an accurate survey of the ground. Plans, profiles and specifications for minor construction such as sewer lateral connections, at the discretion of the public works director, may not be required. 
B.  Minimum standards for the design and construction of water and sewer mains within the city shall be in accordance with the applicable portions of the city's subdivision ordinance and the "land division standards and improvement standards" heretofore or hereafter adopted by the city. The city may permit modification or may require higher standards where unusual conditions are encountered. 
C.  Design calculations submitted for city review shall be in a neat, acceptable form and shall indicate the date and the signature of the supervising engineer and his state registration number. Design calculations will be required for all subdivision sewers with a total ultimate tributary area of fifty (50) acres or more or where, in the judgment of the director, they are necessary. 
D.  Only properly licensed contractors shall be authorized to perform the work of public sewer construction under contract within the city. All terms and conditions of the permit issued by the city to the applicant shall be binding on the contractor. The requirements of this section shall apply to side sewers installed concurrently with public sewer construction. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3(Exh. A), 3-15-2010)  
13.04.210 - Cost of extensions. 
The cost of extending water or sewer mains shall be paid by the applicant to be served by the extension, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2005-05 (part): prior code § 9502) 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3(Exh. A), 3-15-2010) 
Editor's note— Former art. V, § 13.04.200.  
13.04.220 - Reimbursement. 
An applicant who has paid for a water or sewer main extension may be reimbursed by the city for subsequent connections to the extension at the discretion of the city council. Reimbursement, if made, shall be made in accordance with the terms of an agreement which shall be entered into between the city and the applicant. Reimbursement shall be made at the rate of ninety (90) percent of the main connection charge for subsequent connections, based upon the connection charge schedule in effect on the date of the agreement; shall be limited to the cost of the extension, less the main connection charge for the applicant's premises; and shall be limited to a period of ten (10) years from the date of completion of the extension. In order to receive reimbursement, the applicant shall keep the treasurer advised of his current mailing address. 
(Ord. 2005-05 (part): prior code § 9502.1) 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3(Exh. A), 3-15-2010) 
Editor's note— Former art. V, § 13.04.210.  
13.04.230 - Subdivisions—Installment of extensions required. 
A.  Subdividers shall install water and sewer line extensions to all property within the subdivision. No reimbursement shall be made for connections to lots within the subdivision. 
B.  A subdivider shall extend water and sewer lines to the external limits of the subdivision along all streets within or adjoining the subdivision. Adjoining streets shall be those having subdivision lots fronting on one side of the street. 
C.  A subdivider may enter into a reimbursement contract with the city, which shall be applicable to connections, from land outside the subdivision, to line extensions installed by the subdivider. 
(Ord. 2005-05 (part): prior code § 9502.2) 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3(Exh. A), 3-15-2010) 
Editor's note— Former art. V, § 13.04.220.  
13.04.240 - City may require larger size mains. 
The city reserves the right to require a larger size main for any extension than that required to serve the premises of the applicant, or the minimum size permitted by city standards. When such oversizing is required, the city shall pay the additional cost required for the larger size main. 
(Ord. 2005-05 (part): prior code § 9502.3) 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3(Exh. A), 3-15-2010) 
Editor's note— Former art. V, § 13.04.230.  
13.04.250 - Extensions by the city. 
The city reserves the right to extend water and sewer mains at city expense when, in the judgment of the city council, it is in the public interest to do so. Connection fees as specified in Article IV of this chapter shall be charged for all connections to extensions by the city. 
(Ord. 2005-05 (part): prior code § 9502.4) 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3(Exh. A), 3-15-2010) 
Editor's note— Former art. V, § 13.04.240.  
13.04.260 - Main extensions property of city—Right of entry. 
A.  All main extensions paid for by applicants and all facilities furnished by the city, whether located wholly or partially on public or private property shall upon acceptance by the city be and remain the property of the city, which shall have the right to repair, maintain and replace the same and the right to remove the same upon discontinuance of service. The public works director or other duly authorized agent of the city shall have at all reasonable times the right of ingress to and egress from any premises for any purpose relating to the furnishing of water or sewer service to such premises or for the purpose of determining if any violation of this chapter is occurring on such premises. The city engineer may request an easement or right-of-way dedication for the inspection, maintenance or repair of city-owned facilities. 
B.  The officers, inspectors, and any duly authorized employees of the city shall, upon exhibiting the proper credentials and identification, be permitted to enter in and upon any and all buildings, industrial facilities and properties for the purposes of inspection, reinspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing or otherwise performing such duties as may be necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance rules and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. 2005-05 (part): prior code § 9503) 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3(Exh. A), 3-15-2010) 
Editor's note— Former art. V, § 13.04.250.  
Article VII. - Individual Sewage Disposal Systems[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— See editor's note to art. VI. 
 
13.04.270 - Terms and conditions. 
Individual sewage disposal systems shall not be allowed except under the following terms and conditions: 
A.  Ground and geographic strata will permit the easy dissemination of septic fluids. 
B.  The topography will allow for ultimate hookup of such systems to the city sewer system, as hereinafter provided. 
C.  Residential uses will require parcels having a minimum size of five acres. 
D.  Commercial or industrial uses will require parcels having a minimum size of forty thousand (40,000) square feet if neither water or sewer is available and a minimum lot size of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet if either city water or sewer is available; frontage must be at least one hundred twenty (120) feet. 
E.  Individual sewage disposal system's capacity shall not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons. 
F.  Requests for septic tanks shall be acted on by case by case review of a sewage disposal plan containing all of the above items. Such review shall be conducted by the public works commission with the stated goal that future sewer connections will be made available upon availability of a sewer line. Public works commission shall make recommendations to the city council. 
G.  Each applicant shall enter into an agreement with the city providing for subsequent connection to the city's system when any sewer line comes within two hundred (200) feet of any property line of applicant, such hookups will be at the then prevailing city connection fee and rates. 
(Ord. 2005-05 (part): Ord. 96-01 § 15; prior code § 10401) 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3(Exh. A), 3-15-2010) 
Editor's note— Former art. VI, § 13.04.260.  
Article VIII. - Administration and Enforcement[5] 
*Prior history: Prior code §§ 9600—9605 as amended by Ord. 96-11. 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— See editor's note to art. VI. 
 
13.04.280 - Notices. 
A.  Notices from the city to any person will be given in writing, either delivered to the person or mailed to his last known address, except that, in an emergency, the city may give verbal notice by telephone or in person. 
B.  Notices from any person to the city may be given by such person, or his authorized representative, verbally or in writing at city hall, or may be sent by mail to city hall. 
(Ord. 2005-05 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3(Exh. A), 3-15-2010) 
Editor's note— Former art. VII, § 13.04.270.  
13.04.290 - Applications. 
Failure by any person to file his application containing the information required by this chapter shall constitute a violation of this chapter. No application shall be conclusive as to matters therein set forth nor shall the filing of an application preclude the city from collecting from the owner responsible for payment, by appropriate action, such sum as is actually due and payable for services under the provision of this chapter. Each application shall be subject to verification by the public works director. 
(Ord. 2005-05 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3(Exh. A), 3-15-2010) 
Editor's note— Former art. VII, § 13.04.280.  
13.04.300 - Duties of public works director, treasurer and city manager. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the public works director or his authorized representative to supervise all connections to the water and sewer system and to enforce all provisions of this chapter, excepting those relating to the billing and collection of charges and fees and the disposition of revenue hereunder. 
B.  It shall be the duty of the city manager or his designee to prepare and send out bills for all fees and charges hereunder, and to collect all connection and other charges provided for in this chapter, all which shall be payable to the office of the treasurer. The city manager shall keep an accurate accounting and records showing the source, amount and disposition of all funds received hereunder and submit this accounting to the treasurer. 
(Ord. 2005-05 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3(Exh. A), 3-15-2010) 
Editor's note— Former art. VII, § 13.04.290. Section 3(Exh. A) of Ord. No. 2010-01, adopted March 15, 2010, changed the title of former § 13.04.290 from "Duties of public works supervisor, treasurer and city manager" to § 13.04.300 "Duties of public works director, treasurer and city manager."  
13.04.310 - Revenue disposition. 
A.  All revenues received by the treasurer pursuant to this chapter shall, when collected, be disposed of as follows: 
1.  All water main replacement charges, capacity charges, meter installation charges shall be deposited in an account designated the water line revolving account, which account is created in the existing water utility fund of the city. 
2.  All water service charges shall be deposited in the existing water utility fund of the city. 
3.  All sewer main replacement charges, capacity charges and lateral installation charges shall be deposited in an account designated the sewer line revolving account, which account is created in the existing public works fund of the city. 
4.  All sewer service charges shall be deposited in the existing public works fund of the city. 
B.  All moneys in the water utility fund and the public works fund shall be used and withdrawn therefrom for any lawful purpose, as may be determined by the city council. 
(Ord. 2005-05 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3(Exh. A), 3-15-2010) 
Editor's note— Former art. VII, § 13.04.300.  
13.04.320 - Appeals. 
A.  Any person aggrieved by any determination of the public works director, the treasurer or the city manager pursuant to this chapter shall be entitled to appeal such determination to the city council. 
B.  Pending decision upon any appeal relative to the amount of any charge hereunder, the person making such appeal shall pay such charge. After the appeal is heard, the city council shall order refunded to the person making such appeal that amount, if any, which the council determines should be refunded. 
(Ord. 2005-05 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3(Exh. A), 3-15-2010) 
Editor's note— Former art. VII, § 13.04.310.  
13.04.330 - Enforcement. 
All departments, officials and employees of the city vested with the duty or authority to issue permits shall conform to the provisions of this chapter and shall not wilfully issue any permit for use, construction or purpose in conflict with the provisions of this chapter; and any such permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void. 
(Ord. 2005-05 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3(Exh. A), 3-15-2010) 
Editor's note— Former art. VII, § 13.04.320.  
13.04.340 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as set forth in Section 1.12.010 of this code by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.  Every day a violation of this section occurs shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. 2005-05 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3(Exh. A), 3-15-2010) 
Editor's note— Former art. VII, § 13.04.330.  
13.04.350 - Annual report and adjustment of fees. 
A.  Within ninety (90) days after the end of each fiscal year, the city shall prepare a report, pursuant to Government Code Section 66006, which identifies the use of the fees in each account during the prior fiscal year, deposits to the account during the prior year, the fund balance in each account as of the end of the prior year and planned projects during the next five years. 
B.  Fees shall be established by resolution each fiscal year and take effect no sooner than sixty (60) days after adoption. Fees may be reviewed annually to determine correlation with current construction and land costs. The Engineering News Record or other generally accepted publication which provides an annual construction cost index, shall be used to determine necessary increases or decreases in fee assessments. 
(Ord. 2005-05 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3(Exh. A), 3-15-2010) 
Editor's note— Former art. VII, § 13.04.340.  
Chapter 13.06 - WATER CONSERVATION PROGRAM 
 
13.06.010 - Citation of chapter. 
This Chapter 13.06 shall be known as the City of Orland Water Conservation Program. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1)  
13.06.020 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to establish a water conservation program that will reduce water consumption within the city through conservation, enable effective water supply planning, assure reasonable and beneficial use of water, prevent waste of water, and maximize the efficient use of water within the city to avoid and minimize the effect and hardship of water shortage to the greatest extent possible. 
B.  This chapter establishes permanent water conservation standards related to water use efficiency for non-shortage/non-drought conditions and further establishes conservation measures to be implemented during times of declared state-wide water shortage/drought conditions, with increasing restrictions on water use in response to worsening drought or emergency conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1)  
13.06.030 - Findings. 
A.  A reliable minimum and sustainable supply of potable water is essential to the public health, safety and welfare of the people and economy of the city of Orland. 
B.  Careful water management that includes active water conservation measures not only in times of drought, but at all times, is essential to ensure a reliable minimum supply of water to meet current and future water supply needs. 
C.  Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution declares that a city or county may make and enforce within its limits all local, police, sanitary and other ordinances and regulations not in conflict with general laws. 
D.  Article X, Section 2 of the California Constitution declares that the general welfare requires that water resources be put to beneficial use, waste or unreasonable use or unreasonable method of use of water be prevented, and conservation of water be fully exercised with a view to the reasonable and beneficial use thereof. 
E.  California Water Code section 375 authorizes water suppliers to adopt and enforce a comprehensive water conservation program to reduce water consumption and conserve supplies. 
F.  The adoption and enforcement of a water conservation program is necessary to manage the city's potable water supply in the short and long-term and to avoid or minimize the effects of drought and shortage within the city. Such program is essential to ensure a reliable and sustainable minimum supply of water for the public health, safety and welfare for current and future generations. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1)  
13.06.040 - Definitions. 
The following terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the following respective meanings: 
"City" means the city of Orland. 
"Conservation" means the practice of protecting against the loss or waste of natural resources. 
"Customer" or "water user" means a person that uses potable water through a metered service connection. 
"Person" means any natural person or persons, corporation, public or private entity, governmental agency or institution, or any other user of water within the city. 
"Potable water" and "water" means water which is suitable for drinking. 
"Recycled water" means the reclamation and reuse of non-potable water for beneficial use. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1)  
13.06.050 - Application. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter apply to any person using and/or controlling the use of any potable water provided by the city or obtained from or through potable water wells located within the city. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter do not apply to uses of water necessary to protect public health and safety or for essential government services, such as police, fire and other similar emergency services. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the use of recycled water. 
D.  This chapter is intended solely to further the conservation of water. It is not intended to implement any provision of federal, state, or local statutes, ordinances, or regulations relating to protection of water quality. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1)  
13.06.060 - Permanent water conservation requirements: Prohibition against waste. 
The following water conservation requirements are effective at all times and are permanent, unless rescinded by action of the city council. Violations of this section will be considered waste and an unreasonable use of water. 
A.  No Excessive Water Flow or Runoff. Watering or irrigating of any lawn, landscape or other vegetated area in a manner that causes or allows excessive water flow or runoff onto an adjoining sidewalk, driveway, street, alley, gutter or ditch is prohibited. 
B.  No Excessive Potable Water Flow or Runoff. Excessive potable water flow or runoff onto an adjoining sidewalk, driveway, street, alley, gutter or ditch is prohibited. 
C.  No Washing Down Hard or Paved Surfaces. Washing down hard or paved surfaces, including, but not limited to sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios or alleys, is prohibited except when necessary to alleviate safety or sanitary hazards. 
D.  Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks or Malfunctions. Excessive use, loss or escape of water through breaks, leaks or other malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or distribution system for any period of time after such escape of water should have reasonably been discovered and corrected and in no event more than fifteen (15) days of receiving notice from the city, is prohibited. 
E.  Recirculating Water Required for Water Fountains and Decorative Water Features. Operating a water fountain or other decorative water feature that does not use recirculated water is prohibited. 
F.  Limits on Washing Vehicles. Using water to wash or clean a vehicle, including but not limited to any automobile, truck, van, bus, motorcycle, boat or trailer, whether motorized or not is prohibited, except by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device. This subsection does not apply to any commercial car washing facility. 
G.  Drinking Water Served Upon Request Only. Eating or drinking establishments, including but not limited to, a restaurant, hotel, cafe, cafeteria, bar, club or other public place where food or drinks are sold, served, or offered for sale, are prohibited from providing drinking water to any person unless expressly requested. 
H.  Commercial Lodging Establishments Must Provide Option to Not Launder Linen Daily. Hotels, motels and other commercial lodging establishments must provide customers the option of not having towels and linen laundered daily. Commercial lodging establishments must prominently display notice of this option in each bathroom using clear and easily understood language. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1)  
13.06.070 - Conservation measures to be implemented during times of declared state-wide water shortage and/or drought conditions. 
When the city determines, in its sole discretion, that due to drought or other water supply reductions, and/or due to mandatory reduction in water use, the city shall implement the mandatory conservation measures identified in this section of the chapter. 
A.  Limits on Watering Hours. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is prohibited between the hours of eight a.m. and eight p.m. on any day. 
B.  Limits on Watering Days. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to three days per week as follows: 
All properties north of SR32: Sundays, Wednesday and Fridays. 
All properties south of SR32: Saturdays, Tuesdays and Thursdays. 
Exceptions may be considered by the city manager on a case-by-case basis upon presentation of a written plan describing the proposed custom schedule, justifying the requirement for it, and documenting how the required reduction in usage will be achieved. 
C.  Limits on Watering after Rain. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is prohibited during and forty-eight (48) hours after measurable rainfall. 
D.  Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks or Malfunctions. All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or distribution system must be repaired within four days of notification by the city unless other arrangements are made with the city. 
E.  Prohibitions of Water Well Drilling. No new water wells shall be drilled within the city. 
F.  Other Prohibited Uses. The city may implement other prohibited water uses as determined by the city, after notice to customers. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1)  
13.06.080 - Violation and enforcement. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any customer or person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter or to waste any water obtained from or through the distribution facilities of the city or obtained from or through water wells located within the city, or for any customer or person to engage in wasting water as defined herein. The violation of each specific provision of this chapter, and each separate violation thereof, shall be deemed a separate offense, and shall be enforced accordingly. 
A.  Violations. 
1.  For the first violation within the preceding twelve (12) calendar months, the city manager or designee shall issue a written notice of the fact of such violation. No penalty will be imposed for first violations. The city recognizes there is a certain amount of public education necessary so first violations are warnings accompanied by city water conservation information. 
2.  For the second violation within the preceding twelve (12) calendar months, the city manager or designee shall impose a penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) against the customer for the property where the violation occurred. 
3.  For the third violation within the preceding twelve (12) calendar months, the city manager or designee shall impose a penalty of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) against the customer for the property where the violation occurred. 
4.  For a fourth and any subsequent violation within the preceding twelve (12) calendar months, the city manager or designee shall impose a penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) against the customer for the property where the violation occurred. Further, the city manager may disconnect service on the property where the violation occurred or is occurring, for a length of time not to exceed sixty (60) days in length if the outstanding account balance with fines is paid in full. 
5.  In the case of a water well drilled in violation of [Section] 13.06.070(E), the city manager or designee shall impose a penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) against the owner of the property on which the drilling occurred. The property owner shall also be required to safely and hygienically cap that well. If injunctive relief is necessary to enforce this subsection, the owner of the property on which the drilling occurred shall reimburse the city for all costs incurred, including attorney's fees. 
B.  Time Period for Accounting Violations. Accrued violations will be based on acts of noncompliance occurring within the preceding twelve (12) month period. Each successive twenty-four (24) hour period of any violation or failure to comply shall be a separate and distinct violation. 
C.  Notice of Violation. For each violation, city staff designated by the city manager shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall give notice as follows: 
1.  Written notice of violation may be in the form of a door hanger that is personally attached to the front door or a letter sent through the U.S. mail, first-class prepaid, to the address of the account holder as shown on current water billing records or personally served on the water customer. The notice will be considered to have been served upon the water customer either upon depositing the notice in the U.S. mail or when personally served, whichever methodology is utilized. 
2.  Written notice of violation shall include the date, time, and location of the violation; a description of the violation; provisions of the ordinance violated; a statement of the assessed penalty or other enforcement action; and the appeal procedures. 
D.  Right of Appeal. Any customer provided a notice of violation in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall have the right of appeal. A request for hearing must be made in writing, mailed or hand-delivered to the city of Orland, 815 Fourth Street, Orland, CA 95963, Attn: City Manager, and must be received by the city manager within ten (10) calendar days from the date of personal or mailed service of the notice of violation. An appeal processing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be charged for city staff's time. Failure to submit the processing fee at the time of submitting the appeal shall result in the denial of the appeal, unless good cause is shown to the satisfaction of the city manager. 
E.  Determination of Appeal. The appeal will be heard and determined by the city manager or designee within ten (10) calendar days of service of the appeal. The determination of the city manager or designee will be final and conclusive. 
F.  Payment of Penalties and Charges. Any penalty imposed pursuant to this section, and/or reimbursement of city expenses, shall be added to the account of the customer for the property where the violation occurred and shall be due and payable on the same terms and subject to the same conditions as any other charge for regular water service. 
G.  Reimbursement from Tenants. Nothing in this chapter shall limit or be construed to limit the right of a water customer to seek reimbursement of a penalty or other costs from a tenant or other consumer. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1)  
Chapter 13.08 - INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER SYSTEM 
 
13.08.010 - Established. 
This chapter establishes an industrial waste-water system (IWWS) for the city. It shall be operated and maintained by the city. Operating rules and regulations and user fees and charges shall be adopted by resolution. 
(Prior code § 9700)  
13.08.020 - Director defined. 
"Director" means the director of public works for the city, or his designee. 
(Prior code § 9703 (part))  
13.08.030 - Permit required for industrial users and waste haulers—Application. 
Before an industrial waste connection is made to the sewage systems, a permit must first be obtained from the director. Application for a permit to discharge such wastes shall be in writing and shall contain the following information: 
A.  Name and address of applicant; 
B.  Proposed location of connection; 
C.  Estimated gallonage of wastes proposed to be discharged, estimated time of discharge, time or peak load, and other similar data; 
D.  Character of waste proposed to be discharged; 
E.  Other information as may be deemed to be necessary by the director. 
(Prior code § 9703(a) (part))  
13.08.040 - Investigation. 
Upon receipt of an application as provided, the director shall promptly make such investigation as he shall deem necessary. 
(Prior code § 9703(a) (part))  
13.08.050 - Permit issuance. 
In the event that the director finds and determines: 
A.  That the trunk sewer in which the connection is to discharge has sufficient unused carrying capacity for the disposition of these wastes; 
B.  That the character of the wastes proposed to be discharged by the applicant is such that they can successfully be treated or if untreatable, there is sufficient capacity in the industrial wastewater facility; 
C.  That such wastes will not result in damage to the sewage system or can be pretreated to avoid damage; 
then he shall issue a permit to the applicant as requested. 
(Prior code § 9703(a) (part))  
13.08.060 - Conditional grant of permit. 
The director, at his discretion, and toward the end of fulfilling the intent and purposes of this chapter, may grant a permit in part only and may thereupon prescribe conditions with respect to discharge of such waste into such system including pretreatment and installation and maintenance of pretreatment facilities, and/or maintenance of individual screens to collect waste products and/or may require the construction and use of tanks designed to equalize flow and reduce peak load. 
(Prior code § 9703(a) (part))  
13.08.070 - Change in conditions. 
In the event that after the granting of a permit, there shall develop a change of conditions, such as an increased flow or change or character of discharge or operations or for any cause whatsoever, the permittee must immediately report such change to the director. If, in the opinion of the director, it becomes necessary or desirable to change the conditions prescribed at the time of issuing said permit, then the director may revoke such permit or may impose further conditions with respect thereto, toward the end of remedying such conditions. 
(Prior code § 9703(a) (part))  
13.08.080 - Capacity allocation. 
Each industrial user, at the time a permit is issued in accordance with Section 13.06.050, shall be assigned a capacity allocation for peak rate of discharge; daily discharge, monthly discharge and annual discharge measured in million gallons (MG). 
(Prior code § 9703(b))  
13.08.090 - Pretreatment facilities. 
Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the director shall be provided, operated and maintained at the industrial user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the director for all existing industrial user's facilities as well as before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or operating procedures shall be reported to and be acceptable to the director prior to the industrial user's initiation of the changes. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to the director upon request. 
(Prior code § 9703(c))  
13.08.100 - Sewer connection permits for all other users. 
Permits for all sewer connections, except industrial users and liquid waste haulers, shall be obtained in accordance with the provisions of the plumbing code of the city. 
(Prior code § 9703(d))  
13.08.110 - Accidental discharge procedures. 
A.  Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this chapter. Such facilities shall be provided and maintained at the industrial user's expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the director for review and shall be acceptable to the director before construction of such facility. All existing industrial users shall complete such a plan as required by the director. No industrial user shall be permitted to introduce any substance into the system until accidental discharge procedureshave been approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating proce-dures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to provide the protection necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the industrial user to immediately telephone and notify the director of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste concentration and volume and corrective actions. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the industrial user shall submit to the director, a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the wastewater treatment facility, or any other damage to person or property, nor shall such notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed. 
B.  A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of an accidental discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Prior code § 9704)  
13.08.120 - Remedies for noncompliance. 
A.  Revocation of Permit. Any industrial user who performs the following actions, or who violates any condition of its permit, or of applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having its permit revoked: 
1.  Failure of an industrial user to factually report the sewage constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
2.  Failure of an industrial user to report significant changes in operations, site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans or sewage constituents and characteristics; or 
3.  Refusal of reasonable access to an industrial user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring. 
B.  Fine. Any industrial user who intentionally or negligently violates any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who intentionally or negligently discharges waste or wastewater which causes pollution or who violates any cease and desist order, established effluent limitations, national standard of performance or national pretreatment or toxicity standard, shall be fined not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for each offense. The director may determine the existence of a violation and may levy a fine which shall be in accordance with a schedule approved by the council from time to time by resolution. Each day on which a violation may occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In case of a determination of violation the violator shall have fourteen (14) days to request a hearing. The director shall provide a hearing within ten (10) days after receipt of request for hearing. At the hearing the violator may present written or oral evidence that a violation does not exist or why the fine should be reduced or eliminated. The director shallgive written notice of his decision not more than ten (10) days after the hearing. In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this chapter or the orders, rules, regulations and permits hereunder. 
C.  Liability. In the event that a permittee does not comply with the conditions of a permit and wastes are discharged to the sewage system that cause, or threaten to cause, the water quality control plant's waste treatment facilities to malfunction or otherwise result in a violation of waste discharge requirements or limitations imposed by state or federal regulatory agencies, the permittee shall be liable for any or all of the following: 
1.  Any and all monetary penalties, charges, fees and other costs that may be imposedon the city by state or federal regulatory agencies as a result of threatened or actual violation(s) or malfunction(s), including administrative and legal fees; 
2.  Any and all judgments and associatedcosts that may be awarded to individuals or entities as a result of threatened or actual violation(s) or malfunction(s); 
3.  The total cost of any interim waste treatment measures that the director may deem necessary to abate threatened or actual violation(s) or malfunction(s) including consulting and administrative fees; 
4.  The total cost of providing waste treat-ment facilities needed to remedy threatened or actual violation(s) or malfunction(s). 
D.  List of Violators. The director shall annually publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the Orland area, a list of the industrial users which significantly violated applicable pretreatment requirements or standards at least once during the twelve (12) previous months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the industrial user(s) during the same twelve (12) months. A significant violation is one which remains uncorrected forty-five (45) days after notification by the director of noncompliance. 
(Prior code § 9705)  
13.08.130 - Cease and desist orders. 
A.  In addition to any other remedy provided for by law, ordinance or resolution, the director of public works is authorized to issue, upon knowledge of violation of any operating rule, regulation, ordinance or resolution pertaining to the domestic or industrial wastewater system or violation of the then current regional water quality control board or any similar boards' discharge requirements, cease and desist orders to any such violators. 
B.  The director of public works shall also have the authority upon knowledge of violation of any such order or regulation as herein referred to, or cease and desist order, to take all necessary and appropriate action to enforce such rules and order including, but not limited to disconnecting or plugging any discharge lines. 
(Prior code § 9701B)  
13.08.140 - Reconnection. 
A.  Should the director of public works take any action, shut off any discharger as herein provided, such discharger shall not be allowed to reconnect without making adequate assurances to the city administrator that further violations will not occur and paying for all actual costs incurred by reason of the director's action and the further posting, should such be deemed necessary by the city administrator of adequate security for future performance. 
B.  The city shall enact by resolution, rules and regulations for the reconnection of discharger to any system. 
(Prior code § 9702)  
13.08.150 - Violation of operating rules—Penalty. 
Any violation of the operating rules for the IWWS including failure to pay fees, charges etc. imposed, is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable as set forth in Section 1.12.010 of this code by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day during which a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense punishable as provided in this section. 
(Ord. 96-11 § 33; prior code § 9701)  
Chapter 13.12 - STORM DRAIN SYSTEM 
 
13.12.010 - Discharge of harmful materials prohibited. 
No person shall discharge into any storm drain, any material or substance deemed by the director of public works, to be harmful or injurious to the storm drain system. 
(Prior code § 9800)  
13.12.020 - Rules and regulations. 
The city may adopt by resolution, rules and regulations pertaining to the operation, maintenance and repair of its storm drain system. 
(Prior code § 9801 (part))  
13.12.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any violation of any such rule, resolution or ordinance, shall be a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable as set forth in Section 1.12.010 of this code by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 96-11 § 34: prior code § 9801 (part))  
Chapter 13.16 - IMPROVEMENTS IN ANNEXED TERRITORY 
 
13.16.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the development of the economic, industrial, commercial and residential growth of the city by encouraging outlying areas adjacent to the corporate limits of the city to become annexed to the city and to provide for the extension of storm drains, sewer and water mains, lines and facilities to such territories and the construction and improvement of streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters within such territories, upon annexation at a fair and reasonable cost and expense to property owners within such territories, but without casting an unfair burden of cost and expense upon the general fund of the city. 
(Prior code § 12300)  
13.16.020 - Extension and construction. 
At any time after the annexation of territory to the city, the city may construct, extend and maintain storm drains, sewer and water mains, lines and facilities to and within such annexed territory, and may extend, construct, improve and maintain streets. 
(Prior code § 12301)  
13.16.030 - Charges and fees for construction. 
Upon construction of any of the facilities or improvements referred to in this chapter, the treasurer of the city shall charge and collect a fee from any property owner within the annexed territory who desires such facilities or improvements, and who has not theretofore contributed fair and reasonable pro rata share of the construction and extension costs thereof. The amount of such charge and fee shall be fixed by the city council but shall not exceed such property owner's fair and reasonable pro rata share of the construction and extension costs of such facilities or improvements as the same is determined by the city council. The charges and fees to be fixed by the city council and collected by the treasurer shall be in addition to any other storm drain, water, or sewer connection or service charges fixed in accordance with other rules, ordinances or regulations of the city. 
(Prior code § 12302)  
13.16.040 - Collection of fees. 
Any or all of the charges and fees fixed in accordance with provisions of this chapter shall be collected by the treasurer, as directed by the city council, in a lump sum; or, in monthly or other periodic installments in connection with, and upon the same billings for, the collection of water rates and tolls of the city water department; or, on the tax roll in the same manner as general taxes; or, in the manner prescribed by Article 4, Chapter 6, Part 3, Division 5 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California, or as the same may be amended; or, in such other manner as the city council shall determine and prescribe. 
(Prior code § 12303)  
Chapter 13.20 - ENFORCEMENT 
 
13.20.010 - Violation of industrial wastewater system, sanitary sewer system or storm drain system operating rules— Penalty. 
Any violation of the city industrial waste-water system operating rules; the sanitary sewer system operating rules; the storm drain system operating rules or any discharge requirement thereto, is guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day a violation occurs shall be deemed to be a separate offense. Each violation shall be punishable by a one-thousand-dollar ($1,000.00) fine and/or six months in jail. 
(Prior code § 9900)  
13.20.020 - Violation of discharge requirements. 
A.  No person shall discharge in violation of any rule, regulation, statute or ordinance of the city council of the city, or state regulatory authority. 
B.  Any violation shall be considered as grounds for disconnection. 
C.  Any discharge in excess of ten thousand (10,000) EC count, shall be deemed and considered as a separate violation of this chapter and this code, and punished as such. 
(Prior code § 9900a (part))  
13.20.030 - Immediate disconnection when. 
The city council finds that public safety, health and welfare, requires that immediate action be taken, should discharges of TDS have an electroconductivity equal to, or in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) micromhos centimeter; propose a significant danger to the residents of the city and put the city in violation of current regional water quality control board rules; and because, volumetrically, it is impractical to calculate and regulate discharges; therefore, any discharge having an EC count of twenty thousand (20,000) micromhos centimeter or greater, shall be cause for immediate disconnection and the city administrator is authorized to determine in his sole discretion any such violations and take such action as he deems appropriate. 
(Prior code § 9900a (part))  
13.20.040 - Reconnection of discontinued service. 
Any reconnections of discontinued service by reason of a violation of this chapter or any other provision of this code, shall be allowed only upon providing of adequate assurances to the city administrator. 
(Prior code § 9900a (part))  
Title 14 - ENFORCEMENT/NUISANCE ABATEMENT 
Chapters:  
Chapter 14.01 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
14.01.010 - Cumulative remedies. 
Unless otherwise expressly provided, the remedies, procedures and penalties and other provisions of this title are cumulative to each other and to any others available under other city ordinances, state law, common law or equity, and nothing in this title shall be read, interpreted or construed in any manner so as to limit any existing right or power of the city to abate any and all nuisances and dangerous conditions including, without limitation, substandard buildings and dangerous buildings. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.01.020 - Inspections; right of entry. 
A.  The health officer, the fire chief, the building official, and their respective designees are authorized to make such inspections and to take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this title. 
B.  Those persons entitled to make inspections may enter on premises to make inspections to the extent authorized by law. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.01.030 - Code requirements. 
A.  All buildings, structures, property or premises which are required to be repaired, demolished, secured or otherwise abated under the provisions of this title shall be subject to the requirements and standards set forth in the Orland Municipal Code or any other code adopted by the city. 
B.  All buildings, structures, property or premises within the scope of this title and all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection in accordance with and in the manner provided by applicable provisions of the Orland Municipal Code or any other code adopted by the city. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.01.040 - Responsibility for proper property maintenance. 
Every owner of real property within the city is required to maintain such property in a manner so as not to violate the provisions of the Orland Municipal Code or any other code adopted by the city and such owner remains liable for violations thereof regardless of any contract or agreement with any third party regarding such property. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.01.050 - Civil actions—Private parties. 
Any property owner or tenant of property within five hundred (500) feet of an immediately dangerous building, an immediately dangerous condition, a dangerous building or a substandard building or a public nuisance is declared to be damaged thereby. 
A.  Any such party may institute a civil action against the property owner or lessee, sublessee or occupant who creates or maintains an immediately dangerous building, an immediately dangerous condition, a dangerous building, a substandard building or a public nuisance to obtain damages and/or require compliance with the requirements of the Orland Municipal Code or any other code adopted by the city. Damages shall include actual damages, costs, attorney's fees and a civil penalty of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) in addition thereto. 
B.  Nothing in this provision shall be construed to limit any other right or remedy otherwise available in law or equity to any party, nor shall this provision in any way limit the city's right to enforcement under any other provision of this code nor shall it create a duty or obligation on the part of the city. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.01.060 - Abatement, repair and demolition fund. 
A.  General. The city council shall establish a special revolving fund to be designated as the abatement, repair and demolition fund. Payments shall be made out of the fund upon the demand of the building official or responsible official to defray the costs and expenses which may be incurred by the city in doing or causing to be done the necessary work of abatement, repair, demolition or securement pursuant to this title. 
B.  Maintenance of Fund. The city council may at any time transfer to the abatement, repair and demolition fund, out of any money in the general fund or applicable enterprise fund of the city, such sums as it may deem necessary in order to expedite the performance of the work of abatement, repair, demolition or securement, and any sum so transferred shall be deemed a loan to the abatement, repair and demolition fund and shall be repaid out of the proceeds of the collections provided for in this title. All funds collected under the proceedings in this title shall be paid to the city treasurer who shall credit the same to the abatement, repair and demolition fund. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.01.070 - Recovery of attorneys' fees in nuisance abatement actions. 
In any action, administrative proceeding or special proceeding to abate a nuisance in which the city elects, at the initiation of the action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its attorneys' fees, the prevailing party in the action or proceeding shall recover its attorneys' fees incurred in the action or proceeding. In no action, administrative proceeding or special proceeding shall an award of attorneys' fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. "Prevailing party" shall not include a party who complies with a notice of violation issued by the city or an order in any action, administrative proceeding or special proceeding. Attorney fees shall include fees for the services of the city attorney or his or her assistant and deputies, calculated based on the effective hourly rate of such attorney. (Ref. Government Code Section 38773.5.) 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
Chapter 14.02 - SUMMARY ABATEMENT— IMMEDIATELY DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 
Sections: 
 
14.02.010 - Applicable procedures. 
Notwithstanding any provisions of this title to the contrary, the procedures for the abatement of an immediately dangerous building or structure shall be regulated by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.02.020 - Authority and administration. 
The building official and fire chief are each authorized to administer and enforce all provisions of this chapter including, but not limited to, the classification of buildings as immediately dangerous buildings. 
As used herein, the terms "building official" and "fire chief" shall include his or her authorized representatives and/or designee, except as specifically provided otherwise. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.02.030 - Definition—Immediately dangerous building. 
For the purpose of this chapter, an "immediately dangerous building or structure" shall be defined as any building or structure which has been so damaged by fire, infestation, seismic disturbance, or by any other cause, including neglect, to the extent that its structural integrity is irreparably damaged or destroyed and is in imminent danger of collapsing or where the condition of the structure poses an immediate and present threat to life, health or safety of the public. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.02.040 - Procedure to abate. 
A.  Whenever the building official or fire chief has inspected or caused to be inspected any building or structure and has found and determined that such building or structure is an immediately dangerous building or structure as defined in Section 14.02.030 of this chapter, the same may be summarily abated and removed by the city without compliance with the provisions of this code prior to such abatement. 
B.  The building official or fire chief may summarily abate the immediately dangerous building and/or the dangerous conditions in any reasonable manner which he/she determines will eliminate the immediate threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public. Reasonable means to abate the immediately dangerous building and/or the dangerous conditions include, but are not limited to, demolition, repairing, boarding to city specifications, securing, fencing and vacating. 
C.  No action shall be taken to summarily abate an immediately dangerous building without prior approval of the city attorney or his/her authorized representative. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.02.050 - Lien or personal obligation. 
The cost of abatement including all reasonable administrative and engineering costs incurred by the city as a result of any action taken pursuant to this chapter may be assessed as a lien against the property upon which the immediately dangerous building or structure was located and may be made a personal obligation of the property owner. The recovery of such costs shall be governed by the procedures provided in Chapter 14.05 of this title. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
Chapter 14.03 - SUMMARY ABATEMENT— IMMEDIATELY DANGEROUS CONDITIONS 
Sections: 
 
14.03.010 - Applicable procedures. 
Notwithstanding any provisions of this title to the contrary, the procedures for the abatement of an immediately dangerous condition, as defined, shall be regulated by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.03.020 - Authority and administration. 
The health officer, fire chief, building official and the city manager and their respective designees are each authorized to administer and enforce all provisions of this chapter including, but not limited, to the classification of immediately dangerous conditions for the purpose of abating those conditions which exist as the result of a violation of those ordinances for which their respective departments have primary enforcement responsibility. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.03.030 - Definition—Immediately dangerous condition. 
For the purpose of this chapter, an "immediately dangerous condition" shall be defined as a condition on any premises or property which, in the opinion of the health officer, the fire chief, the building official or the city manager, is of such a nature as to be imminently dangerous to the health, safety or welfare of the public, which if abated according to the procedures of this code, would, during the pendency of such proceedings, subject the public to potential harm of a serious nature. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.03.040 - Procedure to abate. 
A.  Whenever the health officer, the fire chief, or the building official has inspected or caused to be inspected any premises or property and has found and determined that there exists on such premises or property an immediately dangerous condition as defined in Section 14.03.030 of this chapter, the same may be summarily abated and removed by the city without compliance with the provisions of this code prior to such abatement. 
B.  The health officer, the fire chief, the building official, or the city manager may abate the immediately dangerous condition in any reasonable manner which he/she determines will eliminate the immediate threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public. Reasonable means to abate the immediately dangerous condition include, but are not limited to, demolition, repairing, boarding to city specifications, securing the perimeter of the property with fencing, gates or barricades, vacating, and removal of junk and debris. 
C.  No action shall be taken to summarily abate an immediately dangerous condition without prior approval of the city attorney or his/her authorized representative. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.03.050 - Lien or personal obligation. 
The cost of abatement including all reasonable administrative and engineering costs incurred by the city as a result of any action taken pursuant to this chapter may be assessed as a lien against the premises or property upon which the immediately dangerous condition was located and may be made a personal obligation of the property owner. The recovery of such costs shall be governed by the procedures provided in Chapter 14.05 of this title. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
Chapter 14.04 - ABATEMENT—DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 
Sections: 
 
14.04.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "dangerous buildings code," may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as "this chapter." 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.020 - Authority and administration. 
The building official is authorized to administer and enforce all provisions of this chapter including, but not limited to, the classification of buildings as dangerous buildings. As used herein, the term "building official" shall include his or her authorized representatives and/or designees. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.030 - Violations of chapter. 
No person, whether as owner, lessee, sublessee, or occupant, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or premises, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any order issued by the building official hereunder. For purposes of this chapter, "person" includes individuals, partnerships, corporations, joint ventures, receivers, limited liability company, trust, estate, cooperative, association or any other entity. Any person violating the provisions of this section or any other provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each day such violation continues. Any person violating the provisions of this section or any other provision of this chapter shall also be liable for civil penalties of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day the violation continues. The city attorney may seek civil penalties in any civil action brought to enforce any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.040 - Abatement hearing officer. 
Subject to ratification by a majority of the city council, the city manager shall appoint the abatement hearing officer(s) for proceedings under this chapter. The term of office of the abatement hearing officer shall be two years. The city manager may designate more than one abatement hearing officer, however, no more than one abatement hearing officer shall preside over any particular proceeding under this chapter. The city manager may re-appoint an abatement hearing officer for successive two-year terms. Compensation for the abatement hearing officer(s) may be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.050 - Abatement. 
All buildings or portions thereof which, after inspection, are determined by the building official to be dangerous, as defined in this chapter, are declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, securement or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.060 - Dangerous buildings specified. 
For purposes of this chapter, any building or structure which has one or more of the conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed to be a dangerous building; provided, that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that the life, health, property, or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered: 
A.  Whenever any door, aisle, hallway, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size, or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic; 
B.  Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, hallway, passageway, stairway, or other means of exit is so warped, buckled, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic; 
C.  Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half times the working stress or stresses allowed in the Orland Municipal Code, the California Building Code, or any other code adopted by the city for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location; 
D.  Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the Orland Municipal Code, the California Building Code, or any other code adopted by the city for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location; 
E.  Whenever any portion or member of a building or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property; 
F.  Whenever any portion of a building or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of two-thirds of that specified in the Orland Municipal Code, the California Building Code, or any other code adopted by the city for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the Orland Municipal Code, the California Building Code, or any other code adopted by the city for such buildings; 
G.  Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction; 
H.  Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of: 
1.  Dilapidation, deterioration or decay, 
2.  Faulty construction, 
3.  The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building, 
4.  The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation, or 
5.  Any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse; 
I.  Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used; 
J.  Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base; 
K.  Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows thirty-three (33) percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or fifty (50) percent damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings; 
L.  Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become: 
1.  An attractive nuisance to children, 
2.  A harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or 
3.  As to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts; 
M.  Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the Orland Municipal Code, the California Building Code, the Uniform Fire Code or any other code adopted by the city or of any law or ordinance of this state or city relating to the condition, location, or structure of buildings; 
N.  Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting part, member or portion, less than fifty (50) percent or in any supporting part, member, or portion less than sixty-six (66) percent, of the (1) strength, (2) fire-resisting qualities or characteristics, or (3) weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location; 
O.  Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, insects, rodents, pests or other vectors, or otherwise, is determined by the building official or health officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease; 
P.  Whenever the fire chief has determined that a building, structure, or the premises thereof constitute a fire hazard for any of the following reasons: 
1.  Dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible or explosive or otherwise hazardous materials, 
2.  Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly installed equipment for handling or using combustible or explosive or otherwise hazardous materials, 
3.  Dangerous accumulations of rubbish, waste paper, boxes, shavings or other highly flammable materials, 
4.  Accumulations of dust or waste material in air conditioning or ventilating systems or of grease in kitchen or other exhaust ducts, 
5.  Obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows, liable to interfere with the operations of the fire department or egress of occupants in case of fire, 
6.  Other conditions including, but not limited to, want of repairs, lack of adequate exit facilities, required automatic or other fire alarm apparatus or fire extinguishing equipment, which create a hazardous condition; 
Q.  Whenever any building or structure, because of lack of fire-resistive construction, or other cause, is determined by the building official or fire chief to be a fire hazard to life, health or property; 
R.  Whenever any building or structure, because of faulty electrical wiring or other cause, is determined by the building official or fire chief to be an electrical or fire hazard to life, health or property; 
S.  Whenever any building or structure, because of faulty gas connections, heating apparatus or water and sewer systems, or other cause, is determined by the building official or fire chief to be a hazard to life, health or property; 
T.  Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is vacant, unoccupied, or abandoned for a period in excess of six months such that the building or portion thereof is an attractive nuisance or hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the public; 
U.  Whenever any well, septic tank or other excavation appurtenant to any existing or demolished structure has been abandoned. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.110 - Notices and orders of the building official. 
A.  Commencement of Proceeding. Whenever the building official has inspected or caused to be inspected any building or structure and has found and determined that such building or structure is a dangerous building he/she shall commence proceedings to repair, vacate, secure or demolish the building. 
B.  Notice and Order. The building official shall issue a notice and order directed to the record owner of the building. The notice and order shall contain: 
1.  The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the building is located; 
2.  A statement that the building official has found the building to be dangerous with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to render the building dangerous under the provisions of Section 14.04.060 of this chapter; 
3.  A statement advising that, in accordance with Sections 17274 and 24436.5 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, a tax deduction may not be allowed for interest, taxes, depreciation, or amortization paid or incurred in the taxable year; 
4.  A statement that the building official has determined that the building must be repaired or demolished at the option of the owner in the manner and within the time limitations hereinafter specified: 
a.  If the owner elects to repair the building, all required permits for repair shall be secured therefor and the work physically commenced thirty (30) days from the date of the order and completed within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable under all of the circumstances, 
b.  If the owner elects to demolish the building, all required demolition permits shall be secured therefor and demolition commenced not later than thirty (30) days from the date of the order, and that demolition be completed within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable, or 
c.  If, prior to compliance, the building or conditions in the building or on the property becomes an immediately dangerous building as defined in Chapter 14.02 or an immediately dangerous condition as defined in Chapter 14.03, the city may abate the immediately dangerous building as provided in Chapter 14.02 or the city may abate the immediately dangerous condition as provided in Chapter 14.03 of this title; 
5.  Statements advising that if any required repair or demolition work is not commenced or completed within the time specified, the building official: 
a.  May order the building vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy until the work is completed if the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or its occupants, or if the building official determines that repair or demolition of the building or structure cannot be accomplished without making it immediately dangerous to life, limb, property or safety of the public or its occupants, 
b.  May order the immediate disconnection of hazardous utility services (electricity, gas, sewer or water), and 
c.  May proceed to repair, secure or demolish the building and charge the costs thereof against the property and its owner; 
6.  Statements advising: 
a.  That any person having any record title or legal interest in the building may appeal, from the notice and order or any action of the building official to the abatement hearing officer, provided the appeal is made in writing, as provided in this chapter, and filed with the building official within thirty (30) days from the date of the order, 
b.  That failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all rights to an administrative hearing and a final determination of the matter. The final order is subject only to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5, 
c.  Whether the city elects to seek its attorneys' fees in the abatement proceeding pursuant to Section 14.01.070 of this title, 
d.  That every owner of property within the city is liable to the city for the total cost of abatement proceedings undertaken pursuant to this chapter on his/her property, and 
e.  How and where interested persons may contact the building official or his/her designee about the notice and order. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.120 - Service and method of service. 
A.  Service of Notice and Order. The notice and order, and any amended or supplemental notice and order, shall be served upon the record owner, and posted on the property, and one copy thereof shall be served on each of the following, if known to the building official or disclosed from official public records: 
1.  The holder of any mortgage or deed of trust or other lien or encumbrance of record; 
2.  The owner or holder of any lease of record; and 
3.  Any known tenants actually occupying the property or occupying that portion affected by the notice and order. 
B.  Method of Service. Service of the notice and order may be made upon all persons entitled thereto, either by personal delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested. Service may be made upon the record owner at his/her/their address as it appears on the latest equalized assessment roll of Glenn County or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, or as known to the building official. Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of mailing. A copy of the notice and order and any amended or supplemental notice and order shall also be posted on the premises. 
In lieu of personal service or service by certified mail, service of the notice and order and any amended or supplemental notice and order may be made as follows: 
1.  In the event that service by certified return receipt mail cannot be effected or the recipient cannot be personally served, service may be made by substituted service. Substituted service may be accomplished as follows: 
a.  By leaving a copy during usual business hours in the recipient's business with the person who is apparently in charge, and by thereafter mailing by first class mail a copy to the recipient at the address where the copy was left; or 
b.  By leaving a copy at the recipient's dwelling or usual place of abode in the presence of a competent member of the household and thereafter mailing by first class mail a copy to the recipient at the address where the copy was left. 
2.  In the event the recipient refuses to accept certified return receipt mail or cannot be personally served and has a property manager or rental agency overseeing the premises, substituted service may be made as set forth in subsection (B)(1) of this section upon the property manager or rental agency. 
3.  If the recipient lives out of state and will not accept certified return receipt mail, then service may be made by first class mail. 
4.  If the recipient cannot be located or service cannot be effected as set forth in this section, service may be made by publication in an Orland newspaper of general circulation which is most likely to give actual notice to the owner. Service shall be deemed sufficient when it is accomplished pursuant to Government Code Section 6062. 
C.  Failure to Serve. The failure of the building official to serve any person required herein to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other persons duly served or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed on him by the provisions of this chapter. The failure of any person served pursuant to this section to receive such notice and order shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this section. 
D.  Proof of Service. Proof of service of the notice and order shall be certified to at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting service, declaring the time, date and manner in which service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt returned in acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail shall be affixed to the copy of the notice and order retained by the building official. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.125 - Notice of pendency of action—Notice of final disposition of action. 
A.  Recordation of Notice of Pendency of Action. Concurrent with service of the notice and order, the building official shall record a notice of pendency of action with the county recorder. The building official shall instruct the county recorder to record the notice and index it in the property index as well as in the name of each owner of record as shown in the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, and/or as known to the building official. The notice shall be substantially in the following form: 
NOTICE OF PENDENCY OF ACTION 
 NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that pursuant to Orland Municipal Code Title 14, Chapter 14.04, an administrative abatement action was commenced on _______, by the City of Orland against the property described herein and the action is now pending. 
 The action alleges that the property is in violation of Orland Municipal Code Chapter 14.04 in that it constitutes a dangerous building and that such dangerous building must be abated. 
 As of the date of commencement of the abatement action, the name and address of the record owner of the property described herein is: _____ . 
 The real property against which the abatement action is pending is that certain real property commonly known as ___________, Assessor Parcel Number _____, and more particularly described in Exhibit A, attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein. 
  
CITY OF ORLAND 
  
Dated: 
  
Name of Officer 
  
B.  Recordation of Final Disposition of Action. The building official shall record a notice of final disposition of action within fifteen (15) days following the earlier of the following dates: (1) the date the building official verifies both voluntary compliance in abating the dangerous building and payment of all accrued costs of abatement to which the city is entitled pursuant to this title; or (2) the date of final resolution of the abatement action. The notice of final disposition of action shall be substantially in the following form: 
NOTICE OF FINAL 
DISPOSITION OF ACTION 
 NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT pursuant to Orland Municipal Code Title 14, Chapter 14.04: 
 1. Final disposition has been reached in the administrative abatement action referenced in that notice of pendency of action recorded on _______ , as Instrument No. _____ of the Official Records of Glenn County, California. 
 2. The City of Orland does hereby withdraw the above-referenced notice of pendency of action. 
 3. The above-referenced notice of pendency of action affected that certain real property commonly known as ___________ , Assessor Parcel Number _____ , and more particularly described in Exhibit A, attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein. 
  
CITY OF ORLAND 
  
Dated: 
  
Name of Officer 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.130 - Standards. 
Any building declared a dangerous building under this chapter shall either be repaired, secured or demolished by the owner in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Orland Municipal Code, the California Building Code, or any other code adopted by the city. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.140 - Notice to vacate. 
A.  Order to Vacate. If any building or structure declared a dangerous building is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property, or safety of the public or its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated as provided in this chapter. 
B.  Posting. Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served as provided in Section 14.04.120 of this chapter, be posted at or upon each exit of the building or upon any individual unit to be vacated, and shall be substantially in the following form: 
DANGEROUS BUILDING DO NOT 
ENTER - UNSAFE TO OCCUPY 
 You are hereby ordered and required to vacate this building on or before _______ . 
 It is a misdemeanor pursuant to Orland Municipal Code Sections 14.04.030 and 14.04.140 to occupy this building on or after _______ or to remove or deface this notice. 
  
Building Official 
  
City of Orland 
  
By 
C.  Compliance. Whenever a notice to vacate is posted, the building official shall specify in the notice to vacate the conditions which necessitate an immediate notice to vacate. 
D.  Violation. No person shall remain in or enter any building which has been so posted, except that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such building under permit without the consent of the building official. No person shall remove or deface any such notice after it is posted until the required repairs, securement, demolition, or removal have been completed and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the Orland Municipal Code and the California Building Code. Any person violating this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
E.  The building official may permit occupancy of the building or individual units if the owner corrects those problems which pose an immediate danger to life, limb, property and safety of the public or occupants. 
F.  Prior to issuing a notice to vacate, the building official shall obtain approval of the city attorney or his/her representative. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.145 - Disconnection of hazardous utilities. 
Whenever a notice to vacate has been posted and served in accordance with Section 14.04.140 of this chapter, the building official may order the immediate disconnection of any utility services determined to be hazardous by the building official. If the sewer service is ordered disconnected pursuant to this section, city water service to such building shall also be disconnected in order to prevent the accumulation of sewage on such premises. It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail to disconnect utility services when ordered to do so pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.210 - Appeal—Generally. 
A.  Form of Appeal. Any person entitled to service under Section 14.04.120, and any person who is a tenant may appeal from any notice and order or any action of the building official under this chapter by filing with the building division, a written appeal containing: 
1.  A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants in the building or the land involved in the notice and order; 
2.  A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant; 
3.  A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought, and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action should be reversed, modified, or otherwise set aside; 
4.  The signatures of all parties named as appellants, and their official mailing addresses; 
5.  A declaration under penalty of perjury of at least one appellant setting forth the truth of the matters stated in the appeal. 
B.  Processing of Appeal. Upon receipt of any appeal filed and the appeal fee pursuant to this section, the building official shall calendar the appeal for hearing before the abatement hearing officer as follows: 
1.  If the appeal is received by the building official not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the next regular hearing of the abatement hearing officer, if any, it shall be calendared for hearing at that hearing. 
2.  If the appeal is received by the building official on a date less than fifteen (15) days prior to the next regular hearing of the abatement hearing officer, if any, it shall be calendared for hearing at the next subsequent hearing of the abatement hearing officer. 
3.  If more than one appeal is received by the building official regarding a notice and order on the same property, all such appeals shall be calendared to be heard at the same hearing of the abatement hearing officer as the last timely appeal received by the building official. 
C.  Noticing Appeal for Hearing. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by the building official either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at his address shown on the appeal and to all other people receiving the appealed-from notice and order. 
D.  Appeal Fee. The building official may collect and require an appeal fee to be paid at the time the written appeal notice is filed pursuant to this section. The appeal fee shall be set by resolution of the city council. The fee shall be calculated to recover the total city costs incurred in the appeal including, but not limited to, staff time to process and handle the appeal, preparation and service of notices, staff appearance at the appeal hearing, and compensation of the abatement hearing officer, if any. No appeal shall proceed without payment of the fee at the time the appeal is filed. The building official may waive the appeal fee upon written request for good cause shown. Good cause may include severe economic hardship, significant attempts to comply with the notice and order, and other factors indicating good faith attempts to comply with the order(s). 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.220 - Effect of failure to appeal. 
Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of Section 14.04.210 of this chapter shall constitute an irrevocable waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and a final adjudication of the building official's order, or any portion thereof, subject only to review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.230 - Staying of orders under appeal. 
Except for orders to vacate made pursuant to Section 14.04.140, and utility disconnection orders made pursuant to Section 14.04.140, enforcement of any notice and order of the building official issued under this chapter shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.310 - Scope of hearing on appeal. 
Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant in the appeal notice shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.320 - Hearing on appeal—Generally. 
A.  Hearing by Abatement Hearing Officer. At the time fixed in the notice required by Section 14.04.210 of this chapter, the abatement hearing officer shall proceed to hear the testimony of the building official or designee and the testimony of the appellant and other competent persons, including members of the public, respecting those matters or issues specifically listed by the appellant in his/her notice of appeal. 
B.  Record. A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape recording, or by any other means of permanent recording determined to be appropriate by the abatement hearing officer. If the appellant seeks judicial review of the decision of the abatement hearing officer, preparation of a record of the proceeding shall be governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5, as presently written or hereinafter amended. 
C.  Reporting. The proceedings at the hearing may also be reported by a certified shorthand reporter if such reporter is provided by the appellant at his/her own expense. 
D.  Continuances. The abatement hearing officer may, upon request of the appellant or the building official, grant continuances from time to time for good cause shown, or upon his/her own motion. 
E.  Reasonable Dispatch. The abatement hearing officer and its representatives shall proceed with reasonable dispatch to conclude any matter before him/her. Due regard shall be shown for the convenience and necessity of any parties or their representatives. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.330 - Conduct of hearing. 
A.  Rules. Hearings need not be conducted according to the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. 
B.  Exclusion of Evidence. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
C.  Rights of Parties. Each party shall have these rights, among others: 
1.  To testify and call others to testify on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing; 
2.  To introduce documentary and physical evidence; 
3.  To rebut the evidence against him/her; 
4.  To represent himself or herself or to be represented by anyone of his/her choice; 
5.  If a party does not proficiently speak or understand the English language, he/she may provide an interpreter, at the party's own cost, to translate for the party. An interpreter shall not have had any involvement in the issues of the case prior to the hearing. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.340 - Inspection of property. 
A.  The abatement hearing officer may, with the owner(s)' consent, or by inspection warrant, inspect the building or premises involved in the hearing prior to, during, or after the hearing; provided, that: 
1.  Notice of such inspection shall be given to the parties before the inspection is made; 
2.  The parties are given an opportunity to be present during the inspection; 
3.  The abatement hearing officer shall state for the record during the hearing, or file a written statement after the hearing for inclusion in the hearing record, upon completion of the inspection, the material facts observed and the conclusion drawn therefrom; and 
4.  Each party then shall have a right to rebut or explain the matters so stated by the abatement hearing officer either for the record during the hearing or by filing a written statement after the hearing for inclusion in the hearing record. 
B.  Neither inspection warrant nor the owner(s)' consent to inspect the building and surrounding properties is required if such inspection can be made from areas in which the general public has access or with permission of other persons authorized to provide access to the property on which the building is located. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.350 - Form and contents of decision—Finality of decision. 
A.  If it is shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the owner has violated provisions of this chapter, then the abatement hearing officer shall order the owner to correct the dangerous conditions or demolish the building within a reasonable time. The abatement hearing officer shall also order that if the owner fails, refuses or neglects to correct the dangerous conditions or demolish the building within the time set forth in its order that the city may repair, demolish or secure the building pursuant to this chapter or institute an action to compel compliance with its order. 
B.  The decision of the abatement hearing officer is a final decision subject only to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5, and shall be in the form of an order and shall contain findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented, and the requirements with which the owner shall comply. The order shall also inform the appellant that the decision of the abatement hearing officer is a final decision and that the time for judicial review is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
C.  The effective date of the decision and order and the period or periods within which the appellant must comply with the requirements of the decision shall be as stated in the decision. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.360 - Service of the final decision and order. 
A copy of the decision and order shall be served on the appellant or appellants personally or sent to him/her/them at the address shown on the appeal(s) by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested and a copy shall be posted on the property. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.410 - Compliance with decision and order. 
A.  General. After the decision and order of the abatement hearing officer or the notice and order of the building official made pursuant to this chapter is final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect, or refuse to obey any such order or decision. Any such person who fails to comply with any such order or decision is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
B.  Failure to Obey Order. If, after the decision and order of the abatement hearing officer or the notice and order of the building official has become final, the person(s) to whom such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the building official may (1) cause such person to be prosecuted under subsection A of this section; (2) institute any appropriate action to abate such building as a public nuisance; or (3) repair, demolish or secure the building in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or as provided in the order of the abatement hearing officer or building official. In any action brought by the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the prevailing party shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney's fees and costs whether or not the matter proceeds to judgment. 
C.  Failure to Commence or Complete Work. Whenever the required repair or demolition is not commenced or completed within the time limits prescribed in the final decision and order of the abatement hearing officer or the notice and order of the building official, the following shall apply: 
1.  If the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or its occupants, or if the building official determines that repair or demolition of the building or structure cannot be accomplished without making it immediately dangerous to life, limb, property or safety of the public or its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated as provided in Section 14.04.140 of this chapter. 
2.  No person shall occupy any building which has been posted with a notice to vacate as specified in this subsection. No person shall remove or deface any such notice so posted until the repairs, demolition, or removal ordered by the building official or the abatement hearing officer shall have been completed. 
3.  To the extent permitted by law, the building official may, in addition to any other remedy herein provided, cause the building to be repaired to the extent necessary to correct the conditions that render the building dangerous as set forth in the notice and order; may cause the building or site to be secured as set forth in the order; or may cause the building to be demolished and the materials, rubble and debris therefrom removed and the lot cleared and graded to provide proper drainage and sediment control. Any such repair, demolition or work to secure the building or site shall be accomplished and the cost thereof paid and recovered in the manner hereinafter provided in this chapter. 
4.  No action shall be taken by the building official to repair, secure, vacate or demolish a building pursuant to this chapter without prior approval of the city attorney's office. 
D.  Enforcement of the decision and order of the abatement hearing officer or the notice and order of the building official made pursuant to this chapter shall be stayed during the pendency of a properly and timely filed appeal therefrom to the superior court. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.420 - Extension of time. 
Upon receipt of a building permit application accompanied by the required permit fees from the person required to conform to a final order and an agreement by such person that he/she will comply with the order if allowed additional time, the building official may, in his/her discretion, grant an extension of time, not to exceed an additional one hundred twenty (120) days, within which to complete the required repair, rehabilitation, or demolition, if the building official determines that such an extension of time will not create or perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property. The building official's authority to extend time is limited to the physical repair, rehabilitation, securement or demolition of the building and will not in any way affect or extend the time to appeal a final order or challenge any order of the abatement hearing officer or building official. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.430 - Interference with repair or demolition work prohibited. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city, or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any building which has been ordered repaired, secured, vacated or demolished under the provisions of this chapter whenever such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city, person having an interest or estate in such building or structure, or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating and repairing, or demolishing any such building, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or is performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.440 - Performance of work of repair, demolition or securement. 
A.  Procedure. When any work of repair, demolition or securement is to be done pursuant to Section 14.04.410 of this chapter by the city or its agents or contractors, the building official shall provide the final order or decision to the city engineer and the work shall be accomplished by city personnel or by private contract under the direction of such engineer and the building official. Plans and specifications therefor may be prepared by such engineer, or he/she may employ such architectural and engineering assistance on a contract basis as he/she may deem reasonably necessary. 
B.  Costs. The cost of such repair, demolition or securement work shall be paid from the abatement repair and demolition fund, and may be made a lien against the property involved and may be made a personal obligation of the property owner, as the abatement hearing officer shall determine is appropriate pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.510 - Liability for costs of abatement. 
A.  Every owner of property within the city is liable to the city for the total cost of abatement proceedings undertaken pursuant to this chapter on his or her property accrued to the date of final resolution of the proceedings, including the recordation of liens pursuant to this chapter, if any. Such costs shall include, without limitation, costs of inspection, including inspections which form the basis of the building official's notice and order; expenses associated with issuing and serving the building official's notice and order and the final decision and order, if any; expenses associated with the appeal of the building official's notice and order, if any; attorneys' fees pursuant to Section 14.01.070 of this title, if any; the cost of repair, securement, demolition or any other abatement of the dangerous building or structure; costs of title reports, placing or removing liens and closing the file, and any other related administrative costs. 
B.  The city manager or his/her designee, in his/her sole discretion, may waive any portion of or all of the costs of abatement proceedings in the event the owner of the property voluntarily complies with the building official's notice and order. 
C.  All costs not otherwise paid by the owner or waived by the building official shall be collected pursuant to the procedures set forth in this part of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.514 - Sale of materials. 
A.  In the event the city repairs, secures, demolishes or otherwise abates the dangerous building and the abatement consists in part of removal of materials or demolition of a building or structure, the city may, at the city's sole discretion, sell the removed materials or materials contained in the demolished building or structure at public sale to the highest responsible bidder. The city shall notice the sale by publication at least five days prior to the date of the sale. The notice shall be published twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The notice by publication may occur either before or after the removal of the materials or demolition of the building or structure. 
B.  Any moneys received from the sale of such removed materials or materials contained in the demolished building or structure shall be deducted from the expense of abatement. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.520 - Account of expenses—Filing of report—Contents. 
A.  The building official shall keep an itemized account of all expenses incurred by the city in the abatement of the dangerous building including, without limitation, those costs and expenses set forth in Section 14.04.510 of this chapter. 
B.  The building official shall keep an itemized account of all revenue received by the city for any sale of materials pursuant to Section 14.04.515 of this chapter. 
C.  Upon the completion of the work, the building official shall prepare a report, verified by the city official in charge of doing the work, specifying the following information: 
1.  The work done in repairing, securing, demolishing or otherwise abating the dangerous building, if any; 
2.  The itemized and total cost of the abatement proceedings undertaken pursuant to this chapter including, without limitation, those costs and expenses set forth in Section 14.04.510 of this chapter; 
3.  The itemized and total revenue received from any sale of materials pursuant to Section 14.04.515 of this chapter; 
4.  The net expense of the abatement (gross expenses less the revenue from any sale of materials pursuant to Section 14.04.515 of this chapter); 
5.  A description of the real property upon which the building or structure is or was located; 
6.  The names and addresses of the persons entitled to notice pursuant to Section 14.04.120 of this chapter; 
7.  Notice of the time, date and place when and where the abatement hearing officer will hear and pass upon the report, together with any objections or protests which may be filed by any person interested in or affected by the proposed charge, and shall confirm, reject or modify the report and determine whether the charge shall be made a personal obligation of the property owner(s) and charged as a lien against the property involved; 
8.  A statement that the decision and order of the abatement hearing officer after the hearing is a final decision and order and is subject only to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.525 - Service of the report and notice of hearing. 
A.  The building official's report and notice of the hearing shall be posted on the property and served by certified return receipt mail and first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the persons entitled to notice pursuant to Section 14.04.120 of this chapter as their names and addresses appear on the last equalized assessment roll of the county or supplemental roll whichever is more current, if such so appears, or as known to the building official. 
B.  Service of the report and notice shall be made at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for hearing. 
C.  All costs associated with service of the report and notice shall be added to total expenses to be reviewed by the abatement hearing officer. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.530 - Making of protests or objections. 
Any person interested in or affected by the proposed charge may file written protests or objections with the building official at any time prior to the time set for the hearing on the report of the building official or may make an oral protest at the hearing. Each written protest or objection must contain a description of the property in which the signer thereof is interested and the grounds of such protest or objection. The building official shall endorse on every such protest or objection the date it was received by him/her. The building official shall present such protests or objections to the abatement hearing officer at the time set for the hearing, and no other written protests or objections shall be considered. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.535 - Nature of protests to be heard. 
The protests heard by the abatement hearing officer pursuant to Section 14.04.540 of this chapter shall relate only to the charge to be made for abatement, and no protest concerning the action of the building official or the abatement hearing officer in ordering the repair, securement, demolition or other abatement of the dangerous building shall be heard at this time. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.540 - Hearing of protests and confirmation, rejection or modification of report. 
Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing, the abatement hearing officer shall hear and pass upon the report of the building official together with any such objections or protests and shall confirm, reject or modify the report. The abatement hearing officer may make such revision, correction or modification of the report or the charge as it may deem just; and in the event the abatement hearing officer is satisfied with the correctness of the charge, the building official's report (as submitted or as revised, corrected or modified) together with the charge, shall be confirmed or rejected. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.545 - Order of abatement hearing officer. 
The abatement hearing officer may order that the charge be made a personal obligation of each owner of the property and charged against the property involved as a lien. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.550 - Final decision and order—Service. 
A.  The decision and order of the abatement hearing officer is a final decision subject only to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
B.  A copy of the final decision and order of the abatement hearing officer shall be served in accordance with Section 14.04.120 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.555 - Personal obligation and lien against the property. 
A.  If the abatement hearing officer orders that the charge shall be a personal obligation of the property owner, it shall direct the city attorney or the city manager to collect the same on behalf of the city by the use of all appropriate legal remedies. 
B.  If the abatement hearing officer orders that the charge shall be charged against the property as a lien, then in the event the charge contained by the abatement hearing officer is not paid within five days after service of the decision of the abatement hearing officer, the charge shall constitute a lien on the property. The lien shall continue until the amount of the charge and interest thereon at the legal rate, computed from the date of confirmation of the charge, is paid or until it is discharged of record. 
C.  The lien shall have the priority of a judgment lien. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.560 - Recordation of lien. 
After notice to the property owner(s) as provided in Section 14.04.570 of this chapter, the city clerk shall record a notice of lien with the county recorder within sixty (60) days after the confirmation of the charge by the abatement hearing officer. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.565 - Form of notice of lien. 
The notice of lien shall be substantially in the following form: 
NOTICE OF LIEN 
 NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT pursuant to Orland Municipal Code Chapter 14.04, the City of Orland undertook the following actions: 
 1. On _______ , the Abatement Hearing Officer of the City of Orland ordered the abatement of a dangerous building on the real property described herein. 
 2. On _______ , the City of Orland abated the dangerous building. 
 3. On _______ , the City of Orland confirmed the cost of the abatement of the dangerous building and charged such cost as a lien against the real property described herein. 
 4. As of the date of recordation of this Notice of Lien, the cost of the abatement has not yet been paid, and the City of Orland does hereby claim a lien on the real property described herein for the net expense of abating the dangerous building on the property in the amount of ($ _____ ) and this amount shall be a lien upon the real property described herein until the full amount, with interest at the legal, has been paid in full and discharged of record. 
 5. As of the date of recordation of this Notice of Lien, the name and address of the record owner of the property described below is: _____ . 
 6. The real property upon which the lien is claimed is that certain real property commonly known as _______ , Assessor Parcel Number _____ , and more particularly described in Exhibit A, attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein. 
  
CITY OF ORLAND 
  
Dated: 
  
Name of Officer 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.570 - Service of notice of lien. 
A.  The city clerk shall serve the notice of lien on the owner of record of the property on which the dangerous building was located based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current. 
B.  The notice of lien shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Article 3 (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. If the owner of record cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten (10) days and by publication in an Orland newspaper of general circulation pursuant to Government Code Section 6062. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.04.575 - Discharge of lien. 
In the event the lien is discharged, released or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, the city clerk shall record a notice of discharge, substantially in the following form: 
DISCHARGE OF LIEN 
  NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT pursuant to Orland Municipal Code Chapter 14.04, the City of Orland undertook the following actions: 
 1. On _______ , the Abatement Hearing Officer of the City of Orland ordered the abatement of a dangerous building on the real property described herein. 
 2. On _______ , the City of Orland abated the dangerous building. 
 3. On _______ , the City of Orland confirmed the cost of the abatement of the dangerous building and charged such cost as a lien against the real property described herein. 
 4. The amount of the lien claimed by the City of Orland was ($ _____ ), with interest at the legal rate. 
 5. As of the date of recordation of this Discharge of Lien, the name and address of the record owner of the property described below is: _____ . 
 6. The lien claimed by the City of Orland has been discharged, released or satisfied and the City of Orland no longer claims a lien on the real property described herein. 
 7. The real property upon which the lien was claimed is that certain real property commonly known as _______ , Assessor Parcel Number _____ , and more particularly described in Exhibit A, attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein. 
  
CITY OF ORLAND 
  
Dated: 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
Chapter 14.05 - ABATEMENT—SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS AND PUBLIC NUISANCES 
Sections: 
 
14.05.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "substandard building and nuisance code," may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as "this chapter." 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.020 - Application. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply generally to all property throughout the city wherein any of the conditions, hereinafter specified, are found to exist; provided, however, that any condition which would constitute a violation of this chapter, but which is duly authorized under any city, state or federal law, shall not be deemed to violate this chapter. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.030 - Authority and administration. 
The health officer, fire chief, building official and the city manager and their respective designees are each authorized to administer and enforce all provisions of this chapter including, but not limited to, the classification of substandard buildings and public nuisances for the purpose of abating those conditions which exist as the result of violation of those ordinances for which their respective departments have primary enforcement responsibility. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.040 - Violations of chapter. 
Any responsible person, whether owner, lessee, sublessor, sublessee or occupant of any property or premises who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each day such violation continues. For purposes of this chapter, "person" includes individuals, partnerships, corporations, joint ventures, receivers, limited liability company, trust, estate, cooperative, association or any other entity. Any person violating the provisions of this section or any other provision of this chapter shall also be liable for civil penalties of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day the violation continues. The city attorney may seek civil penalties in any civil action brought to enforce any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.050 - Abatement hearing officer. 
Subject to ratification by a majority of the city council, the city manager shall appoint the abatement hearing officer(s) for proceedings under this chapter. The term of office of the abatement hearing officer shall be two years. The city manager may designate more than one abatement hearing officer, however, no more than one abatement hearing officer shall preside over any particular proceeding under this chapter. The city manager may re-appoint an abatement hearing officer for successive two-year terms. Compensation for the abatement hearing officer(s) may be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.060 - General definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the following specified meanings: 
"Common area" means the entire common interest development as that term is defined in California Civil Code Section 1351, except the separate interests therein, or any area defined as a "common area" within a homeowners association's declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions. 
"Drive-in enterprise" means any commercial enterprise such as a service station or drive-in restaurant upon which enclosed buildings occupy less than fifty (50) percent of the lot area and where a primary method of providing goods and services to customers is by means of a drive-through service. 
"Homeowners association" means any California corporation, California nonprofit mutual benefit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purposes of controlling, managing, or maintaining the common areas of a common interest development as that term is defined in California Civil Code Section 1351. 
"Junk" means any cast-off, damaged, discarded, junked, obsolete, salvaged, scrapped, unusable, worn-out or wrecked object, thing or material composed in whole or in part of asphalt, brick, carbon, cement, plastic or other synthetic substance, fiber, glass, metal, paper, plaster, plaster of paris, rubber, terra cotta, wool, cotton, cloth, canvas, organic matter or other substance, having no substantial market value or requiring reconditioning in order to be used for its original purpose. 
"Junk yard" means a junkyard as that term is defined in Title 18 of this code or any premises from or on which any junk is abandoned, bailed, bartered, bought, brought, bundled, deposited, disassembled, disposed of, exchanged, handled, kept, packed, processed, scattered, shipped, sold, stored or transported, regardless of whether or not such activity is done for profit. 
"Owner" means the owner of record of real property, occupant, lessee, sublessee, interested holder in real property, or homeowners association, as the case may be. For purposes of this chapter, a homeowners association which exercises management and/or control over a common area shall be deemed an owner of the area over which such control is exercised. Exercising control includes, but is not limited to, ownership, maintenance, easements and/or assessing fees on property owners pursuant to agreements, deeds or recorded documents. 
"Premises" means any real property and/or improvements thereon, as the case may be, including but not limited to, an area designated as a common area within a condominium or similar project. 
"Property" means premises. 
"Responsible official" means the health officer, fire chief, building official or the city manager, or their respective designees, authorized to use the provisions of this chapter for violations of those ordinances for which their respective departments have primary enforcement authority. 
"Service station" means any premises upon which the improvements are designed and built for the primary purpose of selling to or providing others with fuels for internal combustion engines of motor vehicles, whether or not providing related automotive maintenance and repair services. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.110 - Substandard buildings specified. 
Any building or structure or any portion thereof, including any dwelling unit, guest room, or suite of rooms, or the premises on which the same is located, in which there exists any of the following conditions to an extent that endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety, or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof shall be deemed and is hereby declared to be a substandard building and a public nuisance. 
A.  Inadequate Sanitation. Inadequate sanitation shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Lack of, or improper water closet, lavatory, bathtub or shower in a dwelling unit, lodging house or congregate residence; 
2.  Lack of, or improper water closets, lavatories, and bath tubs or showers per number of guests in a hotel; 
3.  Lack of, or improper kitchen sink; 
4.  Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a dwelling unit, lodging house, hotel or congregate residence; 
5.  Lack of adequate heating facilities; 
6.  Lack of, or improper operation of, required ventilating equipment; 
7.  Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation required by the Orland Municipal Code, the California Building Code, or any other code adopted by the city; 
8.  Room and space dimension less than required by the Orland Municipal Code, the California Building Code, or any other code adopted by the city. However, a condition which would require displacement of sound walls or ceilings to meet height, length, or width requirements for ceilings, rooms, and dwelling units shall not by itself be considered sufficient existence of dangerous conditions making a building a substandard building, unless the building was constructed, altered, or converted in violation of such requirements in effect at the time of construction, alteration or conversion; 
9.  Lack of required electrical lighting; 
10.  Dampness of habitable rooms; 
11.  Infestation of insects, vermin, or rodents as determined by city officials and/or the health officer; 
12.  General dilapidation or improper maintenance; 
13.  Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system; 
14.  Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities as determined by city officials and/or the health officer. 
B.  Structural Hazards. Structural hazards shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Deteriorated or inadequate foundations; 
2.  Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports; 
3.  Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety; 
4.  Members of walls, partitions, or other vertical supports that split, lean, list, or buckle due to defective material or deterioration; 
5.  Members of walls, partitions, or other vertical supports that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety; 
6.  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members which sag, split, or buckle due to defective material or deterioration; 
7.  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other horizontal members that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety; 
8.  Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge, or settle due to defective material or deterioration; 
9.  Fireplaces or chimneys which are of insufficient size or strength to carry imposed loads with safety. 
C.  Nuisances. Any nuisance as defined in this code, state law or common law. 
D.  Hazardous Wiring. Hazardous wiring includes all wiring not installed, maintained or used in conformance with the Orland Municipal Code, the California Building Code or any other code adopted by the city. Except as provided in any federal, state, or local law or ordinance now or hereinafter enacted, hazardous wiring shall not include wiring which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been adequately maintained in a good and safe condition and is being used in a safe manner. 
E.  Hazardous Plumbing. Hazardous plumbing includes all plumbing not installed, maintained or used in conformance with the Orland Municipal Code, the California Building Code or any other code adopted by the city. Except as provided in any federal, state, or local law or ordinance now or hereinafter enacted, hazardous plumbing shall not include plumbing which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been adequately maintained in a good and safe condition and which is free of cross-connections and siphonage between fixtures. 
F.  Hazardous Mechanical Equipment. Hazardous mechanical equipment includes all mechanical equipment, including vents, not installed, maintained or used in conformance with the Orland Municipal Code, the California Building Code or any other code adopted by the city. Except as provided in any federal, state, or local law or ordinance now or hereinafter enacted, hazardous mechanical equipment shall not include mechanical equipment which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been adequately maintained in a good and safe condition and is being used in a safe manner. 
G.  Faulty Weather Protection. Faulty weather protection, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Deteriorated, crumbling or loose plaster; 
2.  Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, foundations or floors, including broken windows or doors; 
3.  Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings, including lack of paint or weathering due to lack of paint or other approved protective covering; 
4.  Broken, rotted, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof coverings. 
H.  Fire Hazard. Any building or portion thereof, device, apparatus, equipment, combustible waste, or vegetation which, in the opinion of the building official or fire chief, is in such a condition as to cause a fire or explosion or provide a ready fuel to augment the spread and intensity of fire or explosion arising from any cause, shall be deemed to be a fire hazard. 
I.  Faulty Materials of Construction. Faulty materials of construction shall include all materials of construction except those which are specifically allowed or approved by Orland Municipal Code, the California Building Code and any other code adopted by the city, and which have been adequately maintained in good and safe condition. 
J.  Hazardous or Unsanitary Premises. Hazardous or unsanitary premises shall include those premises on which an accumulation of weeds, vegetation, junk, dead organic matter, debris, garbage, offal, rat harborages, stagnant water, combustible materials and similar materials or conditions which, in the opinion of city officials or the health officer, constitute fire, health or safety hazards. 
K.  Unsafe Building. Any building or portion thereof which is determined to be an unsafe building due to inadequate maintenance or any other reason, in accordance with the Orland Municipal Code, the California Building Code, the Uniform Fire Code or any other code adopted by the city. 
L.  Inadequate Exits. 
1.  Inadequate exits include all buildings or portions thereof not provided with adequate exit facilities as required by the Orland Municipal Code, the California Building Code, the Uniform Fire Code, or any other code adopted by the city. Except as provided in any federal, state, or local law or ordinance now or hereinafter enacted, inadequate exits shall not include those buildings or portions thereof whose exit facilities conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their construction and which have been adequately maintained in a good and safe condition and increased in relation to any increase in occupant load, alteration or addition, or any change in occupancy. 
2.  When an unsafe condition exists through lack of, or improper location of exits, additional exits may be required to be installed. 
M.  Inadequate Fire Protection or Firefighting Equipment. Inadequate fire protection or firefighting equipment includes all buildings or portions thereof which are not provided with the fire-resistive construction or fire-extinguishing systems or equipment required by the Orland Municipal Code, the California Building Code, the Uniform Fire Code, or any other code adopted by the city. Except as provided in any federal, state, or local law or ordinance now or hereinafter enacted, inadequate fire protection or firefighting equipment shall not include those buildings or portions thereof which conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their construction and whose fire-resistive integrity and fire-extinguishing systems or equipment have been adequately maintained in good and safe condition and improved in relation to any increase in occupant load, alteration or addition, or any change in occupancy. 
N.  Improper Occupancy. Improper occupancy includes all buildings or portions thereof occupied for living, sleeping, cooking, or dining purposes which were not designed or intended to be used for such occupancies. 
O.  Inadequate Structural Resistance. Inadequate structural resistance includes all buildings or portions thereof not constructed with adequate structural resistance to horizontal forces as required by the Orland Municipal Code, the California Building Code, or any other code adopted by the city. Except as provided in any federal, state, or local law or ordinance now or hereinafter enacted, inadequate structural resistance shall not include any building which conformed with all applicable laws at the time of its construction and which has been adequately maintained in a good and safe condition and is being used in a safe manner. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.210 - Public nuisances specified. 
It is declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, subleasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises in this city to maintain such premises in such a manner that any one or more of the conditions or activities described in the following subsections are found to exist. 
A.  The keeping, storage, depositing, or accumulation on the premises of any personal property which is within the view of persons on adjacent or nearby real property or the public right-of-way when such personal property constitutes visual blight, reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood, is offensive to the senses, or is detrimental to nearby property or property values. Personal property includes, but is not limited to: junk, as defined in Section 14.05.060 of this chapter; abandoned, wrecked or dismantled automobiles; abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or not seaworthy boats or vessels; automotive parts and equipment; appliances; furniture; containers; packing materials; scrap metal; wood; building materials; rubbish; and debris. 
Wood and building materials being used or to be used for a project of repair or renovation for which an active building permit is in existence may be stored for such period of time as is necessary to expeditiously complete the project. Upon finalization, expiration or cancellation of the permit, the wood and building materials of any nature for the project must be immediately removed; 
B.  The keeping, storage, depositing, or accumulation on the premises of any dead grass, weeds, brush, or rubbish of any kind likely to increase the danger of fire, or any manure, dead animals, decayed vegetables, offal, or other similar matter which is in the view of persons on adjacent or nearby real property or the public right-of-way when such items constitutes visual blight, a danger to the health, safety or welfare of the public, reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood, or is offensive to the senses or is detrimental to nearby property or property values; 
C.  The keeping, storage, depositing or accumulation of dirt, sand, gravel, concrete or other similar materials that constitutes visual blight or reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood or is offensive to the senses or is detrimental to nearby property or property values; 
D.  The operation of a junk yard or automobile dismantling yard, except in an industrial zone pursuant to a use permit; 
E.  Any dangerous, unsightly, or blighted condition which is detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the public; 
F.  Any condition in violation of Title 6 (Animals) or Chapter 12.20 of the Orland Municipal Code; 
G.  Any condition in violation of Title 8 (Health and Safety) of the Orland Municipal Code or in violation of the Uniform Fire Code; 
H.  Any condition in violation of Title 15 (Buildings and Construction) of the Orland Municipal Code, or in violation of the California Building Code, the Uniform Housing Code, the California Electrical Code, or the California Plumbing Code; 
I.  Any condition in violation of Title 17 (Zoning) of the Orland Municipal Code; 
J.  Any condition specified in the Orland Municipal Code as a public nuisance; 
K.  Any condition recognized in law or in equity as constituting a public nuisance; 
L.  The maintenance of the exterior of any vacant or unoccupied building or the interior of any such building which is readily visible from any public street or adjacent parcel of property in a state of unsightliness so as to constitute a blighted condition detrimental to the property values in the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare; 
M.  The draining or allowing or suffering to be drained any sewage into or onto the ground of any premises, whether or not occupied or improved, except that sewage may be properly disposed of in an adequate private sewage disposal system as otherwise permitted by law; 
N.  Any unimproved real property or improved, but unoccupied real property which has become a dumping ground for litter, garbage, junk, debris, discarded vehicles, vehicle parts and/or vehicle hulks, and which real property has been subject of two or more written requests by the city to remove litter, garbage, junk, debris, discarded vehicles, vehicle parts and/or vehicle hulks from the property within a twelve (12) month time period or which has been subject to abatement action on one or more occasions by the city. Once proceedings have been commenced pursuant to this chapter to declare property a public nuisance under this subsection, no such property shall be deemed to be in compliance with this chapter solely because such property thereafter becomes occupied. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.310 - Hearing notice. 
A.  Whenever the responsible official has inspected or caused to be inspected any premises and has found and determined that such premises are in violation of this chapter, he/she shall commence proceedings to cause abatement of the substandard building and/or public nuisance as provided herein. 
B.  The responsible official shall issue a notice directed to the record owner of the premises. The notice shall contain: 
1.  The street address and such other description as is required to identify the premises; 
2.  A statement that the building official has found the building or structure to be substandard with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to render the building or structure substandard under the provisions of this chapter and/or a statement that the responsible official has found the premises constitutes a public nuisance with a brief and concise description of the conditions which constitute the public nuisance; 
3.  A statement advising that, in accordance with Sections 17274 and 24436.5 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, a tax deduction may not be allowed for interest, taxes, depreciation, or amortization paid or incurred in the taxable year; 
4.  An order to the owner to appear before the abatement hearing officer at a stated time, but in no event less than thirty (30) calendar days after having mailed such notice, to show cause why the premises should not be declared a substandard building and/or a public nuisance and the same abated in accordance with this chapter; 
5.  A statement advising the owner that he/she has the option of voluntarily abating the substandard building and/or public nuisance prior to the date set for hearing. If the owner chooses voluntary abatement, such abatement must be completed prior to the hearing date. The owner must advise the responsible official in writing that he/she will voluntarily abate the substandard building and/or public nuisance, and the proposed date of completion. The responsible official will inspect the premises on the completion date, and if the substandard building and/or public nuisance has been abated, the hearing will be taken off calendar. The owner may request a continuance of the hearing pursuant to Section 14.05.410 of this chapter; 
6.  A statement that the decision and order of the abatement hearing officer after the hearing is a final decision and order and is subject only to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5; 
7.  A statement that if, prior to compliance, the substandard building or conditions in the building or on the property or the public nuisance becomes an immediately dangerous building as defined in Chapter 14.02 or an immediately dangerous condition as defined in Chapter 14.03, the city may abate the immediately dangerous building as provided in Chapter 14.02 or the city may abate the immediately dangerous condition as provided in Chapter 14.03 of this title; 
8.  A statement advising the owner whether the city elects to seek its attorneys' fees in the abatement proceeding pursuant to Section 14.01.070 of this title; 
9.  A statement that every owner of property within the city is liable to the city for the total cost of abatement proceedings undertaken pursuant to this chapter on his/her property; 
10.  A statement about how and where interested persons may contact the responsible official or his/her designee about the hearing notice. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.320 - Service and method of service. 
A.  Service of Hearing Notice. The hearing notice, and any amended or supplemental notice, shall be served upon the record owner, and posted on the property, and one copy thereof shall be served on each of the following, if known to the responsible official or disclosed from official public records: 
1.  The holder of any mortgage or deed of trust or other lien or encumbrance of record; 
2.  The owner or holder of any lease of record; and 
3.  Any known tenants actually occupying the property or that portion affected by the hearing notice. 
B.  Method of Service. Service of the hearing notice may be made upon all persons entitled thereto, either by personal delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested. Service may be made upon the record owner at his/her/their address as it appears on the latest equalized assessment roll of Glenn County, or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, or as known to the responsible official. Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of mailing. A copy of the hearing notice and any amended or supplemental notice shall also be posted on the premises. 
In lieu of personal service or service by certified mail, service of the hearing notice and any amended or supplemental notice may be made as follows: 
1.  In the event that service by certified return receipt mail cannot be effected or the recipient cannot be personally served, service may be made by substituted service. Substituted service may be accomplished as follows: 
a.  By leaving a copy during usual business hours in the recipient's business with the person who is apparently in charge, and by thereafter mailing by first class mail a copy to the recipient at the address where the copy was left; or 
b.  By leaving a copy at the recipient's dwelling or usual place of abode in the presence of a competent member of the household and thereafter mailing by first class mail a copy to the recipient at the address where the copy was left. 
2.  In the event the recipient refuses to accept certified return receipt mail or cannot be personally served and has a property manager or rental agency overseeing the premises, substituted service may be made as set forth in subsection (B)(1) of this section upon the property manager or rental agency. 
3.  If the recipient lives out of state and will not accept certified return receipt mail, then service may be made by first class mail. 
4.  If the recipient cannot be located or service cannot be effected as set forth in this section, service may be made by publication in an Orland newspaper of general circulation which is most likely to give actual notice to the owner. Service shall be deemed sufficient when it is accomplished pursuant to Government Code Section 6062. 
C.  Failure to Serve. The failure of the responsible official to serve any person required herein to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other persons duly served or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed on him by the provisions of this chapter. The failure of any person served pursuant to this section to receive such notice and order shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this section. 
D.  Proof of Service. Proof of service of the hearing notice shall be certified to at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting service, declaring the time, date and manner in which service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt returned in acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail shall be affixed to the copy of the hearing notice retained by the responsible official. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.330 - Notice of pendency of action—Notice of final disposition of action. 
A.  Recordation of Notice of Pendency of Action. Concurrent with service of the notice of hearing, the responsible official shall record a notice of pendency of action with the county recorder. The responsible official shall instruct the county recorder to record the notice and index it in the property index as well as in the name of each owner of record as shown in the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, and/or as known to the responsible official. The notice shall be substantially in the following form: 
NOTICE OF PENDENCY OF ACTION 
 NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that pursuant to Orland Municipal Code Title 14, Chapter 14.05, an administrative abatement action was commenced on _______ , by the City of Orland against the property described herein and the action is now pending. 
 The action alleges that the property is in violation of Orland Municipal Code Chapter 14.05 in that it constitutes a substandard building and/or public nuisance and that such substandard building and/or public nuisance must be abated. 
 As of the date of commencement of the abatement action, the name and address of the record owner of the property described herein is: _____ . 
 The real property against which the abatement action is pending is that certain real property commonly known as _______ , Assessor Parcel Number _____ , and more particularly described in Exhibit A, attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein. 
  
CITY OF ORLAND 
  
Dated: 
  
Name of Officer 
B.  Recordation of Final Disposition of Action. The responsible official shall record a notice of final disposition of action within fifteen (15) days following the earlier of the following dates: (1) the date the responsible official verifies both voluntary compliance in abating the substandard building and/or public nuisance and payment of all accrued costs of abatement to which the city is entitled pursuant to this title; or (2) the date of final resolution of the abatement action. The notice of final disposition of action shall be substantially in the following form: 
NOTICE OF FINAL 
DISPOSITION OF ACTION 
 NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT pursuant to Orland Municipal Code Title 14, Chapter 14.05: 
 1. Final disposition has been reached in the administrative abatement action referenced in that notice of pendency of action recorded on ;aurle; , in Book _____ , at Page _____ , of the Official Records of Glenn County, California. 
 2. The City of Orland does hereby withdraw the above-referenced notice of pendency of action. 
 3. The above-referenced notice of pendency of action affected that certain real property commonly known as _______ , Assessor Parcel Number _____ , and more particularly described in Exhibit A, attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein. 
  
CITY OF ORLAND 
  
Dated: 
  
Name of Officer 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.340 - Standards. 
Any premises declared to be a substandard building or public nuisance under this chapter shall be abated by the owner in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Orland Municipal Code, the California Building Code, or any other code adopted by the city. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.410 - Hearings—Generally. 
A.  Hearing by Abatement Hearing Officer. At the time fixed in the notice required by Section 14.05.310 of this chapter, the abatement hearing officer shall proceed to hear the testimony of the responsible official or designee and the testimony of the owner and other competent persons, including members of the public, respecting the condition of the building, structure, and/or premises. 
B.  Record. A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape recording, or by any other means of permanent recording determined to be appropriate by the abatement hearing officer. If the owner or other competent party seeks judicial review of the decision of the abatement hearing officer, preparation of a record of the proceeding shall be governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5, as presently written or hereinafter amended. 
C.  Reporting. The proceedings at the hearing may also be reported by a certified shorthand reporter if such reporter is provided by the owner or other competent party at his/her own expense. 
D.  Continuances. The abatement hearing officer may, upon request of the owner, other competent party, or the responsible official, grant continuances from time to time for good cause shown, or upon his/her own motion. 
E.  Reasonable Dispatch. The abatement hearing officer and its representatives shall proceed with reasonable dispatch to conclude any matter before him/her. Due regard shall be shown for the convenience and necessity of any parties or their representatives. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.420 - Conduct of hearing. 
A.  Rules. Hearings need not be conducted according to the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. 
B.  Exclusion of Evidence. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
C.  Rights of Parties. Each party shall have these rights, among others: 
1.  To testify and call others to testify on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing; 
2.  To introduce documentary and physical evidence; 
3.  To rebut the evidence against him/her; 
4.  To represent himself or herself or to be represented by anyone of his/her choice; 
5.  If a party does not proficiently speak or understand the English language, he/she may provide an interpreter, at the party's own cost, to translate for the party. An interpreter shall not have had any involvement in the issues of the case prior to the hearing. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.430 - Inspection of property. 
A.  The abatement hearing officer may, with the owner(s)' consent, or by inspection warrant, inspect the building or premises involved in the hearing prior to, during, or after the hearing, provided that: 
1.  Notice of such inspection shall be given to the parties before the inspection is made; 
2.  The parties are given an opportunity to be present during the inspection; 
3.  The abatement hearing officer shall state for the record during the hearing, or file a written statement after the hearing for inclusion in the hearing record, upon completion of the inspection, the material facts observed and the conclusion drawn therefrom; and 
4.  Each party then shall have a right to rebut or explain the matters so stated by the abatement hearing officer either for the record during the hearing or by filing a written statement after the hearing for inclusion in the hearing record. 
B.  Neither inspection warrant nor the owner(s)' consent to inspect the building and surrounding properties is required if such inspection can be made from areas in which the general public has access or with permission of other persons authorized to provide access to the property on which the building is located. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.440 - Form and contents of decision—Finality of decision. 
A.  If it is shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the owner has violated provisions of this chapter, then the abatement hearing officer shall order the owner to commence abatement of the substandard building and/or public nuisance not later than fifteen (15) calendar days after issuance of the decision. The abatement hearing officer shall further order the owner to complete the abatement within such time as specified by the abatement hearing officer, or in the alternative, within the time specified by the responsible official. The abatement hearing officer shall also order that if the owner fails, refuses or neglects to abate the substandard building and/or public nuisance within the time set forth in its order that the city may abate the substandard building and/or public nuisance in such a manner as may be ordered by the responsible official pursuant to this chapter or institute an action to compel compliance with its order, and the expense thereof made a lien on the property. 
B.  The decision of the abatement hearing officer is a final decision, subject only to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5, and shall be in the form of an order and shall contain findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented, and the requirements with which the owner shall comply. The order shall also inform the owner that the decision of the abatement hearing officer is a final decision and that the time for judicial review is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
C.  The effective date of the decision and order and the period or periods within which the owner must comply with the requirements of the decision shall be as stated in the decision. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.450 - Service of the final decision and order. 
A copy of the final decision and order of the abatement hearing officer shall be served and posted in accordance with Section 14.05.320 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.510 - Compliance with decision and order. 
A.  General. After any decision and order of the abatement hearing officer made pursuant to this chapter is final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect, or refuse to obey any such order or decision. Any such person who fails to comply with any such order or decision is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
B.  Failure to Obey Order. If, after the decision and order of the abatement hearing officer has become final, the person(s) to whom such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the responsible official may (1) cause such person to be prosecuted under subsection A of this section; (2) institute any appropriate action to abate such substandard building and/or public nuisance; or (3) abate the substandard building and/or public nuisance in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or as provided in the order of the abatement hearing officer. In any action brought by the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the prevailing party shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney's fees and costs whether or not the matter proceeds to judgment. 
C.  Failure to Commence or Complete Work. Whenever the required abatement is not commenced or completed within the time limits prescribed in the final decision and order of the abatement hearing officer, the following shall apply: 
1.  If the substandard building and/or public nuisance is in such condition as to make the premises immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or its occupants, or if the building official determines that abatement of the substandard building or public nuisance cannot be accomplished without making it immediately dangerous to life, limb, property or safety of the public or its occupants, the building official shall order the building, structure or premises to be vacated pursuant to a notice to vacate as provided in this subsection (C)(1) of this section. 
a.  Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served as provided in Section 14.05.320 of this chapter, be posted at or upon each exit of the building or upon any individual unit to be vacated, and shall be substantially in the following form: 
DANGEROUS BUILDING 
DO NOT ENTER UNSAFE TO OCCUPY 
  You are hereby ordered and required to vacate this building/premises on or before _______ . 
 It is a misdemeanor pursuant to Orland Municipal Code Sections 14.05.040 and 14.05.510 to occupy this building/premises on or after _______ or to remove or deface this notice. 
  
Building Official 
  
City of Orland 
  
By 
b.  Whenever a notice to vacate is posted, the building official shall specify in the notice and order to vacate the conditions which necessitate an immediate notice to vacate. 
c.  No person shall remain in or enter any building, structure or premises which has been so posted, except that entry may be made to abate the substandard building and/or public nuisance under permit without the consent of the building official. No person shall remove or deface any such notice after it is posted until the abatement required by the abatement hearing officer has been completed, and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the Orland Municipal Code and the California Building Code, if necessary. Any person violating this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
d.  The building official may permit occupancy of the building or individual units if the owner corrects those problems which pose an immediate danger to life, limb, property and safety of the public or occupants. 
e.  Whenever a notice to vacate has been posted and served in accordance with this subsection, the building official may order the immediate disconnection of any utility services determined to be hazardous by the building official. If the sewer service is ordered disconnected pursuant to this section, city water service to such building shall also be disconnected in order to prevent the accumulation of sewage on such premises. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail to disconnect utility services when ordered to do so pursuant to the provisions of this subsection. 
f.  Prior to issuing a notice to vacate, the building official shall obtain approval of the city attorney or his/her representative. 
2.  To the extent allowed by law, the responsible official may, in addition to any other remedy herein provided, cause the substandard building and/or public nuisance to be abated as set forth in the decision and order of the abatement hearing officer. Any such abatement shall be accomplished and the cost thereof paid and recovered in the manner hereinafter provided in this chapter. 
3.  No action shall be taken by the responsible official to abate a substandard building and/or public nuisance pursuant to this chapter without prior approval of the city attorney's office. 
D.  Enforcement of the decision and order of the abatement hearing officer made pursuant to this chapter shall be stayed during the pendency of a properly and timely filed appeal therefrom to the superior court. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.520 - Extension of time. 
Upon receipt of (1) an application for an extension of time from the person required to conform to the final decision and order, (2) an agreement by such person that he/she will comply with the order if allowed additional time, and (3) an application for any required permits accompanied by the required permit fees, the responsible official may, in his/her discretion, grant an extension of time, not to exceed an additional one hundred twenty (120) days, within which to complete the required abatement, if the responsible official determines that such an extension of time will not create or perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property. The responsible official's authority to extend time is limited to the physical abatement of the substandard building and/or public nuisance and will not in any way affect or extend the time to appeal the final decision and order or challenge any order of the abatement hearing officer. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.530 - Interference with work prohibited. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city, or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any substandard building and/or premises on which a public nuisance exists which has been ordered abated and/or vacated under the provisions of this chapter whenever such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city, person having an interest or estate in such building premises, or purchaser is engaged in the work of abating and/or vacating any such building or premises, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or is performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.540 - Performance of work. 
A.  Procedure. When any abatement work is to be done pursuant to Section 14.05.510 of this chapter by the city or its agents or contractors, the responsible official shall provide the final order or decision to the city engineer and the work shall be accomplished by city personnel or by private contract under the direction of such engineer and the responsible official. Plans and specifications therefor may be prepared by such engineer, or he/she may employ such architectural and engineering assistance on a contract basis as he/she may deem reasonably necessary. 
B.  Costs. The cost of such abatement work shall be paid from the abatement repair and demolition fund, and may be made a lien against the property involved and may be made a personal obligation of the property owner, as the abatement hearing officer shall determine is appropriate pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.610 - Liability for costs of abatement. 
A.  Every owner of property within the city is liable to the city for the total cost of abatement proceedings undertaken pursuant to this chapter on his or her property accrued to the date of final resolution of the proceedings, including the recordation of liens pursuant to this chapter, if any. Such costs shall include without limitation, costs of inspection, including inspections which form the basis of the building official's notice and order; expenses associated with issuing and serving the building official's notice and order and the final decision and order, if any; expenses associated with the appeal of the building official's notice and order, if any; attorneys' fees pursuant to Section 14.01.070 of this title, if any; the cost of repair, securement, demolition or any other abatement of the dangerous building or structure; costs of title reports, placing or removing liens and closing the file, and any other related administrative costs. 
B.  The city manager or his/her designee, in his/her sole discretion, may waive any portion of or all of the costs of abatement proceedings in the event the owner of the property voluntarily complies with the building official's notice and order. 
C.  All costs not otherwise paid by the owner or waived by the city manager shall be collected pursuant to the procedures set forth in this part of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.620 - Account of expenses—Filing of report—Contents. 
A.  The responsible official shall keep an itemized account of all expenses incurred by the city in the abatement of the substandard building and/or public nuisance including, without limitation, those costs and expenses set forth in Section 14.05.610 of this chapter. 
B.  The responsible official shall keep an itemized account of all revenue received by the city for any sale of materials pursuant to Section 14.05.615 of this chapter. 
C.  Upon the completion of the work, the responsible official shall prepare a report, verified by the city official in charge of doing the work, specifying the following information: 
1.  The work done in abating the substandard building and/or public nuisance, if any; 
2.  The itemized and total cost of the abatement proceedings undertaken pursuant to this chapter including, without limitation, those costs and expenses set forth in Section 14.05.610 of this chapter; 
3.  The itemized and total revenue received from any sale of materials pursuant to Section 14.05.615 of this chapter; 
4.  The net expense of the abatement (gross expenses less the revenue from any sale of materials pursuant to Section 14.05.615 of this chapter); 
5.  A description of the real property upon which the building or structure is or was located; 
6.  The names and addresses of the persons entitled to notice pursuant to Section 14.05.320 of this chapter; 
7.  Notice of the time, date and place when and where the abatement hearing officer will hear and pass upon the report, together with any objections or protests which may be filed by any person interested in or affected by the proposed charge, and shall confirm, reject or modify the report and determine whether the charge shall be made a personal obligation of the property owner(s) and charged as a lien against the property involved; 
8.  A statement that the decision and order of the abatement hearing officer after the hearing is a final decision and order and is subject only to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.625 - Service of the report and notice of hearing. 
A.  The responsible official's report and notice of the hearing shall be posted on the property and served by certified return receipt mail and first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the persons entitled to notice pursuant to Section 14.05.320 of this chapter as their names and addresses appear on the last equalized assessment roll of the county or supplemental roll whichever is more current, if such so appears, or as known to the responsible official. 
B.  Service of the report and notice shall be made at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for hearing. 
C.  All costs associated with service of the report and notice shall be added to total expenses to be reviewed by the abatement hearing officer. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.630 - Making of protests or objections. 
Any person interested in or affected by the proposed charge may file written protests or objections with the responsible official at any time prior to the time set for the hearing on the report of the responsible official or may make an oral protest at the hearing. Each written protest or objection must contain a description of the property in which the signer thereof is interested and the grounds of such protest or objection. The responsible official shall endorse on every such protest or objection the date it was received by him/her. The responsible official shall present such protests or objections to the abatement hearing officer at the time set for the hearing, and no other written protests or objections shall be considered. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.635 - Nature of protests to be heard. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection B of this section, the protests heard by the abatement hearing officer pursuant to Section 14.05.640 of this chapter shall relate only to the charge to be made for abatement, and no protest concerning the action of the responsible official or the abatement hearing officer in ordering the abatement of the substandard building and/or public nuisance shall be heard at this time. 
B.  Where the charge to be made is the result of summary abatement pursuant to Chapter 14.02 or 14.03 of this title, the abatement hearing officer may determine whether or not the action to summarily abate was proper, and may modify the charge or not, as he or she may deem proper. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.640 - Hearing of protests and confirmation, rejection or modification of report. 
Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing, the abatement hearing officer shall hear and pass upon the report of the responsible official together with any such objections or protests and shall confirm, reject or modify the report. The abatement hearing officer may make such revision, correction or modification of the report or the charge as it may deem just; and in the event the abatement hearing officer is satisfied with the correctness of the charge, the responsible official's report (as submitted or as revised, corrected or modified) together with the charge, shall be confirmed or rejected. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.645 - Order of abatement hearing officer. 
The abatement hearing officer may order that the charge be made a personal obligation of each owner of the property and charged against the property involved as a lien. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.650 - Final decision and order—Service. 
A.  The decision and order of the abatement hearing officer is a final decision subject only to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
B.  A copy of the final decision and order of the abatement hearing officer shall be served in accordance with Section 14.05.320 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.655 - Personal obligation and lien against the property. 
A.  If the abatement hearing officer orders that a charge shall be a personal obligation of the property owner, it shall direct the city attorney or the city manager to collect the same on behalf of the city by the use of all appropriate legal remedies. 
B.  If the abatement hearing officer orders that the charge shall be charged against the property as a lien, then in the event the charge confirmed by the abatement hearing officer is not paid within five days after service of the decision of the abatement hearing officer, the charge shall constitute a lien on the property. The lien shall continue until the amount of the charge and interest thereon at the legal rate, computed from the date of confirmation of the charge, is paid or until it is discharged of record. 
C.  The lien shall have the priority of a judgment lien. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.660 - Recordation of lien. 
After notice to the property owner(s) as provided in Section 14.05.670 of this chapter, the city clerk shall record a notice of lien with the county recorder within sixty (60) days after the confirmation of the charge by the abatement hearing officer. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.665 - Form of notice of lien. 
The notice of lien shall be substantially in the following form: 
NOTICE OF LIEN 
 NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT pursuant to Orland Municipal Code Chapter 14.05, the City of Orland undertook the following actions: 
 l. On _______ , the Abatement Hearing Officer of the City of Orland ordered the abatement of a substandard building and/or public nuisance on the real property described herein. 
 2. On _______ , the City of Orland abated the substandard building and/or public nuisance. 
 3. On _______ , the City of Orland confirmed the cost of the abatement of the substandard building and/or public nuisance and charged such cost as a lien against the real property described herein. 
 4. As of the date of recordation of this Notice of Lien, the cost of the abatement has not yet been paid, and the City of Orland does hereby claim a lien on the real property described herein for the net expense of abating the substandard building and/or public nuisance on the property in the amount of ($ _____ ) and this amount shall be a lien until the real property described herein until the full amount, with interest at the legal rate, has been paid in full and discharged of record. 
 5. As of the date of recordation of this Notice of Lien, the name and address of the record owner of the property described below is: _____ . 
 6. The real property upon which the lien is claimed is that certain real property commonly known as _______________ , Assessor Parcel Number _____ , and more particularly described in Exhibit A, attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein. 
  
CITY OF ORLAND 
  
Dated: 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.670 - Service of notice of lien. 
A.  The city clerk shall serve the notice of lien on the owner of record of the property on which the substandard building and/or public nuisance was located based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current. 
B.  The notice of lien shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Article 3 (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. If the owner of record cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten (10) days and by publication in an Orland newspaper of general circulation pursuant to Government Code Section 6062. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.05.675 - Discharge of lien. 
In the event the lien is discharged, released or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, the city clerk shall record a notice of discharge, substantially in the following form: Hc; DISCHARGE OF LIEN 
 NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT pursuant to Orland Municipal Code Chapter 14.05, the City of Orland undertook the following actions: 
 1. On _______ , the Abatement Hearing Officer of the City of Orland ordered the abatement of a substandard building and/or public nuisance on the real property described herein. 
 2. On _______ , the City of Orland abated the substandard building and/or public nuisance. 
 3. On _______ , the City of Orland confirmed the cost of the abatement of the substandard building and/or public nuisance and charged such cost as a lien against the real property described herein. 
 4. The amount of the lien claimed by the City of Orland was ($ _____ ), with interest at the legal rate. 
 5. As of the date of recordation of this Discharge of Lien, the name and address of the record owner of the property described below is: _____ . 
 6. The lien claimed by the City of Orland has been discharged, released or satisfied and the City of Orland no longer claims a lien on the real property described herein. 
 7. The real property upon which the lien was claimed is that certain real property commonly known as _______ , Assessor Parcel Number _______ , and more particularly described in Exhibit A, attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein. 
  
CITY OF ORLAND 
  
Dated: 
  
Name of Officer 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
Chapter 14.06 - ABATEMENT—WEEDS AND RUBBISH 
Sections: 
 
14.06.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "weed abatement code," may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as "this chapter." 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.020 - Authority and administration. 
The fire chief is authorized to administer and enforce all provisions of this chapter including, but not limited to, determining when weeds and/or rubbish are hazardous, dangerous or potentially injurious. As used herein, the term "fire chief' shall include his or her authorized representatives and/or designees. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.030 - Violations of chapter. 
Any person violating the provisions of this section or any other provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each day such violation continues. Any person violating the provisions of this section or any other provision of this chapter shall also be liable for civil penalties of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day the violation continues. The city attorney may seek civil penalties in any civil action brought to enforce any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.040 - Abatement hearing officer. 
Subject to ratification by a majority of the city council, the city manager shall appoint the abatement hearing officer(s) to conduct proceedings under this chapter. The term of office of the abatement hearing officer shall be two years. The city manager may designate more than one abatement hearing officer, however, no more than one abatement hearing officer shall preside over any particular proceeding under this chapter. The city manager may re-appoint an abatement hearing officer for successive two-year terms. Compensation for the abatement hearing officer(s) may be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.050 - Abatement—Summary abatement. 
Any property which, after inspection, is determined by the fire chief to be in violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated in accordance with the procedure specified in this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the abatement, pursuant to Chapter 14.03, or any violation of this chapter which constitutes an immediately dangerous condition, as that term is defined in Chapter 14.03 of this title. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.110 - Notice and order of fire chief. 
A.  Commencement of Proceeding. Whenever the fire chief has inspected or caused to be inspected any property and has found and determined that such property is in violation of this chapter, he/she shall commence proceedings to abate the public nuisance by requiring the removal of the accumulation or proliferation of weeds, rubbish, or other combustible material. 
B.  Notice and Order. The fire chief shall issue a written notice and order directed to the record owner of the property. The notice and order shall contain: 
1.  The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the property upon which the public nuisance is located; 
2.  A statement that the fire chief has found the property to be in violation of this chapter with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to violate this chapter; 
3.  A statement that the fire chief has determined that the public nuisance must be abated by removing the accumulation or proliferation of weeds, rubbish, or other combustible material on or before ten (10) days from the date of the notice and order; 
4.  Statements advising that if the required abatement is not completed within the time specified, the fire chief may proceed to abate the public nuisance by removing the accumulation or proliferation of weeds, rubbish, or other combustible material and charging the costs thereof against the property and its owner; 
5.  Statements advising: 
a.  That any person having any record title or legal interest in the property may appeal, from the notice and order or any action of the fire chief to the abatement hearing officer, provided the appeal is made in writing, as provided in this chapter, and filed with the fire chief on or before the required date of compliance as set forth in the notice and order, 
b.  That failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all rights to an administrative hearing and a final determination of the matter. The final order is subject only to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5, 
c.  That failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all rights to contest any fees and/or penalties assessed pursuant to this chapter, with the exception of judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5, 
d.  Whether the city elects to seek its attorneys' fees in the abatement proceeding pursuant to Section 14.01.070 of this title, 
e.  That every owner of property within the city is liable to the city for the total cost of abatement proceedings undertaken pursuant to this chapter on his/her property, 
g.  How and where interested persons may contact the fire chief or his/her designee about the notice and order. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.120 - Service and method of service. 
A.  Service of Notice and Order. The notice and order, and any amended or supplemental notice and order, shall be served upon the record owner, and posted on the property, and one copy thereof shall be served on each of the following, if known to the fire chief, or disclosed from the latest equalized assessment roll of Glenn County or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current: 
1.  The owner; 
2.  Any known leaseholder(s); and 
3.  Any known persons actually occupying the property or occupying that portion affected by the notice and order. 
B.  Method of Service. Service of the notice and order may be made upon all persons entitled thereto, either by personal delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested. Service may be made upon the record owner at his/her/their address as it appears on the latest equalized assessment roll of Glenn County or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, or as known to the fire chief. Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of mailing. A copy of the notice and order and any amended or supplemental notice and order shall also be posted on the property. 
In lieu of personal service or service by certified mail, service of the notice and order and any amended or supplemental notice and order may be made as follows: 
1.  In the event that service by certified return receipt mail cannot be effected or the recipient cannot be personally served, service may be made by substituted service. Substituted service may be accomplished as follows: 
a.  By leaving a copy during usual business hours in the recipient's business with the person who is apparently in charge, and by thereafter mailing by first class mail a copy to the recipient at the address where the copy was left; 
b.  By leaving a copy at the recipient's dwelling or usual place of abode in the presence of a competent member of the household and thereafter mailing by first class mail a copy to the recipient at the address where the copy was left; or 
c.  In the event the recipient has a property manager or rental agency overseeing the property, by leaving a copy during usual business hours with the person who is apparently in charge at the property manager or rental agency's place of business, and by thereafter mailing by first class mail a copy to the recipient at the address where the copy was left. 
2.  If the recipient resides out of the county and will not accept certified return receipt mail, then service may be made by first class mail. 
3.  If the recipient resides in the county and will not accept certified return receipt mail and if three or more documented attempts at personal and/or substituted service have been made without service being effected, then service may be made by first class mail and by posting a copy on the real property where the fire chief has determined that the public nuisance poses an immediate threat to the public safety. 
4.  If the recipient cannot be located or service cannot be effected as set forth in this section, service may be made by publication in an Orland newspaper of general circulation which is most likely to give actual notice to the owner. Service shall be deemed sufficient when it is accomplished pursuant to Government Code Section 6062. 
C.  Failure to Serve. The failure of the fire chief to serve any person required herein to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other persons duly served or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed on him by the provisions of this chapter. The failure of any person served pursuant to this section to receive such notice and order shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this section. 
D.  Proof of Service. Proof of service of the notice and order shall be certified to at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting service, declaring the time, date and manner in which service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt returned in acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail shall be affixed to the copy of the notice and order retained by the fire chief. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.125 - Notice of pendency of action—Notice of final disposition of action. 
A.  Recordation of Notice of Pendency of Action. Concurrent with service of the notice and order, the fire chief shall record a notice of pendency of action with the county recorder. The fire chief shall instruct the county recorder to record the notice and index it in the property index as well as in the name of each owner of record as shown in the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, and/or as known to the fire chief. The notice shall be substantially in the following form: 
NOTICE OF PENDENCY OF ACTION 
 NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that pursuant to Orland Municipal Code Title 14, Chapter 14.06 (Abatement - Weeds and Rubbish), an administrative abatement action was commenced on _______ , by the City of Orland against the property described herein and the action is now pending. 
 The action alleges that the property is in violation of Orland Municipal Code Chapter 14.06 in that it constitutes a public nuisance and that such public nuisance must be abated. 
 As of the date of commencement of the abatement action, the name and address of the record owner of the property described herein is: _____ . 
 The real property against which the abatement action is pending is that certain real property commonly known as _______ , Assessor Parcel Number _____ , and more particularly described in Exhibit A, attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein. 
  
CITY OF ORLAND 
  
Dated: _______ 
  
___________ 
Name of Officer 
B.  Recordation of Final Disposition of Action. The fire chief shall record a notice of final disposition of action within fifteen (15) days following the earlier of the following dates: (1) the date the fire chief verifies both voluntary compliance in abating the public nuisance and payment of all accrued costs of abatement to which the city is entitled pursuant to this title; or (2) the date of final resolution of the abatement action. The notice of final disposition of action shall be substantially in the following form: 
NOTICE OF FINAL 
DISPOSITION OF ACTION 
 NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT pursuant to Orland Municipal Code Title 14, Chapter 14.06 (Abatement - Weeds and Rubbish): 
 1. Final disposition has been reached in the administrative abatement action referenced in that notice of pendency of action recorded on ______ , in Book _______ , at Page _____ , of the Official Records of Glenn County, California. 
 2. The City of Orland does hereby withdraw the above-referenced notice of pendency of action. 
 3. The above-referenced notice of pendency of action affected that certain real property commonly known as ____________ , Assessor Parcel Number __________ , and more particularly described in Exhibit A, attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein. 
  
CITY OF ORLAND 
  
Dated: ________ 
  ___________ 
Name of Officer 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.130 - Standards. 
Any property in violation of this chapter shall be abated by the owner of the property in accordance with the applicable provisions of state and federal law, the Orland Municipal Code, the California Fire Code, or any other code adopted by the city. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.210 - Appeal—Generally. 
A.  Form of Appeal. Any person entitled to service under Section 14.06.120, and any person who is actually occupying the property may appeal from any notice and order or any action of the fire chief under this chapter by filing with the fire department, a written appeal containing: 
1.  A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants in the property involved in the notice and order; 
2.  A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant; 
3.  A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought, and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action should be reversed, modified, or otherwise set aside; 
4.  The signatures of all parties named as appellants, and their official mailing addresses; 
5.  A declaration under penalty of perjury of at least one appellant setting forth the truth of the matters stated in the appeal. 
B.  Processing of Appeal. Upon receipt of any appeal filed and the appeal fee pursuant to this section, the fire chief shall calendar the appeal for hearing before the abatement hearing officer as follows: 
1.  If the appeal is received by the fire chief not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the next regular hearing of the abatement hearing officer, if any, it shall be calendared for hearing at that hearing. 
2.  If the appeal is received by the fire chief on a date less than fifteen (15) days prior to the next regular hearing of the abatement hearing officer, if any, it shall be calendared for hearing at the next subsequent hearing of the abatement hearing officer. 
3.  If more than one appeal is received by the fire chief regarding a notice and order on the same property, all such appeals shall be calendared to be heard at the same hearing of the abatement hearing officer as the last timely appeal received by the fire chief. 
C.  Noticing Appeal for Hearing. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by the fire chief either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at his address shown on the appeal and to all other people receiving the appealed-from notice and order. 
D.  Appeal Fee. The fire chief may collect and require an appeal fee to be paid at the time the written appeal notice is filed pursuant to this section. The appeal fee shall be set by resolution of the city council. The fee shall be calculated to recover the total city costs incurred in the appeal including, but not limited to, staff time to process and handle the appeal, preparation and service of notices, staff appearance at the appeal hearing, and compensation of the abatement hearing officer, if any. No appeal shall proceed without payment of the fee at the time the appeal is filed. The fire chief may waive the appeal fee upon written request for good cause shown. Good cause may include severe economic hardship, significant attempts to comply with the notice and order, and other factors indicating good faith attempts to comply with the order(s). 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.220 - Effect of failure to appeal. 
Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of Section 14.06.210 of this chapter shall constitute an irrevocable waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and a final adjudication of the fire chief's order, or any portion thereof, subject only to review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.230 - Staying of orders under appeal. 
Enforcement of any notice and order of the fire chief issued under this chapter shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.310 - Scope of hearing on appeal. 
Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant in the appeal notice shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.320 - Hearing on appeal—Generally. 
A.  Hearing by Abatement Hearing Officer. At the time fixed in the notice required by Section 14.06.210 of this chapter, the abatement hearing officer shall proceed to hear the testimony of the fire chief or designee and the testimony of the appellant and other competent persons, including members of the public, respecting those matters or issues specifically listed by the appellant in his/her notice of appeal. 
B.  Record. A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape recording, or by any other means of permanent recording determined to be appropriate by the abatement hearing officer. If the appellant seeks judicial review of the decision of the abatement hearing officer, preparation of a record of the proceeding shall be governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5, as presently written or hereinafter amended. 
C.  Reporting. The proceedings at the hearing may also be reported by a certified shorthand reporter if such reporter is provided by the appellant at his/her own expense. 
D.  Continuances. The abatement hearing officer may, upon request of the appellant or the fire chief, grant continuances from time to time for good cause shown, or upon his/her own motion. 
E.  Reasonable Dispatch. The abatement hearing officer and its representatives shall proceed with reasonable dispatch to conclude any matter before him/her. Due regard shall be shown for the convenience and necessity of any parties or their representatives. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.330 - Conduct of hearing. 
A.  Rules. Hearings need not be conducted according to the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. 
B.  Exclusion of Evidence. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
C.  Rights of Parties. Each party shall have these rights, among others: 
1.  To testify and call others to testify on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing; 
2.  To introduce documentary and physical evidence; 
3.  To rebut the evidence against him/her; 
4.  To represent himself or herself or to be represented by anyone of his/her choice; 
5.  If a party does not proficiently speak or understand the English language, he/she may provide an interpreter, at the party's own cost, to translate for the party. An interpreter shall not have had any involvement in the issues of the case prior to the hearing. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.340 - Inspection of property. 
A.  The abatement hearing officer may, with the owner(s)' consent, or by inspection warrant, inspect the property involved in the hearing prior to, during, or after the hearing, provided that: 
1.  Notice of such inspection shall be given to the parties before the inspection is made; 
2.  The parties are given an opportunity to be present during the inspection; 
3.  The abatement hearing officer shall state for the record during the hearing, or file a written statement after the hearing for inclusion in the hearing record, upon completion of the inspection, the material facts observed and the conclusion drawn therefrom; and 
4.  Each party then shall have a right to rebut or explain the matters so stated by the abatement hearing officer either for the record during the hearing or by filing a written statement after the hearing for inclusion in the hearing record. 
B.  Neither inspection warrant nor the owner(s)' consent to inspect the property is required if such inspection can be made from areas in which the general public has access or with permission of other persons authorized to provide access to the subject property. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.350 - Form and contents of decision—Finality of decision. 
A.  If it is shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the property is in violation of this chapter, then the abatement hearing officer shall order the owner of the property to abate the public nuisance and remove the accumulation or proliferation of weeds, rubbish, or other combustible material on the property on or before ten (10) days from the date of the decision. The abatement hearing officer shall also order that if the owner fails, refuses or neglects to abate the public nuisance within the stated time that the city may abate the public nuisance and remove the accumulation or proliferation of weeds, rubbish, or other combustible material on the property pursuant to this chapter or institute an action to compel compliance with its order. 
B.  The decision of the abatement hearing officer is a final decision subject only to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5, and shall be in the form of an order and shall contain findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented, and the requirements which the owner shall comply. The order shall also inform the appellant that the decision of the abatement hearing officer is a final decision and that the time for judicial review is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
C.  The effective date of the decision and order shall be as stated in the decision. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.360 - Service of the final decision and order. 
A copy of the decision and order shall be served on the appellant or appellants personally or sent to him/her/them at the address shown on the appeal(s) by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested and a copy shall be posted on the property. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.410 - Compliance with decision and order. 
A.  General. After the decision and order of the abatement hearing officer or the notice and order of the fire chief made pursuant to this chapter is final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect, or refuse to obey any such order or decision. Any such person who fails to comply with any such order or decision is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
B.  Failure to Obey Order. If, after the decision and order of the abatement hearing officer or the notice and order of the fire chief has become final, the person(s) to whom such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the fire chief may (1) cause such person to be prosecuted under subsection A of this section; (2) institute any appropriate action to abate the property as a public nuisance; and/or (3) abate the public nuisance and remove the accumulation or proliferation of weeds, rubbish, or other combustible material on the property in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or as provided in the order of the abatement hearing officer or fire chief. In any action brought by the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the prevailing party shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney's fees and costs whether or not the matter proceeds to judgment. 
C.  Failure to Complete Work. Whenever the required abatement is not completed within the time limits prescribed in the final decision and order of the abatement hearing officer or the notice and order of the fire chief, in addition to any other remedy provided herein or by law, the fire chief may, to the extent permitted by law, cause the public nuisance to be abated and remove the accumulation or proliferation of weeds, rubbish, or other combustible material on the property. Any such abatement shall be accomplished and the cost thereof paid and recovered in the manner hereinafter provided in this chapter. 
D.  Enforcement of the decision and order of the abatement hearing officer or the notice and order of the fire chief made pursuant to this chapter shall be stayed during the pendency of a properly and timely filed appeal therefrom to the superior court. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.420 - Extension of time. 
The fire chief may, in his/her discretion, grant an extension of time, not to exceed an additional thirty (30) days, within which to complete the required abatement, if the fire chief determines that such an extension of time will not create or perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property. The fire chief's authority to extend time is limited to the physical abatement of the public nuisance and shall not in any way affect or extend the time to appeal a final order or challenge any order of the abatement hearing officer or fire chief. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.430 - Interference with abatement work prohibited. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city, or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any property which has been ordered abated under the provisions of this chapter whenever such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city, person having an interest or estate in such property, or purchaser is engaged in the work of abating the public nuisance, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or is performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.440 - Performance of work of abatement. 
A.  Procedure. When the abatement of the public nuisance is to be done pursuant to Section 14.06.410 of this chapter by the city or its agents or contractors, the work shall be accomplished by city personnel or by private contract under the direction of the fire chief. 
B.  Costs. The cost of abatement of the public nuisance shall be paid from the fire department's specialized services fund, and may be made a special assessment against the property involved, may be made a lien upon the property, and may be made a personal obligation of the property owner, as the fire chief shall determine is appropriate pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.510 - Liability for costs of abatement. 
A.  Every owner of property within the city is liable to the city for the total cost of abatement proceedings undertaken pursuant to this chapter on his or her property, accrued to the date of final resolution of the proceedings, including the recordation of special assessments and/or liens pursuant to this chapter, if any. Such costs shall include, without limitation, costs of inspection, including inspections which form the basis of the fire chief's notice and order; expenses associated with issuing and serving the fire chief's notice and order and the final decision and order, if any; expenses associated with the appeal of the fire chief's notice and order, if any; attorneys' fees pursuant to Section 14.01.070 of this title, if any; the cost of removing the accumulation or proliferation of weeds, rubbish or other combustible material; costs of title reports, creation of a special assessment, placing or removing liens and closing the file, and any other related administrative costs. 
B.  The fire chief or his/her designee, in his/her sole discretion, may waive any portion of or all of the costs of abatement proceedings in the event the owner of the property voluntarily complies with the fire chief's notice and order. 
C.  All costs not otherwise paid by the owner or waived by the fire chief shall be collected pursuant to the procedures set forth in this part of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.520 - Account of expenses—Filing of report—Contents. 
A.  The fire chief shall keep an itemized account of all expenses incurred by the city in abatement actions pursuant to this chapter including, without limitation, those costs and expenses set forth in Section 14.06.510 of this chapter. 
B.  Upon the completion of the work, the fire chief shall prepare a report, verified by the city official in charge of doing the work, specifying the following information: 
1.  The work done in removing the accumulation or proliferation of weeds, rubbish or other combustible material and the net expense of the abatement; 
2.  A description of the real property upon which the public nuisance was located; 
3.  The names and addresses of the persons entitled to notice pursuant to Section 14.06.120 of this chapter; 
4.  Statements advising: 
a.  That any person having any record title or legal interest in the property may appeal the fire chief's report to the abatement hearing officer, provided the appeal is made in writing as provided in Section 14.06.530 of this chapter and filed with the fire department on or before thirty (30) days from the date of the fire chief's report, 
b.  That failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all rights to an administrative hearing and a final determination of the costs of abatement. The final determination is subject only to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.525 - Service of the report. 
A.  The fire chief's report shall be posted on the property and served in accordance with Section 14.06.120 of this chapter. 
B.  All costs associated with service of the report may be added to the total expenses contained in the fire chief's report. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.530 - Appealing the fire chief's report. 
A.  Form of Appeal. Any person entitled to service of the fire chief's report pursuant to Section 14.06.525 may appeal the fire chief's report under this chapter by filing with the fire department on or before thirty (30) days from the date of the fire chief's report, a written appeal containing: 
1.  A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants in the property which is the subject of the fire chief's report; 
2.  A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific portion of the fire chief's report which is protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant; 
3.  A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought, and the reasons why it is claimed the protested portion of the fire chief's report should be reversed, modified, or otherwise set aside; 
4.  The signatures of all parties named as appellants, and their official mailing addresses; 
5.  A declaration under penalty of perjury of at least one appellant setting forth the truth of the matters stated in the appeal. 
B.  Processing of Appeal. Upon receipt of any appeal filed and the appeal fee pursuant to this section, the fire chief shall calendar the appeal for hearing before the abatement hearing officer as follows: 
1.  If the appeal is received by the fire chief not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the next regular hearing of the abatement hearing officer, if any, it shall be calendared for hearing at that hearing. 
2.  If the appeal is received by the fire chief on a date less than fifteen (15) days prior to the next regular hearing of the abatement hearing officer, if any, it shall be calendared for hearing at the next subsequent hearing of the abatement hearing officer. 
3.  If more than one appeal is received by the fire chief regarding a notice and order on the same property, all such appeals shall be calendared to be heard at the same hearing of the abatement hearing officer as the last timely appeal received by the fire chief. 
C.  Noticing Appeal for Hearing. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by the fire chief either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at his address shown on the appeal and to all other people receiving the appealed-from notice and order. 
D.  Appeal Fee. The fire chief may collect and require an appeal fee to be paid at the time the written appeal notice is filed pursuant to this section. The appeal fee shall be set by resolution of the city council. The fee shall be calculated to recover the total city costs incurred in the appeal including, but not limited to, staff time to process and handle the appeal, preparation and service of notices, staff appearance at the appeal hearing, and compensation of the abatement hearing officer, if any. No appeal shall proceed without payment of the fee at the time the appeal is filed. The fire chief may waive the appeal fee upon written request for good cause shown. Good cause may include severe economic hardship, significant attempts to comply with the notice and order, and other factors indicating good faith attempts to comply with the order(s). 
E.  Failure to Appeal. Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this section shall constitute an irrevocable waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and a final adjudication of the fire chief's report, or any portion thereof, subject only to review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.535 - Nature of appeal to be heard. 
The appeals heard by the abatement hearing officer pursuant to Section 14.06.540 of this chapter shall relate only to the charge to be made for abatement, and no protest or appeal concerning the action of the fire chief or the abatement hearing officer in ordering the removal of the accumulation or proliferation of weeds, rubbish or other combustible material shall be considered by the abatement hearing officer. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.540 - Hearing of appeals and confirmation, rejection or modification of report. 
Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing, the abatement hearing officer shall hear the appeal and shall consider and pass upon the report of the fire chief and shall confirm, reject or modify the report. The abatement hearing officer may revise, correct or modify the fire chief's report and the charge as he/she may deem just and shall confirm the fire chief's report and the charge as submitted or as revised, corrected or modified. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.545 - Order of abatement hearing officer. 
Upon the abatement hearing officer's confirmation of the fire chief's report pursuant to Section 14.06.540, the charge shall be declared a special assessment pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 14.06.560, made a personal obligation of each owner of the property pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 14.06.555, and charged against the property involved as a lien pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 14.06.565 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.550 - Final decision and order—Service. 
A.  The decision and order of the abatement hearing officer on the fire chief's report and the charge is a final decision subject only to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
B.  A copy of the final decision and order of the abatement hearing officer shall be served in accordance with Section 14.06.120 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.555 - Personal obligation of owner. 
The charges as set forth in the fire chief's report or the decision and order of the abatement hearing officer shall be a personal obligation of the property owner, and the city attorney or the city manager may collect the same on behalf of the city by the use of all appropriate legal remedies. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.560 - Special assessment. 
A.  In the event the charges as set forth in the fire chief's report or the decision and order of the abatement hearing officer, if any, are not paid within five days after service of the fire chief's report or the decision and order of the abatement hearing officer, the charges as set forth in the fire chief's report or the decision and order of the abatement hearing officer, if any, shall be declared a special assessment against the subject property. 
B.  The fire chief shall present a resolution to the city council to declare a special assessment, and upon passage and adoption of the resolution, shall cause a certified copy of the resolution to be recorded with the county recorder. Upon passage and adoption of the resolution, the fire chief shall also transmit a certified copy thereof to the property owner by certified and first class mail and to the county assessor to add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bills or taxes levied against the subject property for municipal purposes. 
C.  The assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as are provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes are applicable to the special assessment. 
D.  Any assessment or any portion of an assessment levied pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, which has been or becomes paid more than once, which has been or becomes erroneously or illegally collected, or which has been or becomes paid upon an assessment in excess of the amount chargeable, or upon an assessment not chargeable to the person or the property of the person paying the same, under the provisions of this chapter, by reason of a clerical error of the employees or officers of the city or county, may be refunded by order of the city council in the same manner, to the same extent, and under the same conditions as now or hereafter provided by the laws of the city for refund of payments of general or special taxes. 
E.  If the city does not record a notice of abatement lien pursuant to Section 14.06.565 of this chapter, and any real property to which the costs of abatement relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or a lien on a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attached to that property, prior to the date on which the first installment of municipal taxes would become delinquent, then the cost of abatement shall not result in a lien against that real property but shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. 
F.  The assessment and the tax collector's power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the property owner to receive notice. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.565 - Recordation of lien against the property. 
A.  In the event the charges as set forth in the fire chief's report or the decision and order of the abatement hearing officer, if any, are not paid within five days after service of the fire chief's report or the decision and order of the abatement hearing officer, the charges shall constitute a lien on the subject property. The lien shall continue until the amount of the charge and interest thereon at the legal rate, computed from the date of confirmation of the charge, is paid or until it is discharged of record. 
B.  Recordation of a notice of lien as provided in this section has the same effect as recordation of an abstract of a money judgment recorded pursuant to the California Code of Civil Procedure. The lien created has the priority as a judgment lien on real property. 
C.  Service of Notice of Lien. 
1.  Upon determining that the charges as set forth in the fire chief's report or the decision and order of the abatement hearing officer, if any, are not paid within five days after service of the fire chief's report or the decision and order of the abatement hearing officer, the city clerk shall serve the notice of lien on the owner of record of the subject property based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current. 
2.  The notice of lien shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Article 3 (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. If the owner of record cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten (10) days and by publication in an Orland newspaper of general circulation pursuant to Government Code Section 6062. 
D.  After notice to the property owner(s) as provided in this section, the city clerk shall record a notice of lien with the county recorder within fifteen (15) days of the date of service of the notice of lien. 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.570 - Form of notice of lien. 
The notice of lien shall be substantially in the following form: Hc; NOTICE OF LIEN 
 NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT pursuant to Orland Municipal Code Chapter 14.06, the City of Orland undertook the following actions: 
 1. On _______ , the City of Orland ordered the abatement of a public nuisance on the real property described. 
 2. On _______ , the City of Orland abated the public nuisance. 
 3. On _______ , the City of Orland confirmed the cost of the abatement of the public nuisance and charged such cost as a lien against the real property described herein. 
 4. As of the date of recordation of this Notice of Lien, the cost of the abatement has not yet been paid, and the City of Orland does hereby claim a lien on the real property described herein for the net expense of abating the public nuisance on the property in the amount of _______ ($ _____ ) and this amount shall be a lien upon the real property described herein until the full amount, with interest at the legal rate, has been paid in full and discharged of record. 
 5. As of the date of recordation of this Notice of Lien, the name and address of the record owner of the property described below is: _____ . 
 6. The real property upon which the lien is claimed is that certain real property commonly known as _______ , Assessor Parcel Number _______ , and more particularly described in Exhibit A, attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein. 
  
CITY OF ORLAND 
  
Dated: ________ 
  
___________ 
Name of Officer 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
14.06.575 - Discharge of lien. 
In the event the lien is discharged, released or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure or sale of the property, the city clerk shall record a notice of discharge, substantially in the following form: 
DISCHARGE OF LIEN 
 NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT pursuant to Orland Municipal Code Chapter 14.06, the City of Orland undertook the following actions: 
 l. On _______ , the City of Orland ordered the abatement of a public nuisance on the real property described. 
 2. On _______ , the City of Orland abated the public nuisance. 
 3. On _______ , the City of Orland confirmed the cost of the abatement of the public nuisance and charged such cost as a lien against the real property described herein. 
 4. The amount of the lien claimed by the City of Orland was _______ ($ _____ ), with interest at the legal rate. 
 5. As of the date of recordation of this Discharge of Lien, the name and address of the record owner of the property described below is: _____ . 
 6. The lien claimed by the City of Orland has been discharged, released or satisfied and the City of Orland no longer claims a lien on the real property described herein. 
 7. The real property upon which the lien was claimed is that certain real property commonly known as _______ , Assessor Parcel Number _____ , and more particularly described in Exhibit A, attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein. 
  
CITY OF ORLAND 
  
Dated: 
  
Name of Officer 
(Ord. 2005-01 (part))  
Chapter 14.07 - ABATEMENT OF MARIJUANA[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 5, adopted Jan. 4, 2016, changed the title of Ch. 14.07 from "Abatement of Medical Marijuana" to read as herein set out. 
 
14.07.010 - Applicability. 
This chapter may be utilized in the following nuisance circumstances: the cultivation of marijuana; the odor of marijuana detected by any member of the public; or marijuana, visible to any member of the public. 
"Marijuana" shall be defined as set forth in Chapter 8.24 and shall include medical marijuana. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, § 5; Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 5)  
14.07.020 - Abatement procedure. 
A.  The city, through a code enforcement officer or other designees, shall issue a declaration of public nuisance requiring abatement within forty-eight (48) hours after the posting of that declaration in a conspicuous place at the location of the nuisance. The declaration shall contain the following information: 
(i)  The location of the premises. 
(ii)  A description of the specific condition(s) which represent a code violation, and the evidence relied upon to determine the existence of a code violation, except that the city may withhold the identity of a witness if that person requests and if such action is reasonable under the circumstances. 
(iii)  The date and time when abatement must be completed to avoid any further action from the city. 
(iv)  A statement that, to avoid the imposition of a civil penalty under subsection (c) below, the offending condition(s) must be abated by the deadline set forth in the declaration. 
(v)  A statement that, if the nuisance is not abated by the deadline set forth in the declaration, the city will issue a notice entitled, "NOTICE OF HEARING TO DETERMINE EXISTENCE OF PUBLIC NUISANCE AND TO ABATE IN WHOLE OR PART," at which time the city will present evidence of the listed code violations and request the mayor or, at the mayor's discretion, the city council, order the public nuisance be abated and impose a civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for each day that the nuisance remains unabated. 
(vi)  A statement that, in any administrative or court proceeding to enforce the abatement order the prevailing party is entitled to recover reasonable attorney fees from the other party or parties to the action, if the city elects, at the initiation of an individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorney fees. In no action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding shall an award of attorney fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorney fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. 
B.  Failure to Voluntarily Abate Nuisance. If after the expiration of the notice period the nuisance has not been abated, the city shall issue a notice, entitled, "NOTICE OF HEARING TO DETERMINE EXISTENCE OF PUBLIC NUISANCE." This notice shall be in the substantially the same form as the notice described in Section 14.07.20(vi) above. The hearing shall be before the mayor or, at the mayor's discretion, the city council, and shall be held not less than five days after service of the notice on the owner/occupier of the property. The hearing shall be public; however, if the owner/occupier believes that the hearing should not be public, the owner/occupier shall notify the mayor of the reason(s) therefore at least three days prior to the hearing. The request shall be considered. 
C.  Service of Notice. The notice shall be served either personally, or by certified mail, the owner of the property and, if applicable, the occupier of the property. The notice shall also be posted on the subject property. 
D.  Hearing on Notice. At the hearing, the city shall present evidence of unlawful cultivation of marijuana to the mayor/city council. The owner/occupier, if present, shall also be entitled to present evidence. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the mayor/city council shall prepare a written order, which shall include findings of fact and an order. If the mayor/city council finds a public nuisance exists, the officer shall direct the owner/occupier to abate the public nuisance by a date certain. The order shall also contain authorization for the city to abate the nuisance pursuant to this chapter, if in the mayor's/council's discretion, it finds that abatement by the city is warranted. The order shall set forth the times within which the work shall be commenced and completed and shall be mailed to the owner/occupier by certified mail. 
E.  Abatement by City. If upon finding a violation of this section exists, the owner/occupier fails to abate the nuisance as ordered by the mayor/city council, the city shall take steps to obtain and execute an inspection/administrative abatement warrant pursuant to this chapter. 
F.  Finding of No Public Nuisance. If the mayor/city council determines that the property owner is not responsible for the public nuisance, the city shall not assess removal and/or administration costs against the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, § 5)  
14.07.030 - Civil penalties and attorneys fees. 
A.  Civil Penalty. Fines in the amount of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day shall be imposed upon the property owner/occupier as deemed in the above-described order for each day the property remains in violation of this section upon expiration of the time for abatement set forth in a final order under Section 14.07.20 (D). 
B.  Attorneys Fees. Attorneys fees shall be recoverable as set forth in Section 14.01.070. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, § 5)  
14.07.040 - Violation as criminal offense. 
Every person who, in violation of the provisions of Section 8.24.030 of the Orland Municipal Code, maintains, permits or allows marijuana to be grown upon his or her property or premises, and every person occupying, renting or leasing the property or premises of another who maintains, permits or allows marijuana to be grown thereon in violation of that section is guilty of an infraction punishable as set forth in Section 1.12.010 of the Orland Municipal Code. After written notice is provided to any such person of such violation, the continued existence of such violation for each and every day after the service of such notice shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, § 5)  
14.07.050 - Liability for costs of abatement. 
Every owner of property within the city is liable to the city for the total cost of abatement proceedings undertaken pursuant to this chapter on his or her property, accrued to the date of final resolution of the proceedings, including the recordation of special assessments and/or liens pursuant to this chapter, if any. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, § 5)  
14.07.060 - Nuisance abatement lien (Government Code Section 38773.1). 
A.  Costs of Abatement Borne by Property Owner. In any action to determine the existence of and/or abate a public nuisance, the owner of the property declared to be a public nuisance shall be responsible for the city's costs incurred herein. Such costs shall constitute a lien on the subject property. 
B.  Notice of Lien. The city shall provide notice prior to the recordation of the lien to the owner of record of the parcel of land on which the nuisance is maintained, based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current. 
C.  Service of Notice. The notice shall be served in the same manner as summons in a civil action in accordance with Article 3 (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. If the owner of record, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten (10) days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county in which the property is located pursuant to Section 6062 of the Government Code. 
D.  Contents of Lien. A nuisance abatement lien authorized by this section shall specify the amount of the lien, the name of the agency on whose behalf the lien is imposed, the date of the abatement order, the street address, legal description and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel. 
E.  Recordation of Lien. A nuisance abatement lien shall be recorded in the county recorder's office in the county in which the parcel of land is located and from the date of recording shall have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien. 
F.  Discharge of Lien. In the event that the lien is discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the information specified in subsection D. of this section shall be recorded by the city. A nuisance abatement lien and the release of the lien shall be indexed in the grantor-grantee index. 
G.  Foreclosure of Lien. A nuisance abatement lien may be foreclosed by an action brought by the city for a money judgment. 
H.  Recovery of Costs of Recording. The city may recover from the property owner any costs incurred regarding the processing and recording of the lien and providing notice to the property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien. 
I.  In any action, administrative proceeding or special proceeding to abate a nuisance in which the city elects, at the initiation of the action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its attorneys' fees, the prevailing party in the action or proceeding shall recover its attorneys' fees incurred in the action or proceeding. In no action, administrative proceeding or special proceeding shall an award of attorneys' fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. "Prevailing party" shall not include a party who complies with a notice of violation issued by the city or an order in any action, administrative proceeding or special proceeding. Attorney fees shall include fees for the services of the city attorney or his or her assistant and deputies, calculated based on the effective hourly rate of such attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, § 5)  
14.07.070 - Applicability of other laws. 
To the fullest extent permitted by law, any actions taken under the provisions of this chapter by any public officer or employee of the city of Orland or city of Orland itself, shall not become a personal liability of such person or the liability of the city of Orland. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, § 5; Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 5)  
14.07.080 - Remedies not exclusive. 
The remedies provided herein shall not be the exclusive means of enforcing the provisions of this chapter or the exclusive means available to the city to address problems associated with the cultivation of marijuana, whether for medical or other purposes. The city shall continue to have available to it the ability to pursue abatement of nuisances and other problems related to marijuana cultivation under California Penal Code Sections 372 and 373a and other applicable provisions of law. The city may also pursue the recovery of its abatement costs in the manner provided in Section 8.24 of the Orland Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, § 5)  
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION[1] 
Chapters: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Sections 1 and 2 of Ord. No. 2013-08, adopted Nov. 18, 2013, repealed the former tit. 15, chs. 15.02—15.50, §§ 15.02.010—15.02.120, 15.04.010, 15.04.020, 15.06.010—15.06.030, 15.08.010, 15.08.020, 15.10.010, 15.10.020, 15.12.010, 15.12.020, 15.14.010, 15.14.020, 15.16.010, 15.16.020, 15.20.010—15.20.030, 15.24.010, 15.24.020, 15.28.010, 15.32.010—15.32.060, 15.38.010—15.38.050, 15.42.010—15.42.070, 15.46.010—15.46.210, 15.50.010—15.50.210, 15.54.010, and enacted a new tit. 15 as set out herein. The former tit. 15 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2011-02, adopted May 2, 2011. 
 
Chapter 15.02 - ADMINISTRATIVE CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3, adopted Nov. 21, 2016, repealed Ch. 15.02 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 15.02, §§ 15.02.010—15.02.120, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2. 
 
15.02.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "City of Orland Administrative Code." 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
15.02.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth in this section: 
"Building codes" means the city of Orland building codes and each and every ordinance codified therein as adopted by the city council of the city of Orland by ordinance, including, but not limited to, the 2016 California Building Standards Code published by the International Code Council and contained in Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations; 2016 California Building Code published by the International Code Council and contained in Title 24, Part 2, Volumes 1 and 2 of the California Code of Regulations; 2016 California Residential Code published by the International Code Council and contained in Title 24, Part 2.5 of the California Code of Regulations; 2016 California Electrical Code published by the BNi Building News and contained in Title 24, Part 3 of the California Code of Regulations; 2016 California Mechanical Code published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials and contained in Title 24, Part 4 of the California Code of Regulations; 2016 California Plumbing Code published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials and contained in Title 24, Part 5 of the California Code of Regulations; 2016 California Energy Code published by International Code Council and contained in Title 24, Part 6 of the California Code of Regulations; 2016 California Historical Building Code published by International Code Council and contained in Title 24, Part 8 of the California Code of Regulations; 2016 California Fire Code published by International Code Council and contained in Title 24, Part 9 of the California Code of Regulations; 2016 California Existing Buildings Code published by International Code Council and contained in Title 24, Part 10 of the California Code of Regulations; 2016 California Green Building Standards Code published by International Code Council and contained in Title 24, Part 11 of the California Code of Regulations; 1997 Uniform Housing Code published by the International Conference of Building Officials; and 1997 Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings published by the International Conference of Building Officials. 
"Building official" means the building division manager of the city of Orland or his/her designated representative. 
"Limited agricultural building" means a building meeting the definition of "agricultural building" in Part 2, California Building Code, Volume 1, § 202 and also found on the list set forth in Part 2, California Building Code, Volume 2, Appendix C, § C101.1. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
15.02.030 - Authority having jurisdiction. 
The building official of the city is designated to be the authority having jurisdiction of the city of Orland building codes. The building official shall administer, enforce, and render interpretations of all the provisions of this code and the referenced technical codes. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
15.02.040 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this code is to provide procedures for administration and enforcement of the provisions of the city of Orland building codes and to adopt and enforce rules and regulations supplemental to this code as may be deemed necessary to clarify the application of the provisions of this code. Such interpretations, rules, and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this code. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
15.02.050 - Adoption by reference. 
The Orland Municipal Code, the 2016 Edition of the California Building Standards Code, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, 1997 Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings as listed above in Section 15.02.020 by reference without further publication, published by the International Code Council, the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, the BNi Building News, and the International Conference of Building Officials, is hereby adopted and made part of this title as though fully set forth herein to provide the procedures for administration and enforcement of the provisions of the city of Orland building codes. One copy of the codes shall be kept on file in the building department and shall be available for use and examination by the public. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
15.02.060 - Right of entry. 
The code enforcement officer, the fire chief, the building official, and/or their designees shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property as provided for in Section 14.01.020 of the city of Orland Municipal Code to enforce the provisions of this title, or for the purpose of making any inspection, re-inspection, or test of any work performed pursuant to this title. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
15.02.080 - Violation—Nuisance. 
Any violation of any code and/or uniform code as adopted and amended by ordinance shall be, and the same is declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
15.02.090 - Enforcement. 
Unless otherwise set forth in this title, the building official or his/her designated representative shall enforce the provisions of this title pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.08 to 1.10, inclusive of, the city of Orland Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
15.02.100 - Penalties. 
The following penalties shall apply to any violation of a provision of this title, unless a different penalty is otherwise established by the city council and specifically set forth by ordinance: 
A.  Violation of any provision of this title shall be an administrative violation per the city of Orland Municipal Code. In addition to enforcement by any procedure set forth inclusive, any violation of this title shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.  Each of the sanctions for administrative violations identified per the city of Orland Municipal Code shall be available for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  In addition to the criminal penalty set and, based upon the standards for the imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in the city of Orland Municipal Code, a violation of any provision of this title shall be deemed a violation, as that term is described in the city of Orland Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
15.02.110 - Enforcement procedures. 
A.  Prior to the suspension, revocation, or denial of any license or permit, or the assessment of any fee, penalty, or charge, or the commencement of any other enforcement action pursuant to this title, the building official and/or his/her designated representative shall follow the procedures as set forth in the city of Orland Municipal Code. The rights to judicial review set forth in the city of Orland Municipal Code shall apply. 
B.  A notice to correct or stop order shall be served in accordance with the provisions of the city of Orland Municipal Code. 
1.  Unless otherwise set forth in this title, if the violation that is the subject of the notice to correct concerns the failure to apply for and/or obtain a valid permit, the time allowed for application for a permit shall be no less than seven calendar days and no more than thirty (30) calendar days. A stop order shall accompany the notice to correct, and shall remain in effect pending the review of and decision on any permit application. 
2.  Unless otherwise set forth in this title, if the violation that is the subject of the notice to correct concerns (a) the failure to comply with conditions placed on a permit or other entitlement issued by the city or (b) a violation of any provision of this title, the time allowed to correct the violation shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours and a maximum of ninety (90) calendar days, depending upon the type of action that will be necessary to correct the violation. If the violation creates a potential risk of harm to persons or property, a stop order may accompany the notice to correct, and shall remain in effect until the violation has been remedied to the satisfaction of the building official or his/her designated representative. 
3.  If the building official or his/her designated representative determines that there has been a good faith effort to correct the violation(s) set forth in a notice to correct, the building official or his/her designated representative may extend the deadline for compliance for a reasonable period of time. Any such extension shall be memorialized in writing and copy shall be sent by first class mail to all responsible persons. 
C.  A notice of administrative violation may be issued pursuant to the procedures established in the Orland Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
15.02.120 - Conflicts. 
In the event of any conflict between this code and any law, rule or regulation of the federal or state government, that requirement which establishes the higher standard of safety shall govern. Failure to comply with such standard of safety shall be a violation of this code. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
Chapter 15.04 - BUILDING CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3, adopted Nov. 21, 2016, repealed Ch. 15.04 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 15.04, §§ 15.04.010—15.04.120, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2. 
 
15.04.010 - California Building Standards Code, 2016 Edition adopted. 
The 2016 California Building Standards Code with appendices thereto, and all subsequent editions thereto, published by the International Code Council, is adopted, incorporated and made a part of this code by reference without further publication as though fully set forth in this chapter and is declared to be the building code of the city; and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city limits. 
The following sections of the 2016 California Building Standards Code are hereby amended and adopted to read as follows: 
A.  Section 101.4.4 "Property Maintenance" is amended to read as follows: The provisions of the Uniform Housing Code and Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings shall apply to existing structures and premises; equipment and facilities; light, ventilation, space heating, sanitation, life and fire safety hazards; responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants; and occupancy of existing premises and structures. 
B.  Section 107.3.1 "Approval of construction documents" is amended to read as follows: 
When the Building Official or his/her designated representative issues a permit, the construction documents shall be approved, in writing or by stamp, as "Reviewed for Code Compliance." 
One set of construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the Building Department. The other set shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the Building Official or a duly authorized representative. 
C.  Section 109.3 "Building permit valuations" is deleted and replaced to read as follows: Permit, plan checking, filing, and reinspection fees and refunds shall be as specified and adopted by the City Council in Title 3, "Revenue and Finance" of the Orland Municipal Code. 
D.  Section 111.1 "Use and Occupancy" is amended to read as follows: No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the Building Official or his/her designated representative has issued a certificate of occupancy therefore as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. 
E.  Section 112.3 Authority to disconnect service utilities is amended to read as follows: The Building Official or his/her designated representative shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by this code and the referenced codes in case of an emergency, where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The Building Official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by this code and the codes referenced when any building service equipment is maintained in violation of the 2016 California Building Standards Code, or of the codes adopted in Section 15.02.050, or in violation of a notice issued pursuant to the provisions of Section 114 of Chapter 1, of the 2016 California Building Standards Code. The Building Official or his/her designated representative shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system, of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
15.04.015 - Post-Disaster Safety Assessment Program. 
A.  Post-Disaster Safety Assessment Placards and Standard for Repair of Damaged Structures. 
1.  Purpose and Intent. These provisions establish standard placards to be used to indicate the condition of a structure for continued occupancy after any natural or manmade disaster. These provisions further authorize the building official or his/her designated representative to post the appropriate placard at each entry point to a building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment. These provisions also provide a defined level of repair for buildings damaged by a natural or manmade disaster where a formal state of emergency has been proclaimed by the city council. 
2.  Application of Provisions. The provisions are applicable, following each natural or manmade disaster, to all buildings and structures of all occupancies regulated by the city of Orland. 
3.  Definitions. 
i.  Damage Ratio. Damage ratio is the estimated value of repairs required to restore the structural members to the estimated replacement value of the building or structure. 
ii.  Safety assessment is a visual, non-destructive examination of a building or structure for the purpose of determining the condition for continued occupancy following a natural or manmade disaster. 
4.  Placards. The following are descriptions of the official placards to be used to designate the condition for continued occupancy of buildings or structures: 
i.  INSPECTED—Lawful Occupancy Permitted—(Green) is to be posted on any building or structure wherein no apparent structural hazard has been found. This placard is not intended to mean that there is no damage to the building or structure. 
ii.  RESTRICTED USE—(Yellow) is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged wherein the damage has resulted in some form of restriction to the continued occupancy. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered and will clearly and concisely note the restrictions on continued occupancy. 
iii.  UNSAFE—Do Not Enter or Occupy—(Red) is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged such that continued occupancy poses a threat to life safety. Buildings or structures posted with this placard shall not be entered except as authorized in writing by the building division. Safety assessment teams shall be authorized to enter these buildings. This placard is not to be used or considered as a demolition order. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered. 
5.  The section number of the Orland Municipal Code (15.04.010 V. 1.), the name of the department, its address, and phone number shall be listed on each placard. 
6.  Once it has been attached to a building or structure, a placard is not be removed, altered or covered until done so by an authorized representative of the building department or upon written notification from the department. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
15.04.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter of the California Building Standards Code enacted in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction for any such misdemeanor, shall be punishable as set forth in Section 1.12.010 of this code by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
Chapter 15.06 - RESIDENTIAL CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3, adopted Nov. 21, 2016, repealed Ch. 15.06 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 15.06, §§ 15.06.010—15.06.030, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2; and Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1. 
 
15.06.010 - California Residential Code adopted. 
The California Residential Code, 2016 Edition, with appendices thereto, and all subsequent editions thereto, published by the International Code Council, is adopted, incorporated and made a part of this code by reference without further publication as though fully set forth in this chapter and is declared to be the residential code of the city, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city limits. 
The following section(s) of the 2016 California Residential Code is hereby amended and adopted to read as follows: 
A.  R506.2.4 Reinforcement support. Slabs-on-ground supporting residential conditioned space and attached garages shall include reinforcement consisting of deformed #3 rebar at 18" on center each way or deformed #4 rebar at 24" on center each way. Where provided in slabs-on ground, reinforcement shall be supported to remain in place from the center to upper one-third of the slab for the duration of the concrete placement. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
15.06.020 - Installation of residential fire suppression systems. 
Residential fire suppression systems as referenced in the 2016 California Residential Code, published by the International Code Council, shall be regulated under that authority of the city of Orland's building official and within the authority of the city of Orland building department. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
15.06.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or of the California Residential Code enacted in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction for any such misdemeanor, shall be punishable as set forth in Section 1.12.010 of this code by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
Chapter 15.08 - MECHANICAL CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3, adopted Nov. 21, 2016, repealed Ch. 15.08 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 15.08, §§ 15.08.010, 15.08.020, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2. 
 
15.08.010 - California Mechanical Code adopted. 
The California Mechanical Code, 2016 Edition, with appendices thereto, and all subsequent editions thereto, published by the International Code Council and the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, is adopted, incorporated and made a part of this code by reference without further publication as though fully set forth in this chapter and is declared to be the mechanical code of the city; and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city limits. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
15.08.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or of the California Mechanical Code enacted in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction for any such misdemeanor shall be punishable as set forth in Section 1.12.100 of this code by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
Chapter 15.10 - ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3, adopted Nov. 21, 2016, repealed Ch. 15.10 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 15.10, §§ 15.10.010, 15.10.020, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2. 
 
15.10.010 - California Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings adopted. 
The California Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, with appendices thereto, and all subsequent editions thereto, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, is adopted, incorporated and made a part of this code by reference without further publication as though fully set forth in this chapter and is declared to be the abatement of dangerous buildings code of the city; and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city limits. The provisions contained therein are enacted in order to provide a just, equitable and practicable method of enforcement and shall be considered to be cumulative with and in addition to any other remedies provided by law including, but not limited to, those remedies provided by the California Building Standards Code, Uniform Housing Code and any other applicable laws and regulations pertaining to the abatement of conditions in buildings or structures, conditions which from any cause endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or welfare of the general public or occupants of such buildings or structures. 
Section 403 subsection 1.3 is amended to read as follows: If the building does not constitute an immediate danger to the life, limb, property or safety of the public, it may be vacated, secured and maintained from entry. 
Measures to secure and maintain against entry. 
1.  All openings in the basement, first floor doors and windows, and any point of entry accessible from a porch, fire escape or other potential climbing point shall be barricaded with plywood, 2 × 4 braces, carriage bolt sets, and nails. Particle board, wafer board, Masonite, or other similar material shall not be used for purposes of boarding-up a building. 
2.  Openings that are at least 10' from ground level which are not accessible from a porch, fire escape, roof, or other climbing point can be secured with nails in each brace, and every 12" around the perimeter. For all openings, the plywood shall be fitted so that it rests snugly against the exterior frame, butting up to the siding on wood frame buildings and up to the brick molding edge on brick buildings. 
3.  The structure shall be posted with a NO TRESPASSING sign at the completion of the board-up. 
Materials 
1.  Plywood, ½" (4-ply) exterior grade CDX 
2.  Braces - 2" by 4" by 8' construction grade lumber 
3.  3/8 " (coarse thread) by 12" carriage bolts (rounded head on weather side) 
4.  3/8 " (coarse thread) construction grade nuts 
5.  ½" (USS Standard) Flat washers with an inside diameter large enough to bypass the wrench neck inside the carriage bolt head so no lift edge is available beneath an installed carriage bolt head. 
6.  3/8 " (USS Standard) diameter flat washers for installation beneath the nut inside the building 
7.  1 5/8 " (6d) galvanized or stainless steel ring-shank nails or comparable deck nails. 
Board Up Procedures
Materials List and Specifications
Barrier Assembly 
1.  Applying barriers is accomplished with an inside and outside carpenter with appropriate tools and supplies. The inside carpenter will need a light. Exit is made over a ladder when the last window is boarded. 
2.  Plywood shall be cut to fit over the window and door openings, flush with outside of the molding/trimmer stud. Application of barriers shall be completed so that all lift or pry points are avoided. 
3.  The 2 × 4 braces shall be cut to fit the horizontal dimension of the plywood. Two exterior and two interior 2 × 4 braces shall be provided for each window and three sets for each door. 
4.  Window Assembly - Braces are located horizontally approximately 1/3 of the distance from the top and the bottom of the window. Bolt holes are located 1/3 of the length of the brace from the outside edge of the window jams. Prior to installation, the assembly should be pre-assembled and 3/8 " holes drilled through all of the components. 
5.  Door Assembly - Door braces will be placed horizontally; one in the center of the doorway and one ½ the distance from the center to the top and one ½ distance from the center to the bottom of the doorway. Bolt holes are located 1/3 of the length of the brace from the outside edge of the door frame. Prior to installation, the assembly should be pre-assembled and 3/8 " holes drilled through all of the components. 
6.  Plywood used to cover exterior openings shall be nailed every 12" along the perimeter to the window or door frame. 
7.  The 2 × 4 braces on the interior and exterior of the assemblies shall be secured using 3/8 " by 12" carriage bolt assemblies. Bolts shall be inserted through the predrilled holes from the exterior with a ½" washer place against the exterior brace, a 3/8 " washer is placed against the interior brace. The bolt is tightened from the inside so that it slightly compresses the interior brace. Should the through-bolt compression method be impossible due to the size or condition of the opening, the opening shall be covered with plywood and secured with a minimum of 3-inch-long deck or wood screws installed on 4-inch centers around the circumference of the opening. For buildings that require access by authorized personnel, a single door that is visible from the street may be secured using a solid core wood or steel door. There shall be no windows or other openings in this door. The door shall be securely locked using a padlock and hasp assembly that is bolted through the door. The lock loop portion of the hasp is attached to the door frame using a minimum of 3-inch-long wood screws. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
15.10.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or of the California Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings as enacted in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction for any such misdemeanor shall be punishable as set forth in Section 1.12.010 of this code by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
Chapter 15.12 - HOUSING CODE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3, adopted Nov. 21, 2016, repealed Ch. 15.12 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 15.12, §§ 15.12.010, 15.12.020, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2. 
 
15.12.010 - Uniform Housing Code adopted. 
The Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition, with appendices thereto, and all subsequent editions thereto, prepared and published by the International Conference of Building Officials, is adopted, incorporated and made a part of this code by reference without further publication as though fully set forth in this chapter and is declared to be the housing code of the city; and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city limits. 
Section 1103 subsection 1.3 is amended to read as follows: If the building does not constitute an immediate danger to the life, limb, property or safety of the public, it may be vacated, secured and maintained from entry. 
Measures to secure and maintain against entry. 
1.  All openings in the basement, first floor doors and windows, and any point of entry accessible from a porch, fire escape or other potential climbing point shall be barricaded with plywood, 2 × 4 braces, carriage bolt sets, and nails. Particle board, wafer board, Masonite, or other similar material shall not be used for purposes of boarding-up a building. 
2.  Openings that are at least 10' from ground level which are not accessible from a porch, fire escape, roof, or other climbing point can be secured with nails in each brace, and every 12" around the perimeter. For all openings, the plywood shall be fitted so that it rests snugly against the exterior frame, butting up to the siding on wood frame buildings and up to the brick molding edge on brick buildings. It may be necessary to remove the staff bead so this fit can be flush and tight. 
3.  The structure shall be posted with a NO TRESPASSING sign at the completion of the board-up. 
Materials 
1.  Plywood, ½" (4 ply) exterior grade CDX 
2.  Braces - 2" by 4" by 8' construction grade lumber 
3.  3/8 " (coarse thread) by 12" carriage bolts (rounded head on weather side) 
4.  3/8 " (coarse thread) construction grade nuts 
5.  ½" (USS Standard) Flat washers with an inside diameter large enough to bypass the wrench neck inside the carriage bolt head so no lift edge is available beneath an installed carriage bolt head. 
6.  3/8 " (USS Standard) diameter flat washers for installation beneath the nut inside the building. 
7.  1 5/8 " (6d) galvanized or stainless steel ring-shank nails or comparable deck nails. 
Board Up Procedures
Materials List and Specifications
Barrier Assembly 
1.  Applying barriers is accomplished with an inside and outside carpenter with appropriate tools and supplies. The inside carpenter will need a light. Exit is made over a ladder when the last window is boarded. 
2.  Plywood shall be cut to fit over the window and door openings, flush with outside of the molding/trimmer stud. Application of barriers shall be completed so that all lift or pry points are avoided. 
3.  The 2 × 4 braces shall be cut to fit the horizontal dimension of the plywood. Two exterior and two interior 2 × 4 braces shall be provided for each window and three sets for each door. 
4.  Window Assembly - Braces are located horizontally approximately 1/3 of the distance from the top and the bottom of the window. Bolt holes are located 1/3 of the length of the brace from the outside edge of the window jams. Prior to installation, the assembly should be pre-assembled and 3/8 " holes drilled through all of the components. 
5.  Door Assembly - Door braces will be placed horizontally; one in the center of the doorway and one ½ the distance from the center to the top and one ½ distance from the center to the bottom of the doorway. Bolt holes are located 1/3 of the length of the brace from the outside edge of the door frame. Prior to installation, the assembly should be pre-assembled and 3/8 " holes drilled through all of the components. 
6.  Plywood used to cover exterior openings shall be nailed every 12" along the perimeter to the window or door frame. 
7.  The 2 × 4 braces on the interior and exterior of the assemblies shall be secured using 3/8 " by 12" carriage bolt assemblies. Bolts shall be inserted through the predrilled holes from the exterior with a ½" washer place against the exterior brace, a 3/8 " washer is placed against the interior brace. The bolt is tightened from the inside so that it slightly compresses the interior brace. Should the through-bolt compression method be impossible due to the size or condition of the opening, the opening shall be covered with plywood and secured with a minimum of 3-inch-long deck or wood screws installed on 4-inch centers around the circumference of the opening. For buildings that require access by authorized personnel, a single door that is visible from the street may be secured using a solid core wood or steel door. There shall be no windows or other openings in this door. The door shall be securely locked using a padlock and hasp assembly that is bolted through the door. The lock loop portion of the hasp is attached to the door frame using a minimum of 3-inch-long wood screws. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
15.12.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or of the Uniform Housing Code as enacted in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction for any such misdemeanor shall be punishable as set forth in Section 1.12.010 of this code by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
Chapter 15.14 - GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3, adopted Nov. 21, 2016, repealed Ch. 15.14 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 15.14, §§ 15.14.010, 15.14.020, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2. 
 
15.14.010 - California Green Building Standards Code adopted. 
The 2016 California Green Building Standards Code, with appendices thereto, and all subsequent editions thereto, as adopted by the State of California's Building Standards Commission, is adopted, incorporated and made a part of this code by reference without further publication as though fully set forth in this chapter and is declared to be the green building standards code of the city; and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city limits. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
15.14.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or of the green building standards code enacted in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction for any such misdemeanor, shall be punishable as set forth in Section 1.12.010 of this code by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
Chapter 15.16 - ELECTRICAL CODE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3, adopted Nov. 21, 2016, repealed Ch. 15.16 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 15.16, §§ 15.16.010, 15.16.020, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2. 
 
15.16.010 - California Electrical Code adopted. 
The California Electrical Code, 2016 Edition, and all subsequent editions thereto, published by the International Code Council, is adopted, incorporated and made a part of this code by reference without further publication as though fully set forth in this chapter and is declared to be the electrical code for the city; and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city limits. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
15.16.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or of the California Electrical Code as enacted in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction for any such misdemeanor shall be punishable as set forth in Section 1.12.010 of this code by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
Chapter 15.20 - PLUMBING CODE[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3, adopted Nov. 21, 2016, repealed Ch. 15.20 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 15.20, §§ 15.20.010—15.20.030, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2. 
 
15.20.010 - California Plumbing Code adopted. 
The California Plumbing Code, 2016 Edition, with appendices thereto, and all subsequent editions thereto, published by the International Conference of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, is adopted, incorporated and made a part of this code by reference without further publication as though fully set forth in this chapter and is declared to be the plumbing code of the city; and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city limits. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
15.20.020 - Use of CPVC plastic piping authorized when—Installation requirements. 
Chlorinated polyvinyl chloride (CPVC) plastic piping is an approved alternate material for use in plumbing systems to which the California Plumbing Code applies, including all potable water systems, when the building official has personal knowledge or is furnished adequate information by or on behalf of the owner of a building site that corrosive conditions exist in the water supply for the site or in the soil through which water supply piping for the site will pass and that such conditions may destroy conventional metal piping that would otherwise be used for the water supply. The following requirements apply to all potable water systems in which CPVC plastic piping is used: 
A.  The piping shall be listed as an approved material in, and installed in accordance with, the 2016 Edition of the California Plumbing Code. 
B.  All installations of CPVC shall strictly comply with the interim flushing procedures and worker safety measures set forth in subdivisions (1) and (2) of this subsection. 
1.  The following safe work practices shall be adhered to when installing both CPVC and copper plumbing pipe: 
a.  Employers shall provide education and training to inform plumbers of risks, provide equipment and techniques to help reduce exposures from plumbing pipe installation, foster safety work habits, and post signs to warn against the drinking of preoccupancy water. 
For purposes of this subdivision "training" shall include training in ladder safety, safe use of chain saws and wood-boring tools, hazards associated with other construction trades, hazards from molten solder and flux, and the potential hazards and safe use of soldering tools and materials. 
b.  Cleaners shall be renamed as primers, include strong warnings on the hazards of using primers as cleaners, and shall include dyes to discourage use as cleaners. 
c.  Applicators and daubers shall be limited to small sizes. 
d.  Enclosed spaces shall be ventilated with portable fans when installing CPVC pipe. 
e.  Protective impermeable gloves shall be utilized when installing CPVC pipe. 
f.  Employees shall provide on-site portable eye wash stations for all employees to allow for immediate flushing of eyes in the event of splashing of hot flux. 
g.  Employers using acetylene torches shall ensure that the acetylene tanks are regularly maintained and inspected in accordance with applicable regulatory requirements. Fire extinguishers shall be kept in close proximity to the workplace. 
2.  All of the following flushing procedures shall be adhered to when installing CPVC pipe: 
a.  When plumbing is completed and ready for pressure testing, each cold water and hot water tap shall be flushed starting with the fixture (basin, sink, tub or shower) closest to the water meter and continuing with each successive fixture, moving toward the end of the system. Flushing shall be continued for at least one minute or longer until water appears clear at each fixture. This step may be omitted if a jurisdiction requires the building inspector to test each water system. 
b.  The system shall be kept filled with water for at least one week and then flushed in accordance with the procedures set forth in subdivision (b) of this subsection. The system shall be kept filled with water and not drained. 
c.  Before the premises are occupied, the hot water heater shall be turned on and the system shall be flushed once more. Commencing with the fixture closest to the hot water heater, the hot water tap shall be permitted to run until hot water is obtained. The time required for hot water to flow from a specified tap shall be determined, and the cold water tap at the same location shall then be turned on for the same period of time. This procedure shall be repeated for each fixture in succession through the rest of the system. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
15.20.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or of the California Plumbing Code as enacted in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction for any such misdemeanor shall be punishable as set forth in Section 1.12.010 of this code by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
Chapter 15.24 - SWIMMING POOLS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3, adopted Nov. 21, 2016, repealed Ch. 15.24 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 15.24, § 15.24.010, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2. 
 
15.24.010 - Fencing required. 
All swimming pools within the city shall be fenced with an approved fence as provided in this section. 
A.  Every person in possession of land within the city, either as an owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant, licensee, or otherwise upon which land is situated a swimming pool or other out-of-doors body of water, designed, constructed and used for swimming, dipping or immersion purposes by men, women, or children, having a depth in excess of eighteen (18) inches, or with a surface area exceeding two hundred fifty (250) square feet, shall maintain on the lot or premises upon which such pool or body is located, and completely surrounding such pool or body of water, a fence or wall not less than four and one-half feet high (measured outside the enclosure), with openings, holes or gaps therein no larger than four inches measured horizontally, except for doors or gates; provided, however, a single-family dwelling house or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure. 
B.  All gates or doors opening through such enclosure shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device designed to keep and capable of keeping such door or gate securely closed at all times when not in actual use; provided, however, the door of any dwelling occupied by human beings and forming a part of the enclosure hereinabove required need not be so equipped, with the exception of breezeways, back doors or garages, and similar structures affording access to the pool, which shall be self-closing and self-latching, with such latching device placed at least four feet above ground level or otherwise made inaccessible from the outside to small children. 
C.  The building inspector may grant an exception to the requirements of fencing a swimming pool when he finds there is a barrier existing on the premises by reason of vegetation, landscaping or topography suitable to prevent children from straying into the pool. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
Chapter 15.32 - FIRE CODE[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3, adopted Nov. 21, 2016, repealed Ch. 15.32 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 15.32, §§ 15.32.010—15.32.070, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2. 
 
15.32.010 - California Fire Code adopted. 
The California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, with appendices thereto, and all subsequent editions thereto, published by the International Code Council is adopted, incorporated and made a part of this code by reference without further publication as though fully set forth in this chapter and is declared to be the fire code of the city; and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city limits. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
15.32.020 - Modifications to the California Fire Code. 
Whenever the word "Chief" appears in the California Fire Code, the following words shall be deemed inserted in lieu thereof: "Chief and/or Building Inspector, and/or Fire Marshall, and or Building Official." 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
15.32.030 - Storage of gasoline and petroleum products. 
The storage of gasoline or any other petroleum products which will emit a flammable vapor, at less than one hundred (100) degrees Fahrenheit, shall be permitted under the following circumstances: 
A.  Storage shall be in a sound and non-leaking nonflammable container. 
B.  Such container shall be housed within a structure of such a size, character and nature, so as to accommodate eighty (80) percent of the contents of the tank/container, when such container is full. 
C.  Such housing shall be adequate to contain any spillage and facilitate effort. 
D.  No gasoline or other petroleum product as provided for in this section shall be allowed to escape to the ground strata. 
E.  Any electrical wiring or other fittings shall be approved by the appropriate agency, as being explosion proof. 
F.  The city may adopt other reasonable requirements as may be necessary to protect the public safety and welfare and may do so by resolution or adoption of any state building standards adopted, either by the California Fire Code or the State Fire Marshal. 
G.  Appeals of all decisions shall be made in accordance with Section 16.36.070 of this code, et seq. to the city council. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
15.32.040 - Exceptions to Section 15.32.030. 
The provisions of Section 15.32.030 of this code shall not apply to: 
A.  A gasoline or petroleum product tank affixed to and which is part of a motor vehicle licensed by the state of California. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
15.32.050 - Temporary storage of gasoline and petroleum products. 
A.  Any person may apply, in writing, to the city council for permission to temporarily store gasoline or petroleum products which emit an inflammable vapor at less than one hundred (100) degrees Fahrenheit. 
B.  When received by the city clerk, such application shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular meeting of the city council. 
C.  At such regular meeting the city council shall consider any evidence presented by any interested person, no formal rules of evidence need be followed and such hearing may be continued for a period not to exceed sixty-five (65) days. 
D.  The city council after hearing such evidence, may, in its sole discretion grant or deny such application. 
E.  If an application is granted, the city council may impose conditions or restrictions that, in its discretion, are necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
15.32.060 - Installation of metal tanks. 
The metal tanks referred to in Section 15.32.030 of this chapter shall be installed in accordance with the appropriate provisions of this code. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
15.32.070 - Installation of residential fire suppression systems. 
Residential fire suppression systems referred to in the 2013 Residential Code shall be regulated under that authority of the city of Orland building official and within the authority of the city of Orland building department. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1—3)  
Chapter 15.38 - MOBILEHOMES, CAMP CARS, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES, TRAVEL TRAILERS AND TRAILER COACHES 
 
15.38.010 - Definitions. 
Definitions of the words and terms used in this chapter are set forth in the California Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 2, Chapter 1, Section 18000 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.38.020 - Use restricted. 
Except as specifically provided in Section 17.76.130 (second dwellings) of this code, it is unlawful for any person to maintain or use, or allow to be maintained or used, for human habitation, any camp car, mobilehome, recreational vehicle, travel trailer, and/or trailer coach in the city, except in a licensed mobilehome park, incidental camping areas, recreational trailer park, temporary trailer park or travel trailer park. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.38.030 - Park permits. 
A.  All persons desiring to establish and operate any mobilehome park, incidental camping area, recreational trailer park, temporary trailer park or travel trailer park within the city limits shall request and obtain a permit from the building inspector of the city before maintaining or operating any such establishment. All applications shall be upon a form as may be prescribed by the building inspector, and among other things, shall set forth the following: 
1.  That no dangerous conditions, either to life or health, will be allowed to exist; 
2.  That no overcrowding at any camp will be allowed; 
3.  That adequate plumbing and waste and sewage disposal facilities will be built and properly maintained; 
4.  That the camp will be operated in a clean and sanitary manner. 
B.  Upon receipt of the application, and after consideration of the same, if the requirements as set out in this code and the California Health and Safety Code shall be complied with, the building inspector shall thereupon issue a permit to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.38.040 - Nonconforming uses. 
Except as prohibited by the California Health and Safety Code, camp cars, mobilehomes, recreational vehicles, travel trailers and/or trailer coaches in the city which have been used for human habitation for thirty (30) days or longer, immediately preceding March 8, 1971, may continue to be so used by the person or persons enjoying such use on March 8, 1971. No person who acquires an ownership interest or a possessory interest in any camp car, mobilehome, recreation vehicle, travel trailer or trailer coach after midnight March 8, 1971, may use or allow to be used such vehicle contrary to the provisions of Section 15.38.020. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.38.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation who does or allows to be done, any act prohibited by the provisions of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code. Each day such act occurs or is allowed to occur is a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
Chapter 15.42 - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES 
 
15.42.010 - Purpose. 
A.  In order to implement the goals and objectives of the city's general plan and to mitigate the impacts caused by future development in Orland, certain public facilities must be or have been required to be constructed, and/or compensation measures must be or have been required to be taken to offset resources lost due to future development. The city council has determined that development impact fees are necessary in order to finance these public facilities, and/or compensation measures and to pay for each development's fair share of the construction costs of these improvements, and/or the costs of the compensation measures. 
B.  The city is authorized to levy fees where specific findings are made with regard to the need to expand facilities to maintain adopted levels of service, mitigate environmental impacts, and/or to comply with city general plan policies and standards. General plan policies and standards provide a reliable basis for levying fees or associated exactions, since the general plan is acknowledged as the foundation document for all development requirements in the community. 
C.  Environmental impact mitigation is also a basis for the establishment of development impact fees; however, the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) may not be used as the statutory basis for the fee. Other enabling ordinances or statutes are required to be adopted prior to implementation of fees based on environmental concerns. 
D.  In establishing the fee described in this chapter, the city council has found the fee to be consistent with its general plan and pursuant to Government Code Section 65913.2, has considered the effects of the fee with respect to the city's housing needs as established in the housing element of the general plan. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.42.020 - Adoption of necessary findings. 
The city council shall, from time to time as necessary, undertake and complete one or more studies of various public facility needs, specifically, the cost of public facilities to accommodate new development in the city of Orland, and shall document its findings based on such study or studies in a report or reports identified as the Orland impact fee study or studies. This study or studies shall remain on file with the Orland city clerk and shall form the basis by which the city establishes and adopts the fees set forth in Orland Municipal Code at Section 15.42.030, all pursuant to the authority set forth in Government Code section 66000 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, § 1) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2014-01, adopted Jan. 21, 2014, repealed former § 15.42.020 and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former § 15.42.020 pertained to findings and derived from Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2.  
15.42.030 - Fees established. 
Fees needed to construct new police facilities, fire facilities, city hall facilities, library facilities, local and area wide storm drainage facilities, parks facilities, traffic signals and intersection improvements, and roadway connections are established. The city council shall adopt a resolution setting forth the specific amount of the fee, describe the benefit/assessment on which the fee is imposed, describe the public improvements to be financed, estimated cost for such facilities, describe the reasonable relationship between the fee and the proposed development, and set forth a time for payment. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.42.040 - Impact fee administration. 
A.  Proceeds from the impact fees shall be collected and segregated into separate accounts to ensure that fees are used for the purposes and projects for which the fees are collected. The city may utilize these monies for any project included in the original fee justification to construct facilities which directly increase the capacity of the community. Special accounts may be established for improvements associated with an impact fee assessment area and for individual projects. 
B.  The fees collected, along with any interest earned on the account, shall be used for the following purposes: 
1.  To pay for design and construction of designated public facilities constructed by the city with funds (other than grants or gifts) from other sources; 
2.  To reimburse the city for designated public facilities constructed by the city with funds (other than grants or gifts) from other sources; 
3.  To reimburse developers who have designed and constructed designated public facilities which are oversized with supplemental size, length or capacity. 
C.  Development impact fees shall be adopted each year at the beginning of the fiscal year. Fees may be reviewed annually to determine correlation with current construction and land costs. The Engineering News Record, or other generally accepted publication which provides an annual construction cost index, shall be used to determine necessary increases or decreases in fee assessments. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.42.050 - State limitations on the imposition of fees and exactions. 
The city council makes the following findings: 
A.  Fees or exactions do not exceed the reasonable cost of providing the services or constructing the needed facilities. The fees are not in excess of those required to accommodate new development and be used to remedy existing community service deficiencies. 
B.  The components of the fee have been segregated so that it is clear for what purpose the fees can be used. 
C.  Specific projects and programs have been identified. 
D.  The fees charged to different land uses are in proportion to the relative need that each use generates for new public facilities. 
E.  The Orland Impact Fee Study establishes a rational, well reasoned analysis of the cost of constructing a facility and the allocation of those costs to specific land uses. This analysis has considered: 
1.  General plan goals, policies and standards; 
2.  Current engineering studies regarding traffic, drainage and other needs; 
3.  Specific reference to environmental mitigation measures; 
4.  Identification of specific projects that are to be constructed. 
F.  The fees collected are to be segregated into different accounts and are to be used for the purposes authorized by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.42.060 - Exemption from CEQA. 
Establishment of fees is categorically exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) per Section 15273(a)(4) of the State CEQA Guidelines. CEQA Section 15273(c) requires that written findings be incorporated in the record setting forth with specificity the basis for the claim of exemption. This claim of exemption is made based on the finding that the fee is necessary to maintain current service levels within the Orland planning area. Without such fees current service levels will decline within the planning area causing economic and social hardship and threatening public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.42.070 - Annual report and adjustment of fees. 
A.  Within ninety (90) days after the end of each fiscal year, the city shall prepare a report, pursuant to Government Code Section 66006, which identifies the use of the fees in each account during the prior fiscal year, deposits to the account during the prior year, the fund balance in each account as of the end of the prior year and planned projects during the next five years. 
B.  Fees shall be established by resolution each fiscal year and take effect no sooner than sixty (60) days after adoption. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
Chapter 15.46 - STREET FACILITY REIMBURSEMENT FEES 
 
15.46.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted in order to establish a procedure for reimbursing developers of property located within the city, as well as the Orland redevelopment agency and the city itself, for a portion of the costs of constructing and installing street facilities which adjoin other properties within the city, reduce the cost of any additional development occurring on such other properties by eliminating the need for construction and installation of such street facilities at the time such development occurs, and, by reason thereof, directly benefit such other properties. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.46.020 - Findings. 
The city council makes the following findings and determinations provided for in Section 66001 of the Government Code in regard to the street facility reimbursement fees assessed and levied pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
A.  The city council finds that developers of property located in the city are often required to construct and install off-site street facilities incident to or as condition of the approval or issuance of a final map, parcel map, certificate of compliance for a minor land division or a building permit which, while necessary to serve development occurring on their property, also adjoin other properties, reduce the cost of additional development occurring on such other properties by eliminating the need for the construction and installation of such street facilities at the time such development occurs, and, by reason thereof, directly benefit such other properties. Similarly, the city often constructs and installs street facilities adjoining properties located in the city which directly benefit such properties. Because such street facilities benefit adjoining properties, the city council finds that it is equitable and proper to assess and levy a fee on the owners of such properties incident to and as a condition of additional development occurring on the properties in an amount equal to each property's proportional share of the cost of constructing and installing the street facilities, and to use the revenue derived from such fees for the purpose of reimbursing the initial developer and/or the city for the cost of constructing and installing that part of such street facilities which benefit such adjoining properties. By reason of the foregoing, the city council determines that there is a reasonable relationship between the street facilities, the costs of which will be reimbursed with the fees assessed and levied pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and the development upon which such fees are imposed. 
B.  The city council finds that the revenues from the street facility reimbursement fees assessed and levied pursuant to the provisions of this chapter will be used to reimburse developers and/or the city as and for the cost of that part of the street facilities constructed and installed by them which benefit the adjoining properties for which such fees are assessed. 
In particular, the city council finds that in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the revenue from the street facility reimbursement fees assessed and levied against an owner of property pursuant to a memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs approved by the city council for an initial developer in the manner provided by this chapter must be used for the purpose of reimbursing the initial developer over a twenty-year period for the cost of that part of the street facilities constructed and installed by the initial developer which benefit such property, all in accordance with the terms and conditions of a reimbursement agreement between the city and initial developer executed in the manner provided by this chapter. By reason of the foregoing, the city council determines that there is a reasonable relationship between the use of street facility reimbursement fees provided for by this chapter and the development upon which such fees are imposed. 
C.  The city council finds that the street facility reimbursement fees assessed and levied pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for the purposes of reimbursing developers and/or the city as and for the costs of constructing and installing street facilities which benefit adjoining properties will be in an amount equal to each such property's proportional share of such costs. In particular, the city council finds that in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the amount of street facility fees assessed and levied pursuant to a memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs approved by the city council for an initial developer and/or the city in the manner provided by this chapter will be based on the product of the cost per foot of constructing such street facilities, determined from the actual costs incurred by the initial developer and/or the city in designing, constructing and installing the street facilities, or as calculated from unit street facility costs established by resolution of the city council, whichever is less, multiplied by the total footage of that part of a benefited parcel fronting on the street facilities and adjusted for any increase in the cost of constructing and installing street facilities between the date such costs were incurred and the date such fees are paid. By reason of the foregoing, the city council determines that there is a reasonable relationship between the amount of the street facility reimbursement fees provided for by this chapter and the cost of the street facilities for which the fees are assessed. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.46.030 - Definitions. 
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions shall govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this chapter: 
"Benefited property" or "benefited parcel" means a parcel of real property or any part thereof which adjoins a street which was constructed and installed by an initial developer and/or the city. 
"Initial developer" means any person who is required to construct and install off-site street facilities which benefit other parcels of real property incident to or as a condition of the approval of a final map, final parcel map, certificate of compliance, or incident to or as a condition of the issuance of a building permit. 
"Street facilities" means a public street constructed or installed within the city or any part thereof including, but not limited to, the street surfaces, street base, street sub-base, and all sidewalks, curbs, gutters, storm drains, street lights, street signs and other facilities necessary and appurtenant thereto. 
"Street facilities costs" or "the cost of constructing and installing street facilities" means all direct costs usually incurred in the construction and installation of street facilities within the city including, but not limited to, costs incurred in designing such street facilities, the cost of all plan check fees and other fees incurred in securing city and other governmental approvals of the plans and specifications for the street facilities, and the cost of all labor, materials, equipment, contractors and/or subcontractors employed in constructing and installing the street facilities, but excluding the cost of any land or interests in land acquired for or devoted to the street facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.46.040 - Manner of serving notices on property owners. 
Any notice or other document required to be served on an owner of property pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed served when either personally delivered to such property owner or when deposited in the United States mail, certified and return receipt requested, addressed to the property owner at the property owner's address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll or supplemental roll of the county, whichever is more current. 
Service by mail of a notice or other document in the manner provided for in this section shall be effective on the date of mailing, and the failure of any person to actually receive such notice shall not affect the validity of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.46.050 - Street facility costs subject to reimbursement designated. 
The following street facility costs shall be subject to reimbursement in the manner hereinafter provided by this chapter: 
A.  The costs incurred by an initial developer who is required to construct and install street facilities subsequent to March 1, 1997, incident to or as a condition of the approval of a subdivision map, parcel map or certificate of compliance for a minor land division, or incident to or as a condition of the issuance of a building permit, save and except for: 
1.  The cost of constructing and installing street facilities within the boundaries of the parcel being subdivided or improved pursuant to such subdivision map, parcel map, certificate of compliance or building permit; 
2.  The cost of constructing and installing street facilities within the half-street section of a public right-of-way immediately adjacent to the parcel being subdivided or improved pursuant to such subdivision map, parcel map, certificate of compliance or building permit; 
3.  The cost of constructing and installing temporary street facilities or the cost of maintenance work performed on existing street facilities; or 
4.  Any portion of the cost of constructing and installing street facilities in excess of the usual cost of constructing and installing local street facilities, as determined by the city council in the manner provided by this chapter. 
B.  The cost incurred by the city for constructing and installing street facilities which were completed subsequent to March 1, 1997, save and except for: 
1.  The cost of constructing and installing street facilities which are exempted from the provisions of this chapter by resolution of the city council; 
2.  The cost of constructing and installing temporary street facilities or the cost of maintenance work performed on existing street facilities; or 
3.  Any portion of the cost of constructing and installing street facilities in excess of the cost of designing, constructing and installing local street facilities as determined by the city council in the manner provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.46.060 - Unit street facility costs—Establishment. 
The city council shall, by resolution, establish unit street facility costs to be used for the purpose of determining the amount of the street facility reimbursement to be paid to an initial developer and/or the city in the manner provided for by this chapter, as well as any street facility reimbursement fees to be assessed and levied on the owner of benefited property, also in the manner provided for by this chapter. Such unit costs shall be determined by the city council based entirely on the usual costs which would be incurred by the city on the date of the adoption of such resolution for the construction and installation of a local street, including all of the curbs, gutters, sidewalks, storm drains, street lights, street signs, and other facilities usually necessary and appurtenant thereto, when designed, constructed and installed in accordance with the design criteria and improvement standards adopted in land division standards and improvement standards of this code. 
However, such unit costs shall not include or otherwise provide for costs which might be incurred in connection with the construction of a particular local street by reason of unusual topographical or geographical conditions incurred when grading the street right-of-way, streams and watercourses which must be spanned by bridges or culverts, and/or other unique conditions that might be encountered in the course of constructing and installing a particular local street. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.46.070 - Same—Annual adjustments. 
If on July 1 following the city council's adoption of a resolution establishing unit street facility costs in the manner provided by this chapter, or on July 1 of any year thereafter, there has been an increase in the usual costs of constructing and installing local streets within the Orland area, including all of the facilities usually necessary and appurtenant thereto, the city administrator, without any further action by the city council, shall increase the unit street facility costs adopted by resolution of the city council in an amount proportional thereto. The determination of whether there has been an increase in the cost of constructing and installing local street facilities and the amount of any increase in the unit street facility cost adopted by resolution of the city council which is proportional thereto, shall be made by the city administrator based on the net percentage increase in the Engineering News Record Cost Index for San Francisco (based on 1913 U.S. average = 100) as last published in the Engineering News Record/McGraw Hill Construction Weekly. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.46.080 - Costs incurred by initial developer—Application for reimbursement. 
Any initial developer desiring a reimbursement for street facility costs in the manner provided by this chapter shall file an application for such reimbursement with the city administrator within ninety (90) days following the date of acceptance for those street facilities constructed and installed by the initial developer which are completed and accepted by the city subsequent to the effective date of this chapter. Such application shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council based on the estimated cost of administering the provisions of this chapter, shall be in a form required by the city administrator and shall contain the following information and/or be accompanied by the following documents: 
A.  The name, capacity and address of the initial developer; 
B.  A description of the street facilities for which the initial developer seeks a reimbursement of costs; 
C.  An itemized statement of the costs incurred by the initial developer in constructing and installing such street facilities prepared by and attested to by a certified public accountant; 
D.  A legal description and assessor's parcel number for each parcel of real property, other than the developer's property, which adjoins the street facilities and by reason thereof is benefited by same; 
E.  An engineered plat which depicts the street facilities and each benefited parcel; 
F.  A statement setting forth the total length of the street facilities and the length of each benefited parcel; and 
G.  Such additional information and documents as may reasonably be required by the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.46.090 - Same—Memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs. 
Where an initial developer has filed an application for reimbursement of street facility costs, the city administrator, based on the information provided in such application, shall prepare a proposed memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs and promptly transmit same to the city clerk. In such memorandum the city administrator shall set forth the following: 
A.  The total cost subject to reimbursement as and for street facilities constructed and installed by the initial developer, either as set forth in the application filed by the initial developer or as calculated entirely from the unit street facility cost established by resolution of the city council, whichever is less; 
B.  A legal description of each parcel, other than the initial developer's parcel, which adjoins such street facilities and by reason thereof, benefits from same; 
C.  The total length of the street facilities, as well as the length of that portion of each benefited parcel which adjoins the street facilities; 
D.  The street facility costs subject to reimbursement for each front foot of a benefited parcel adjoining the street facilities determined by dividing the total street facility costs subject to reimbursement by the front footage of all benefited parcels adjoining same; 
E.  The total street facility costs subject to reimbursement for each particular benefited parcel adjoining the street facilities determined by multiplying the costs subject to reimbursement for each front foot of a benefited parcel by the total front footage of each particular benefited parcel; 
F.  A statement sufficient to advise each owner of a benefited parcel: 
1.  That a street facility reimbursement fee may be assessed and levied against the owner of such benefited parcel as and for such parcel owner's fair share of the reimbursable street facility costs incurred by the city for constructing and installing the street facilities adjoining the parcel; and 
2.  That such street facility reimbursement fee will be in an amount equal to the total street facility costs subject to reimbursement for such person's particular benefited parcel, as set forth in the memorandum, adjusted for any increase in the cost of constructing and installing street facilities between the date such street facilities were completed and the date such fees are paid, as determined by the city administrator, based on the net percentage increase in the Engineering News Record Cost Index for San Francisco (based on 1913 U.S. Average = 100) published in the Engineering News Record/McGraw Hill Construction Weekly, all as hereinafter provided by this chapter; and 
G.  If more than one of the benefited parcels is located within the unincorporated territory of the county, the additional statement that a street facility reimbursement fee may also be assessed and levied upon the owner of such parcel or parcels as and for such parcel or parcel's fair share of the reimbursable street facility costs incurred by the city in the amount set forth therein and adjusted for any increase in the cost of constructing and installing street facilities in the manner provided for therein if, at the time of approval of any additional development on the parcel or parcels, the parcel or parcels are annexed or annexing to the incorporated territory of the city and/or are connecting or being connected to the city sewer system, all as provided for by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.46.100 - Same—Hearing on memorandum. 
A.  Upon receipt of a proposed memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs incurred by an initial developer, the city clerk shall schedule the memorandum for consideration by the city council at a public hearing at the first regular or adjourned regular meeting of the city council on the twentieth day after receipt of the memorandum. 
B.  At least ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing, the city administrator shall cause notice of the time, date and place of such hearing, as well as a copy of the proposed memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs to be served on the owner of each benefited property identified therein. In addition, at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing the city administrator shall cause notice of the time, date and place of the hearing, as well as a brief statement of the subject of the hearing, to be posted along the street facility identified in the memorandum. Such notices shall be posted not more than three hundred (300) feet apart, but in no event shall less than three such notices be posted. 
C.  At the time and place set for the hearing on the proposed memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs, the city council shall consider the report of the city administrator thereon and any protests thereto presented by the owner of a benefited property identified therein. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.46.110 - Same—Action on memorandum. 
If, after considering a proposed memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs incurred by an initial developer at a public hearing in the manner provided by this chapter, the city council determines that (1) the initial developer has incurred street facility costs subject to reimbursement; (2) that the total street facility costs subject to reimbursement set forth in such memorandum are equal to the initial developer's actual reimbursable costs as set forth in the application filed by the initial developer or as calculated entirely from the unit street facility costs established by resolution of the city council, whichever is less; (3) that each of the parcels described in the memorandum adjoins the street facilities constructed and installed by the initial developer and therefore is benefited by same; and (4) that the street facility costs subject to reimbursement for each front foot of a benefited parcel and the total street facility costs subject to reimbursement for each particular benefited parcel as set forth in the memorandum has been correctly calculated, the city council, by minute order, shall approve the memorandum together with any modifications thereto which it deems appropriate. 
Following approval of the memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs, the city clerk shall endorse such memorandum with the number and date of the minute order approving same, and shall forward two certified copies of the memorandum to the city administrator. Upon receipt of such certified copies of the memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs, the city administrator shall cause one copy to be filed in the office of the building official and shall cause the other copy to be recorded in the official records of the county. Thereafter the building official shall cause an additional copy thereof to be included in the file, if any maintained by the building official for each benefited parcel. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.46.120 - Same—Reimbursement agreement. 
A.  Promptly following the approval of a memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs incurred by an initial developer in the manner provided by this chapter, the city administrator shall offer to enter into an agreement with the initial developer on behalf of the city undertaking to reimburse the initial developer for all or a portion of the reimbursable street facility costs set forth in such memorandum out of the revenues from the street facility reimbursement fees assessed and levied in the manner provided by this chapter. Such agreement shall set forth: 
1.  The total street facility costs subject to reimbursement as and for the street facilities constructed and installed by the initial developer; 
2.  A description of each parcel, other than the developer's parcel, which adjoins such street facilities and by reason thereof benefits from same; 
3.  The total length of such street facilities as well as the length of each individual benefited parcel; 
4.  The street facility costs subject to reimbursement for each foot of a benefited parcel fronting on the street facilities; and 
5.  The total street facility costs subject to reimbursement for each particular benefited parcel, all as provided for in the memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs approved by the city council. 
B.  In addition, such agreement shall set forth the undertaking of the city to pay to the initial developer the revenues, if any, received by the city over the twenty-year period following the date of the agreement from the street facility fees assessed and levied upon the owner of a particular benefited parcel at the time and in the manner hereinafter provided by this chapter in an amount equal to the total street facility costs subject to reimbursement for such parcel, adjusted for any increase in the cost of constructing and installing street facilities between the date the street facilities were completed and the date such fees are paid, as determined by the city administrator based on the net percentage increase in the Engineering News Record Cost Index for San Francisco (based on 1913 U.S. Average = 100) published in the Engineering News Record/McGraw Hill Construction Weekly, all as provided for in the memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs approved by the city council. Following execution of the agreement, the original copy thereof shall be filed in the office of the building official who, thereafter shall cause a duplicate copy thereof to be included in the file, if any, maintained by the building official for each benefited parcel. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.46.130 - Costs incurred by city—Memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs. 
Where the city has incurred reimbursable street facility costs incident to the construction of a public street, the city administrator, promptly following completion of such street, shall prepare a proposed memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs and transmit same to the city clerk. In such memorandum the city administrator shall set forth the following: 
A.  The total cost subject to reimbursement as and for the street facilities constructed and installed by the city, either as determined by the city administrator from the actual cost incurred by the city in constructing and installing such street facilities, or as calculated entirely from the unit street facility costs established by resolution of the city council, whichever is less; 
B.  A legal description of each parcel which adjoins such street facilities and by reason thereof benefits from same; 
C.  The total length of that portion of each benefited parcel which adjoins the street facilities; 
D.  The street facility costs subject to reimbursement for each front foot of a benefited parcel adjoining the street facilities determined by dividing the total street facility costs subject to reimbursement by the front footage of all benefited parcels adjoining same; 
E.  The total street facility costs subject to reimbursement for each particular benefited parcel adjoining the street facilities determined by multiplying the costs subject to reimbursement for each front foot of a benefited parcel by the total front footage of each particular benefited parcel; 
F.  The statement sufficient to advise each owner of a benefited parcel; 
1.  That a street facility reimbursement fee may be assessed and levied against the owner of such benefited parcel as and for such parcel owner's fair share of the reimbursable street facility costs incurred by the city for constructing and installing the street facilities adjoining the parcel; and 
2.  That such street facility reimbursement fee will be in an amount equal to the total street facility costs subject to reimbursement for such person's particular benefited parcel, as set forth in the memorandum, adjusted for any increase in the cost of constructing and installing street facilities between the date such street facilities were completed and the date such fees are paid, as determined by the city administrator, based on the net percentage increase in the Engineering News Record Cost Index for San Francisco (based on 1913 U.S. Average = 100) published in the Engineering News Record/McGraw Hill Construction Weekly, all as hereinafter provided by this chapter; and 
G.  If more than one of the benefited parcels is located within the unincorporated territory of the county, the additional statement that a street facility reimbursement fee may also be assessed and levied upon the owner of such parcel or parcels as and for such parcel or parcel's fair share of the reimbursable street facility costs incurred by the city in the amount set forth therein and adjusted for any increase in the cost of constructing and installing street facilities in the manner provided for therein if, at the time of approval of any additional development on the parcel or parcels, the parcel or parcels are annexed or annexing to the incorporated territory of the city and/or are connecting or being connected to the city sewer system, all as provided for by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.46.140 - Same—Hearing on memorandum. 
A.  Upon receipt of a proposed memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs incurred by the city, the city clerk shall schedule the memorandum for consideration by the city council at a public hearing at the first regular or adjourned regular meeting of the city council on the twentieth day after receipt of the memorandum. 
B.  At least ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing, the city administrator shall cause notice of the time, date and place of such hearing, as well as a copy of the proposed memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs to be served on the owner of each benefited property identified therein. In addition, at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing the city administrator shall cause notice of the time, date and place of the hearing, as well as a brief statement of the subject of the hearing, to be posted along the street facility identified in the memorandum. Such notices shall be posted not more than three hundred (300) feet apart, but in no event shall less than three such notices be posted. 
C.  At the time and place set for the hearing on the proposed memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs, the city council shall consider the report of the city administrator thereon and any protests thereto presented by the owner of a benefited property identified therein. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.46.150 - Same—Action on memorandum. 
If, after considering a proposed memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs incurred by the city at a public hearing in the manner provided by this chapter, the city council determines (1) that the city has incurred street facility costs subject to reimbursement; (2) that the total street facility costs subject to reimbursement set forth in such memorandum are equal to the actual reimbursable costs incurred by the city to construct and install the street facilities identified in the memorandum or as calculated entirely from the unit street facility costs established by resolution of the city council, whichever is less; (3) that each of the parcels described in the memorandum adjoins the street facilities constructed and installed by the city and therefore, is benefited by same; and (4) that the street facility costs subject to reimbursement for each front foot of a benefited parcel, as set forth in the memorandum, have been correctly calculated, the city council, by minute order, shall approve the memorandum together with any modifications thereto which it deems appropriate. Following approval of the memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs, the city clerk shall endorse such memorandum with the number and date of the minute order approving same, and shall forward two certified copies of the memorandum to the city administrator. Upon receipt of such certified copies of the memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs, the city administrator shall cause one copy to be filed in the office of the building official and shall cause the other copy to be recorded in the official records of the county. Thereafter the building official shall cause an additional copy thereof to be included in the file, if any, maintained by the building official for each benefited parcel. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.46.160 - Fees—Imposition. 
A street facility reimbursement fee is assessed and levied upon any owner of benefited property described in a memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs approved by the city council in the manner provided by this chapter as and for such property owner's share of the cost of the street facilities which adjoin and, therefore, are of benefit to such person's property at the time of the occurrence of any of the following events affecting the property: 
A.  Approval of a final map, final parcel map or a certificate of compliance authorizing the subdivision of such property; or 
B.  Issuance of a building permit authorizing construction of a building or other structure on such property. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.46.170 - Same—Amount. 
Any street facility reimbursement fee assessed and levied upon an owner of benefited property identified in a memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs approved by the city council in the manner provided by this chapter shall be in an amount equal to the total street facility costs subject to reimbursement for that particular parcel as set forth in such memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs, adjusted for the increase, if any, in the cost of constructing and installing street facilities between the date the street facilities were completed and the date such fee was paid, as determined by the city administrator, based on the net percentage increase in the Engineering News Record Cost Index for San Francisco (based on 1913 U.S. Average = 100) published in the Engineering News Record/McGraw Hill Construction Weekly, also as provided for in the memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.46.180 - Same—Exemptions. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, a street facility fee shall not be assessed and levied upon an owner of benefited property identified in a memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs approved by the city council in the manner provided by this chapter where a building permit is issued which authorizes the construction of a building or structure on such benefited property and the benefited property is part of a subdivision for which such fees were paid incident to approval of the final map, parcel map or certificate of compliance for such subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.46.190 - Same—Payable when. 
Where a street facility reimbursement fee is assessed and levied pursuant to the provisions of this chapter upon an owner of property incident to the approval or issuance of a final map, final parcel map, certificate of compliance for a minor land division or building permit for such property, such fee will be due and payable at the time of approval or issuance of such final map, final parcel map, certificate of compliance or building permit. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.46.200 - Same—Disposition. 
A.  Revenues Received as Reimbursement for Street Facility Costs Incurred by Initial Developers. The revenues received by the city from street facility fees assessed and levied pursuant to a memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs approved by the city council in the manner provided by this chapter for street facility costs incurred by an initial developer shall be disbursed to such initial developer in accordance with the provisions of the reimbursement agreement executed by the city and such initial developer also in the manner provided by this chapter. Provided, however, that in the event the city receives revenues from street facility reimbursement fees assessed and levied pursuant to a memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs approved by the city council for an initial developer after expiration of the term of the reimbursement agreement between the city and such initial developer, such fees shall be deposited in a city local street facility fund and thereafter appropriated and used for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing or maintaining local streets with the city. 
B.  Revenues Received as Reimbursement for Street Facility Costs Incurred by the City. All revenues received by the city from street facility reimbursement fees assessed and levied pursuant to a memorandum of reimbursable street facility costs approved by the city council in the manner provided by this chapter for street facility costs incurred by the city shall be deposited in a city local street facility fund and thereafter appropriated and used only for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing or improving local streets within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.46.210 - Other street facility fees. 
The street reimbursement fees assessed and levied pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be in addition to any street facility improvement fees assessed and levied pursuant to other chapters or sections of this code, as well as any street facility or other public improvement fees assessed and levied pursuant to any other ordinance or resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
Chapter 15.50 - UNDERGROUND CANALS REIMBURSEMENT FEES 
 
15.50.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted in order to establish a procedure for reimbursing developers of property located within the city, as well as the city itself, for a portion of the costs of constructing and installing underground canals which adjoin other properties with the city, reduce the cost of any additional development occurring on such other properties by eliminating the need for the construction and installation of such underground canals at the time such development occurs, and, by reason thereof, directly benefit such other properties. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.50.020 - Findings. 
The city council makes the following findings and determinations provided for in Section 66001 of the Government Code in regard to underground canals reimbursement fees assessed and levied pursuant to the provisions of this chapter: 
A.  The city council finds that developers of property located in the city are often required to construct and install off-site underground canals incident to or as a condition of the approval or issuance of a final map, parcel map, certificate of compliance for a minor land division or a building permit which, while necessary to serve development occurring on their property, also adjoin other properties, reduce the cost of additional development occurring on such other properties by eliminating the need for the construction and installation of such underground canals at the time such development occurs, and, by reason, thereof, directly benefit such other properties. Similarly, the city often constructs and installs underground canals adjoining properties located in the city which directly benefit such properties. Because such underground canals benefit adjoining properties, the city council finds that it is equitable and proper to assess and levy a fee on the owners of such properties incident to and as a condition of additional development occurring on the properties in an amount equal to each property's proportional share of the cost of constructing and installing the underground canals, and to use the revenue derived from such fees for the purpose of reimbursing the initial developer and/or the city for the cost of constructing and installing that part of such underground canals which benefit such adjoining properties. By reason of the foregoing, the city council determines that there is a reasonable relationship between the underground canals, the costs of which will be reimbursed with the fees assessed and levied pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and the development upon which such fees are imposed. 
B.  The city council finds that the revenues from the underground canals reimbursement fees assessed and levied pursuant to the provisions of this chapter will be used to reimburse developers and/or the city as and for the cost of that part of the underground canals constructed and installed by them which benefit the adjoining properties for which such fees are assessed. In particular, the city council finds that in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the revenue from the underground canals reimbursement fees assessed and levied against an owner of property pursuant to a memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs approved by the city council for an initial developer in the manner provided by this chapter must be used for the purpose of reimbursing the initial developer over a twenty-year period for the cost of that part of the underground canals constructed and installed by the initial developer which benefit such property, all in accordance with the terms and conditions of a reimbursement agreement between the city and initial developer executed in the manner provided by this chapter. By reason of the foregoing, the city council determines that there is a reasonable relationship between the use of underground canals reimbursement fees provided for by this chapter and the development upon which such fees are imposed. 
C.  The city council finds that the underground canals reimbursement fees assessed and levied pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for the purposes of reimbursing developers and/or the city as and for the costs of constructing and installing underground canals which benefit adjoining properties will be in an amount equal to each such property's proportional share of such costs. In particular, the city council finds that in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the amount of underground canals fees assessed and levied pursuant to a memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs approved by the city council for an initial developer and/or the city in the manner provided by this chapter will be based on the product of the cost per foot of constructing such underground canals, determined from the actual costs incurred by the initial developer and/or the city in designing, constructing, and installing the underground canals, or as calculated from unit underground canals costs established by resolution of the city council, whichever is less, multiplied by the total footage of that part of a benefited parcel fronting on the underground canals and adjusted for any increase in the cost of constructing and installing underground canals between the date such costs were incurred and the date such fees are paid. By reason of the foregoing, the city council determines that there is a reasonable relationship between the amount of the underground canals reimbursement fees provided for by this chapter and the cost of the underground canals for which the fees are assessed. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.50.030 - Definitions. 
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions shall govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this chapter: 
"Benefited property" or "benefited parcel" means a parcel of real property or any part thereof which adjoins an underground canal which was constructed and installed by an initial developer and/or the city. 
"Initial developer" means any person who is required to construct and install off-site underground canal facilities which benefit other parcels of real property incident to or as a condition of the approval of a final map, final parcel map, certificate of compliance, or incident to or as a condition of the issuance of a building permit. 
"Underground canals" means those waterways installed underground to serve those a part of the Orland unit water users' association and/or bureau of reclamation system installed in early 1900s. These waterways may be in property owned by Orland unit water users' association and/or bureau of reclamation, and/or in easements or other form of property right(s) allowing irrigation waters to be transported within the affected property. 
"Underground canals costs" or "the cost of constructing and installing underground canals" means all direct costs usually incurred in the construction and installation of underground canals within the city including, but not limited to, costs incurred in designing such underground canals, the cost of all plan check fees and other fees incurred in securing city and other governmental approvals of the plans and specifications for the underground canals, and the cost of all labor, materials, equipment, contractors and/or subcontractors employed in constructing and installing the underground canals, but excluding the cost of any land or interests in land acquired for or devoted to the underground canals. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.50.040 - Manner of serving notices on property owners. 
Any notice or other document required to be served on an owner of property pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed served when either personally delivered to such property owner or when deposited in the United States mail, certified and return receipt requested, addressed to the property owner at the property owner's address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll or supplemental roll of the county, whichever is more current. Service by mail of a notice or other document in the manner provided for in this section shall be effective on the date of mailing, and the failure of any person to actually receive such notice shall not affect the validity of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.50.050 - Underground canals subject to reimbursement designated. 
The following underground canals costs shall be subject to reimbursement in the manner hereinafter provided by this chapter: 
A.  The costs incurred by an initial developer who is required to construct and install underground canals subsequent to April 1, 1997, incident to or as a condition of the approval of a subdivision map, parcel map or certificate of compliance for a minor land division, or incident to or as a condition of the issuance of a building permit, save and except for: 
1.  The cost of constructing and installing underground canals within the boundaries of the parcel being subdivided or improved pursuant to such subdivision map, parcel map, certificate of compliance or building permit; 
2.  The cost of constructing and installing underground canals within the half-street section of a public right-of-way immediately adjacent to the parcel being subdivided or improved pursuant to such subdivision map, parcel map, certificate of compliance or building permit; 
3.  [Any] portion of the cost of constructing and installing underground canals in excess of the usual cost of constructing and installing local underground canals, as determined the city council in the manner provided by this chapter. 
B.  The cost incurred by the city for constructing and installing underground canals which were completed subsequent to April 1, 1997, save and except for: 
1.  The cost of constructing and installing underground canals which are exempted from the provisions of this chapter by resolution of the city council; 
2.  Any portion of the cost of constructing and installing underground canals in excess of the cost of designing, constructing and installing local underground canals as determined by the city council in the manner provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.50.060 - Unit underground canals costs established. 
The city council shall, by resolution, establish unit underground canals costs to be used for the purpose of determining the amount of the underground canals reimbursement to be paid to an initial developer and/or the city in the manner provided for by this chapter, as well as any underground canals reimbursement fees to be assessed and levied on the owner of benefited property, also in the manner provided for by this chapter. Such unit costs shall be determined by the city council based entirely on the usual costs which would be incurred by the city on the date of the adoption of such resolution for the construction and installation of an underground canal, including all other facilities usually necessary and appurtenant thereto, when designed, constructed and installed with all appropriate approval from bureau of reclamation and/or Orland unit water users' association and/or others with jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.50.070 - Unit underground canals costs—Annual adjustments. 
If on July 1 following the city council's adoption of a resolution establishing unit underground canals costs in the manner provided by this chapter, or on July 1 of any year thereafter, there has been an increase in the usual costs of constructing and installing underground canals within the Orland area, including all of the facilities usually necessary and appurtenant hereto, the city administrator, without any further action by the city council, shall increase the unit underground canals costs adopted by resolution of the city council in an amount proportional thereto. The determination of whether there has been an increase in the cost of constructing and installing underground canals and the amount of any increase in the unit underground canals cost adopted by resolution of the city council which is proportional thereto, shall be made by the city administrator based on the net percentage increase in the Engineering News Record Cost Index for San Francisco (based on 1913 U.S. Average = 100) as last published in the Engineering News Record/McGraw Hill Construction Weekly. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.50.080 - Costs incurred by initial developer—Application for reimbursement. 
Any initial developer desiring a reimbursement for underground canals costs in the manner provided by this chapter shall file an application for such reimbursement with the city administrator within ninety (90) days following the date of acceptance for those underground canals constructed and installed by the initial developer which are completed and accepted by the bureau of reclamation and/or Orland unit water users' association subsequent to the effective date of this chapter. Such application shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council based on the estimated cost of administering the provisions of this chapter, shall be in a form required by the city administrator and shall contain the following information and/or be accompanied by the following documents: 
A.  The name, capacity and address of the initial developer; 
B.  A description of the underground canals for which the initial developer seeks a reimbursement of costs; 
C.  An itemized statement of the costs incurred by the initial developer in constructing and installing such underground canals prepared by and attested to by a certified public accountant; 
D.  A legal description and assessor's parcel number for each parcel of real property, other than the developer's property, which adjoins the underground canals and by reason thereof is benefited by same; 
E.  An engineered plat which depicts the street facilities and each benefited parcel; 
F.  A statement setting forth the total length of the underground canals and the length of each benefited parcel; and 
G.  Such additional information and documents as may reasonably be required by the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.50.090 - Same—Memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs. 
Where an initial developer has filed an application for reimbursement of underground canals costs, the city administrator, based on the information provided in such application, shall prepare a proposed memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs and promptly transmit same to the city clerk. In such memorandum the city administrator shall set forth the following: 
A.  The total cost subject to reimbursement as and for underground canals constructed and installed by the initial developer, either as set forth in the application filed by the initial developer or as calculated entirely from the unit underground canals cost established by resolution of the city council, whichever is less; 
B.  A legal description of each parcel, other than the initial developer's parcel, which adjoins such underground canals and by reason thereof, benefits from same; 
C.  The total length of the underground canals, as well as the length of that portion of each benefited parcel which adjoins the underground canals; 
D.  The underground canals costs subject to reimbursement for each front foot of a benefited parcel adjoining the underground canals determined by dividing the total underground canals costs subject to reimbursement by the front footage of all benefited parcels adjoining same; 
E.  The total underground canals costs subject to reimbursement for each particular benefited parcel adjoining the underground canals determined by multiplying the costs subject to reimbursement for each front foot of a benefited parcel by the total front footage of each particular benefited parcel; 
F.  A statement sufficient to advise each owner of a benefited parcel: 
1.  That an underground canal reimbursement fee may be assessed and levied against the owner of such benefited parcel as and for such parcel owner's fair share of the reimbursable underground canals costs incurred by the city for constructing and installing the underground canals adjoining the parcel; and 
2.  That such underground canals reimbursement fee will be in an amount equal to the total underground canals costs subject to reimbursement for such person's particular benefited parcel, as set forth in the memorandum, adjusted for any increase in the cost of constructing and installing underground canals between the date such underground canals were completed and the date such fees are paid, as determined by the city administrator, based on the net percentage increase in the Engineering News Record Cost Index for San Francisco (based on 1913 U.S. Average = 100) published in the Engineering News Record/McGraw Hill Construction Weekly, all as hereinafter provided by this chapter; and 
G.  If more than one of the benefited parcels is located within the unincorporated territory of the county, the additional statement that an underground canal reimbursement fee may also be assessed and levied upon the owner of such parcel or parcels as and for such parcel or parcel's fair share of the reimbursable underground canals costs incurred by the city in the amount set forth therein and adjusted for any increase in the cost of constructing and installing underground canals in the manner provided for therein if, at the time of approval of any additional development on the parcel or parcels, the parcel or parcels are annexed or annexing to the incorporated territory of the city and/or are connecting or being connected to the city sewer system, all as provided for by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.50.100 - Same—Hearing on memorandum. 
A.  Upon receipt of a proposed memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs incurred by an initial developer, the city clerk shall schedule the memorandum for consideration by the city council at a public hearing at the first regular or adjourned regular meeting of the city council on the twentieth day after receipt of the memorandum. 
B.  At least ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing, the city administrator shall cause notice of the time, date and place of such hearing, as well as a copy of the proposed memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs to be served on the owner of each benefited property identified therein. In addition, at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing the city administrator shall cause notice of the time, date and place of the hearing, as well as a brief statement of the subject of the hearing, to be posted along the street facility identified in the memorandum. Such notices shall be posted not more than three hundred (300) feet apart, but in no event shall less than three such notices be posted. 
C.  At the time and place set for the hearing on the proposed memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs, the city council shall consider the report of the city administrator thereon and any protests thereto presented by the owner of a benefited property identified therein. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.50.110 - Same—Action on memorandum. 
If, after considering a proposed memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs incurred by an initial developer at a public hearing in the manner provided by this chapter, the city council determines (1) that the initial developer has incurred underground canals costs subject to reimbursement; (2) that the total underground canals costs subject to reimbursement set forth in such memorandum are equal to the initial developer's actual reimbursable costs as set forth in the application filed by the initial developer or as calculated entirely from the unit underground canals costs established by resolution of the city council, whichever is less; (3) that each of the parcels described in the memorandum adjoins the underground canals constructed and installed by the initial developer and therefore is benefited by same; and (4) that the underground canals costs subject to reimbursement for each front foot of a benefited parcel and the total underground canals costs subject to reimbursement for each particular benefited parcel as set forth in the memorandum has been correctly calculated, the city council, by minute order, shall approve the memorandum together with any modifications thereto which it deems appropriate. 
Following approval of the memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs, the city clerk shall endorse such memorandum with the number and date of the minute order approving same, and shall forward two certified copies of the memorandum to the city administrator. Upon receipt of such certified copies of the memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs, the city administrator shall cause one copy to be filed in the office of the building official and shall cause the other copy to be recorded in the official records of the county. Thereafter the building official shall cause an additional copy thereof to be included in the file, if any, maintained by the building official for each benefited parcel. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.50.120 - Same—Reimbursement agreement. 
A.  Promptly following the approval of a memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs incurred by an initial developer in the manner provided by this chapter, the city administrator shall offer to enter into an agreement with the initial developer on behalf of the city undertaking to reimburse the initial developer for all or a portion of the reimbursable underground canals costs set forth in such memorandum out of the revenues from the underground canals costs set forth in such memorandum out of the revenues from the underground canals reimbursement fees assessed and levied in the manner provided by this chapter. Such agreement shall set forth: 
1.  The total underground canals costs subject to reimbursement as and for the underground canals constructed and installed by the initial developer; 
2.  A description of each parcel, other than the developer's parcel, which adjoins such underground canals and by reason thereof benefits from same; 
3.  The total length of such underground canals as well as the length of each individual benefited parcel; 
4.  The underground canals costs subject to reimbursement for each foot of a benefited parcel fronting on the underground canals; and 
5.  The total underground canals costs subject to reimbursement for each particular benefited parcel, all as provided for in the memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs approved by the city council. 
B.  In addition, such agreement shall set forth the undertaking of the city to pay to the initial developer the revenues, if any, received by the city over the twenty-year period following the date of the agreement from the underground canals fees assessed and levied upon the owner of a particular benefited parcel at the time and in the manner hereinafter provided by this chapter in an amount equal to the total underground canals costs subject to reimbursement for such parcel, adjusted for any increase in the cost of constructing and installing underground canals between the date the underground canals were completed and the date such fees are paid, as determined by the city administrator based on the net percentage increase in the Engineering News Record Cost Index for San Francisco (based on 1913 U.S. Average = 100) published in the Engineering News Record/McGraw Hill Construction Weekly, all as provided for in the memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs approved by the city council. Following execution of the agreement, the original copy thereof shall be filed in the office of the building official who, thereafter shall cause a duplicate copy thereof to be included in the file, if any, maintained by the building official for each benefited parcel. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.50.130 - Costs incurred by city—Memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs. 
Where the city has incurred reimbursable underground canals costs, the city administrator, promptly following completion of such underground canals, shall prepare a proposed memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs and transmit same to the city clerk. In such memorandum the city administrator shall set forth the following: 
A.  The total cost subject to reimbursement as and for the underground canals constructed and installed by the city, either as determined by the city administrator from the actual cost incurred by the city in constructing and installing such underground canals, or as calculated entirely from the unit underground canals costs established by resolution of the city council, whichever is less; 
B.  A legal description of each parcel which adjoins such underground canals and by reason thereof benefits from same; 
C.  The total length of the underground canals, as well as the length of that portion of each benefited parcel which adjoins the underground canals; 
D.  The underground canals costs subject to reimbursement for each front foot of a benefited parcel adjoining the underground canals determined by dividing the total underground canals costs subject to reimbursement by the front footage of all benefited parcels adjoining same; 
E.  The total underground canals costs subject to reimbursement for each particular benefited parcel adjoining the underground canals determined by multiplying the costs subject to reimbursement for each front foot of a benefited parcel by the total front footage of each particular benefited parcel; 
F.  The statement sufficient to advise each owner of a benefited parcel: 
1.  That an underground canal's reimbursement fee may be assessed and levied against the owner of such benefited parcel as and for such parcel owner's fair share of the reimbursable underground canals costs incurred by the city for constructing and installing the underground canals adjoining the parcel; and 
2.  That such underground canals reimbursement fee will be in an amount equal to the total underground canals costs subject to reimbursement for such person's particular benefited parcel, as set forth in the memorandum, adjusted for any increase in the cost of constructing and installing underground canals between the date such underground canals were completed and the date such fees are paid, as determined by the city administrator, based on the net percentage increase in the Engineering News Record Cost Index for San Francisco (based on 1913 U.S. Average = 100) published in the Engineering News Record/McGraw Hill Construction Weekly, all as hereinafter provided by this chapter; and 
G.  If more than one of the benefited parcels is located within the unincorporated territory of the county, the additional statement that an underground canals reimbursement fee may also be assessed and levied upon the owner of such parcel or parcels as and for such parcel or parcel's fair share of the reimbursable underground canals costs incurred by the city in the amount set forth therein and adjusted for any increase in the costs of constructing and installing underground canals in the manner provided for therein if, at the time of approval of any additional development on the parcel or parcels, the parcel or parcels are annexed or annexing to the incorporated territory of the city and/or are connecting or being connected to the city sewer system, all as provided for by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.50.140 - Same—Hearing on memorandum. 
A.  Upon receipt of a proposed memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs incurred by the city, the city clerk shall schedule the memorandum for consideration by the city council at a public hearing at the first regular or adjourned regular meeting of the city council on the twentieth day after receipt of the memorandum. 
B.  At least ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing, the city administrator shall cause notice of the time, date, and place of such hearing, as well as a copy of the proposed memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs to be served on the owner of each benefited property identified therein. In addition, at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing the city administrator shall cause notice of the time, date and place of the hearing, as well as a brief statement of the subject of the hearing, to be posted along the underground canals identified in the memorandum. Such notices shall be posted not more than three hundred (300) feet apart, but in no event shall less than three such notices be posted. 
C.  At the time and place set for the hearing on the proposed memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs, the city council shall consider the report of the city administrator thereon and any protests thereto presented by the owner of a benefited property identified therein. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.50.150 - Same—Action on memorandum. 
If, after considering a proposed memorandum of reimbursable underground canals incurred by the city at a public hearing in the manner provided by this chapter, the city council determines (1) that the city has incurred underground canals costs subject to reimbursement; (2) that the total underground canals costs subject to reimbursement set forth in such memorandum are equal to the actual reimbursable costs incurred by the city to construct and install the underground canals identified in the memorandum or as calculated entirely from the unit underground canals costs established by resolution of the city council, whichever is less; (3) that each of the parcels described in the memorandum adjoins the underground canals constructed and installed by the city and therefore, is benefited by same; and (4) that the underground canals costs subject to reimbursement for each front foot of a benefited parcel, as set forth in the memorandum, have been correctly calculated, the city council, by minute order, shall approve the memorandum together with any modifications thereto which it deems appropriate. Following approval of the memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs, the city clerk shall endorse such memorandum with the number and date of the minute order approving same, and shall forward two certified copies of the memorandum to the city administrator. Upon receipt of such certified copies of the memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs, the city administrator shall cause one copy to be filed in the office of the building official and shall cause the other copy to be recorded in the official records of the county. Thereafter the building official shall cause an additional copy thereof to be included in the file, if any, maintained by the building official for each benefited parcel. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.50.160 - Fees—Imposed. 
An underground canals reimbursement fee is assessed and levied upon an owner of benefited property described in a memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs approved by the city council in the manner provided by this chapter as and for such property owner's share of the cost of the underground canals which adjoin and, therefore, are of benefit to such person's property at the time of the occurrence of any of the following events affecting the property: 
A.  Approval of a final map, final parcel map or a certificate of compliance authorizing the subdivision of such property; or 
B.  Issuance of a building permit authorizing construction of a building or other structure on such property. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.50.170 - Same—Amount. 
Any underground canals reimbursement fee assessed and levied upon an owner of benefited property identified in a memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs approved by the city council in the manner provided by this chapter shall be in an amount equal to the total underground canals costs subject to reimbursement for that particular parcel as set forth in such memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs, adjusted for the increase, if any, in the cost of constructing and installing underground canals between the date the underground canals were completed and the date such fee was paid, as determined by the city administrator, based on the net percentage increase in the Engineering News Record Cost Index for San Francisco (based on 1913 U.S. Average = 100) published in the Engineering News Record/McGraw Hill Construction Weekly, also as provided for in the memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.50.180 - Same—Exemptions. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, an underground canals fee shall not be assessed and levied upon an owner of benefited property identified in a memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs approved by the city council in the manner provided by this chapter where a building permit is issued which authorizes the construction of a building or structure on such benefited property and the benefited property is part of a subdivision for which such fees were paid incident to approval of the final map, parcel map or certificate of compliance for such subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.50.190 - Same—Payable when. 
Where an underground canals reimbursement fee is assessed and levied pursuant to the provisions of this chapter upon an owner of property incident to the approval or issuance of a final map, final parcel map, certificate of compliance for a minor land division or building permit for such property, such fee will be due and payable at the time of approval or issuance of such final map, final parcel map, certificate of compliance or building permit. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.50.200 - Same—Disposition. 
A.  Revenues Received as Reimbursement for Underground Canals Costs Incurred by Initial Developers. The revenues received by the city from underground canals fees assessed and levied pursuant to a memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs approved by the city council in the manner provided by this chapter for underground canals costs incurred by an initial developer shall be disbursed to such initial developer in accordance with the provisions of the reimbursement agreement executed by the city and such initial developer also in the manner provided by this chapter. 
Provided, however, that in the event the city receives revenues from underground canals reimbursement fees assessed and levied pursuant to a memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs approved by the city council for an initial developer after expiration of the term of the reimbursement agreement between the city and such initial developer, such fees shall be deposited in a city local underground canals fund and thereafter appropriated and used for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing or maintaining local underground canals within the city. 
B.  Revenues Received as Reimbursement for Underground Canals Costs Incurred by the City. All revenues received by the city from underground canals reimbursement fees assessed and levied pursuant to a memorandum of reimbursable underground canals costs approved by the city council in the manner provided by this chapter for underground canals costs incurred by the city shall be deposited in a city local underground canals fund and thereafter appropriated and used only for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing or improving local underground canals within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
15.50.210 - Other underground canals fees. 
The underground canals reimbursement fees assessed and levied pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be in addition to any underground canals improvement fees assessed and levied pursuant to other chapters of sections of this code as well as any underground canals or other public improvement fees assessed and levied pursuant to any other ordinance or resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
Chapter 15.54 - ENFORCEMENT 
 
15.54.010 - Delegation of enforcement duties. 
Enforcement of the codes in this title shall be delegated to the city building inspector or such other persons as are designed in writing by the city council. All code enforcement shall be conducted in the following manner: either by the building department or the state fire marshal office upon request of the chief building official or the city. The city manager is authorized to request the state fire marshal to enforce any provisions of law established by this code or applicable to the city by virtue of other laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 1, 2)  
Title 16 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 16.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.04.010 - Purpose. 
A.  This title is enacted for the purpose of adopting standards, regulations and procedures for the subdivision and utilization of land in the incorporated area of the city, as authorized and directed by the Subdivision Map Act and other applicable provisions of law. 
B.  This title provides for the subdivision of land, and also for the reversion to acreage of lands previously divided. 
(Prior code § 12200, 12200.01)  
16.04.020 - Applicability. 
This title shall not affect any agreement, contract or bond previously executed with respect to any subdivision or any rights or action accrued thereunder; or any previous action to approve a tentative map or final map, except that conditions of approval and time limitations imposed thereon shall prevail. 
(Prior code § 12200.02)  
16.04.030 - Conformity with other applicable provisions required. 
All subdivisions of land which are subject to the provisions of this title shall conform to the general plan, specific plans, and to adopted standards and provisions of law which are pertinent or applicable to such divisions. 
(Prior code § 12200.03)  
16.04.040 - Units of land separate units when. 
All contiguous units of land which were previous deemed merged, under the terms of the Subdivision Map Act prior to July, 1977, are hereby deemed unmerged and separate units, provided that such units were established as separate units of record in conformance with laws applicable at the time of their establishment. 
(Prior code § 12200.04)  
Chapter 16.08 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.08.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this title: 
"Advisory agency," means the Orland planning commission, which is also referred to in this title as the "planning commission." 
"Alley" means a way for secondary vehicular access to private property for on-site parking, freight handling and related purposes. 
"Appeal board" means the city council of the city of Orland, which is also referred to in this title as the "city council." 
"Authorized representative" means a qualified person who is authorized by a city official defined in this title to act in the place of such official with respect to the operation and administration of this title. 
"Building official" means the person so designated by the city council. 
"City engineer" means the person so designated by the city council. 
"City health officer or health officer" means the person so designated by the city council. 
"City planner" means the agent of the planning commission designated by the city council to fulfill the duties of the city planner described in this title. 
"City street" means a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, court, circle, drive or way of any other designation which has been dedicated for public use and accepted by the city, or has been laid out and constructed as a city street, or has been made a public street or road pursuant to law. It includes public streets constructed by federal, state and county agencies, but does not include private streets or private alleys. 
"Engineer" means a civil engineer competent to practice civil engineering, as defined in Section 6371 of, and who is registered under the provisions of, the Business and Professions Code of the state of California, who is retained to provide engineering services related to subdivision of land. 
"Final map" means a map containing com-plete engineering data for all parcels prepared in accordance with the conditions of approval of a tentative map and in acceptable form for processing and filing for record as provided in this title. 
"General plan" means any element thereof as set forth in the Planning and Zoning Law, Title 7 of the Government Code of the state of California. 
"Land division standards" means a set of detailed standards, specifications, drawings and schedules, which shall be adopted by resolution of the city council to set forth the regulations, standards and specifications for land development improvements; the type and nature of investigations, tests and reports; schedules for fees to be charged, and such other matters as the city council finds to be necessary to properly supplement the provisions of this title in the processing of subdivisions and the improvement thereof. Whenever reference is made to "this title" herein, such reference shall include the land division standards. 
"Lease" shall not include: 
1.  The leasing of apartments, offices, stores, or similar space within an apartment building, commercial building, industrial building or a mobilehome park which is subject to the provisions of state law; or 
2.  Mineral, oil or gas leases; or 
3.  The leasing and actual exclusive use of land parcels of not less than ten (10) acres, for the full lease term period, for commercial agricultural purposes. 
"Map Act" means the Subdivision Map Act of the state of California, as amended or hereafter amended. 
"Owner" means any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership, trust or any other legal entity having a proprietary interest in the land proposed to be subdivided or otherwise utilized, who commences and maintains proceedings to utilize the sale under the provisions of this title. 
"Parcel map" means a map of certain specified types of subdivisions as hereinafter described, containing complete engineering data for all parcels, prepared in accordance with the conditions of approval of a tentative map in acceptable form for processing and filing for record, as provided in this title. 
"Preliminary map" means a map prepared from existing records in sufficient detail to show clearly the development plan proposed for the total land area which is to be developed in one or more units. 
"Private street" means a way for vehicular traffic, however designated, which is not intended or proposed to be accepted by the city. 
"Record of survey" means a map prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Land Surveyors Act to delineate land boundaries, property lines, or other lines or points of survey. 
"Reversion to acreage map" means a map prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act for the purpose of reverting previously divided parcels to acreage, and as provided in this title. 
"Specific plan" means any unit thereof, as set forth in the Planning and Zoning Law, Title 7 of the Government Code of the state of California, which has been adopted by the city council. 
"Subdivider" shall have the meaning described in the Subdivision Map Act. 
"Subdivision" means as defined in the Subdivision Map Act. 
"Surveyor" means a land surveyor licensed under the Land Surveyors Act of the state of California or a civil engineer registered in the state of California, retained by the subdivider, owner, developer or contractor to provide land surveying services. 
"Technical advisory committee" means the city clerk, the city engineer, the director of public works and the building official, or their authorized representative, and "committee" means the technical advisory committee. Additional members may be added to this committee at the discretion of the city council. 
"Tentative map" means a map prepared from existing records and field data in sufficient detail to meet the requirements for filing, prescribed in this title, and to constitute an adequate basis for the preparation of a final map. 
(Prior code §§ 12201, 12201.01—12201.27)  
Chapter 16.12 - PROCEDURES GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
16.12.010 - Conformance with procedures required. 
A.  Any action to divide any land in the incorporated territory of the city into two or more parcels shall hereafter be subject to the provisions of this title, and any such action shall be undertaken in accordance with the general procedures set out in this chapter. 
B.  The specific procedures set out in Chapters 16.16, 16.20 and 16.24 shall be followed for all subdivisions of land within the city. 
(Prior code §§ 12202, 12204)  
16.12.020 - Preliminary maps. 
A.  A preliminary map shall be filed, processed and approved for all subdivisions which will be developed in two or more units. 
B.  For each preliminary map a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus five dollars ($5.00) per lot shall be charged. 
(Prior code §§ 12202.01, 12202.01(A))  
16.12.030 - Tentative maps. 
A.  A tentative map shall be filed, processed and approved for all subdivisions. 
B.  The planning commission is authorized to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove such subdivisions that do not require a final map as provided for in Section 16.12.040 of this code. 
(Ord. 2004-07 § 3 (part); prior code §§ 12202.02, 12202.02(A), 12202.02(B))  
16.12.040 - Final maps. 
A final map shall be submitted, processed, approved and filed for record for all subdivisions creating five or more parcels, five or more condominiums as defined in Section 783 of the Civil Code, or a community apartment project containing five or more parcels, except where: 
A.  The land before divisions contains less than five acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway, and no dedications or improvements are required by the city council; or 
B.  Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of twenty (20) acres or more and has approved access to a maintained public street or highway; or 
C.  The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of the city council as to the street alignments and widths; or 
D.  Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of forty (40) acres or more. 
(Ord. 2004-07 § 3 (part); prior code §§ 12202.03, 12202.03(A))  
16.12.050 - Parcel maps. 
A parcel map shall be submitted, processed, approved and filed for record for all subdivisions for which a final map is not required, unless a waiver of the parcel map requirement is issued by the city council. 
(Ord. 2004-07 § 3 (part); prior code §§ 12202.04, 12202.04(A))  
16.12.060 - Waiver of parcel map requirement. 
A.  The city council may, by resolution, waive the requirement for a parcel map, provided that it makes a finding that the proposed division of land complies with all requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this code regarding area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, improved public streets, sanitary facilities, water supply availability and environmental protection. The council may require the submission of such information as it deems necessary to make the required finding. 
B.  A fee of one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) shall be charged for each application for a parcel map waiver. 
(Prior code §§ 12202.05, 12202.05(A))  
16.12.070 - Lot line adjustments. 
The planning commission may approve a lot line adjustment pursuant to Section 66412(d) of the California Government Code. The commission will require submission of a tentative map and other information it deems necessary to evaluate the proposed change and may impose such conditions as it deems necessary relative to such lot line adjustment and in response to current or proposed uses. The application fee shall be determined as detailed in Table A of Section 16.12.080. 
(Ord. 2004-07 § 3 (part); prior code § 12202.06)  
16.12.080 - Municipal fees. 
Fees for any action to divide any land in the incorporated territory of the city into two or more parcels shall be determined as detailed in Table A of this section. 
CITY OF ORLAND 
MUNICIPAL FEES 
TABLE A: SUBDIVISION OF LAND FEE SCHEDULE 
Task # 	Task Description 	City Planner Hours Included in Fee 	New Fee 	Pre-Application Deposit (b) 
4.0 	PARCEL MAP/LLA 
	4.1 Appeal 	7 	$350 	
	4.2 New Tentative Parcel Map (a) 	12.5 	$1,370 	$250 non-refundable deposit 
	4.3 Final Parcel Map (a) 		$330 	
	4.4 Parcel Map Amend./Extension (a) 	7 	$846 	
	4.5 Lot Line Adjustment/Lot Meger (a) 		$200 deposit (a) 	
	4.6 Prelim./Concept. Review (TAC) 		zero 	
5.0 	CERT. OF COMPLIANCE 
	5.1 Lot Line Adjustment (C. of C.) (a) 	0.75 	$100 	
	5.2 Lot Meger (C. of C.) (a) 	0.75 	$100 	
7.0 	SUBDIVISIONS PROCESSING 
	7.2 Extension (a) 	9 	$870 	
	7.3 Amendment (a) 	12 	$1,175 	$250 non-refundable deposit 
	7.4 Final Subdivision Map (a) 	2 	$350 + $10/lot 	
8.0 	TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION MAP 
	8.1 Application (a) (c) 	24 	(d) $1,500 + $15/lot 	$250 non-refundable deposit 
	8.2 Extension (a) 	9 	$870 	
 
  
(a) City Engineer will calculate the appropriate deposit, against which engineering services will be billed at an hourly rate of $80 per hour. 
(b) After the initial ½ hour consultation with the City Planner, the City Clerk will require this deposit from the applicant prior to additional review. This deposit will be credited against the total fee amount, should the applicant file a formal application, paying the normal total fee. 
(c) This fee covers only initial 5.5 hours of City Engineer's preliminary/conceptual review and site assessment for T.A.C. City Engineer will calculate the appropriate deposit, against which all subsequent engineering services will be billed at an hourly rate of $80 per hour. 
(d) Based on a 28-lot subdivision. 
NOTE:  If changes to the project are deemed by the City of Orland to be substantial and result in redundant processing by City staff, the applicant agrees to pay those costs at the stated hourly rate. 
(Ord. 2004-07 § 3 (part))  
Chapter 16.16 - PRELIMINARY MAPS AND TENTATIVE MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.16.010 - Preliminary map—Form and contents. 
A.  A preliminary map shall be prepared for the total area of any proposed subdivision which will be developed in two or more units. 
B.  The dimensions, scale and content of the preliminary map shall show in reasonable detail the following: 
1.  Street and lot pattern and land uses proposed; 
2.  Topography and drainage, watercourses, drainage features and areas subject to inundation or flooding; 
3.  Geology, soil types and vegetation; 
4.  Proposed water supply, sewerage and fire protection; 
5.  Proposed street sections and improvements; 
6.  Other features required to adequately represent the total plan of development. 
(Prior code §§ 12204.01, 12204.02, 12204.03)  
16.16.020 - Preliminary map—Submittal. 
Six prints of the preliminary map, in acceptable form, shall be submitted to the city clerk for action by the committee. 
(Prior code §§ 12204.04)  
16.16.030 - Action of preliminary map. 
Within ten (10) days of submittal to the city clerk, the committee shall meet to consider the map. Within ten (10) days of its meeting, the committee shall prepare a report on the map and transmit a copy to the subdivider and to the planning commission for action prior to or concurrently with the tentative map. 
(Prior code § 12204.05)  
16.16.040 - Acceptance of tentative map as preliminary map. 
The committee may accept a tentative map as a preliminary map, subject to all other provisions of this title. 
(Prior code § 12204.06)  
16.16.050 - Tentative map—Form. 
Tentative maps shall be eighteen (18) by twenty-six (26) inches in size, with a one-inch clear border, and to a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred (100) feet, unless otherwise approved by the committee. 
(Prior code § 12204.07)  
16.16.060 - Tentative map—Contents. 
A.  The following information shall be shown on each tentative map, except for any such information which the committee determines is not necessary for any particular tentative map: 
1.  A site location sketch indicating the location of the property to be divided in relation to the surrounding area; 
2.  A tract number issued by the county surveyor, date, north arrow, scale and sufficient description to define the location and boundaries of the proposed tract; 
3.  Name and address of record owner or owners of the property to be divided, and statement of authorization to subdivide; 
4.  Name and address of the subdivider; 
5.  Name, business address and registration number of the civil engineer or land surveyor who prepared the map; 
6.  The locations, names or other approved identification, widths, approximate grade and curve radii of all streets, highways and ways within the property and immediate vicinity; 
7.  Contour lines having an interval of two feet, supplemented by spot elevations when the distance between contour lines exceeds one hundred (100) feet. Elevations shall be based upon city datum; 
8.  The location, character and identification of all existing public utility facilities on the property or on adjoining properties and on contiguous streets, and the locations and widths of all existing and proposed easements; 
9.  Arrangement and configuration of lots, with approximate dimensions of each lot. Each lot shall be numbered, and proposed setbacks shall be shown; 
10.  A preliminary grading plan, designed to control erosion and prevent sedimentation or damage to off-site property; 
11.  The outline of any existing buildings, identification of those to remain in place, and their locations relative to existing or proposed streets or lot boundaries; 
12.  Approximate location and species of trees or groups of trees on the property, and general identification of those to be removed; 
13.  Approximate location of existing and proposed drainage control features and bodies of water, all areas which are subject to inundation or stormwater overflow, and the location, width and direction of flow of all watercourses; 
14.  Approximate locations of existing wells and sewage disposal systems, and of test wells, percolation test holes and staked or flagged reference points for use by appropriate public agencies for field check purposes; 
15.  The location, identification and description of known or found survey monuments on or adjacent to the property; 
16.  The names of owners of adjacent properties. 
B.  The following statements shall either appear on the tentative map or shall be submitted in written form with the map, except for any of such items which the committee determines are not necessary to be filed with any particular tentative map: 
1.  A statement from all parties having any record title interest in the real property proposed to be subdivided, consenting to the proposed subdivision; 
2.  The existing use or uses of the property; 
3.  The proposed use of the property. If the property is proposed to be used for more than one purpose, the area, lot or lots proposed for each type of use shall be described in a statement and shown on the tentative map; 
4.  Descriptive information on the following: 
a.  Proposed drainage channel changes and flood control measures, 
b.  Proposed domestic water supply and sewage disposal systems, 
c.  Proposed street, surface drainage, grading, fire protection and other improvements, with descriptive drawings where appropriate, 
d.  Proposed utility service for electrical, gas and communication systems, including the name and address of the serving utility company or agency. 
C.  The following documents shall be submitted with each tentative map, except for any which the committee determines are not necessary to be filed with any particular tentative map: 
1.  A preliminary title report for the real property proposed for subdivision; 
2.  A copy of any condition or any restrictive reservations or covenants, existing or proposed; 
3.  A letter setting forth and describing the reasons for any requested exceptions to provisions of this title, and an application for any requested rezoning, use permit or variance which may be necessary to permit proposed uses of land and structures. 
(Prior code §§ 12204.08—12204.10)  
16.16.070 - Preliminary soils report. 
A preliminary soils report, prepared by a registered civil engineer and based upon adequate test borings, shall be submitted for each proposed subdivision, subject to the following provisions: 
A.  The committee may waive the requirement for a preliminary soils report if it determines that sufficient knowledge of the soils in the proposed subdivision exists. 
B.  1.  If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, a soils investigation of each lot in the subdivision may be required by the planning commission. 
2.  Such soils investigation shall be done by a registered civil engineer, who shall recommend the corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure proposed to be constructed in the area where such soils problem exists. 
3.  The planning commission may approve the subdivision or portion thereof where such soils problem exists. 
4.  The planning commission may approve the subdivision or portion thereof where such soils problems exist if it determines that the recommended action is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure to be constructed, and, as a condition to the issuance of any building permit, may require that the approved recommended action be incorporated in the construction of each structure. 
(Prior code § 12204.11)  
16.16.080 - Tentative map—Filing and processing. 
A.  Twenty-two (22) prints of a tentative map for subdivisions that require a final map or eighteen (18) prints of a tentative map for subdivision that will not require a final map and a subdividers statement shall be submitted to the city clerk together with such other required documents and filing this by five p.m. on the first Wednesday of each month. 
B.  Upon the submittal of such a tentative map and accompanying documents, the city clerk shall transmit copies of the map and pertinent documents to the following: health department, recreation department, fire department, superintendent of schools, State Real Estate Commission, State Department of Transportation, utility companies and such other officials or agencies as the city clerk may determine have an interest therein. 
C.  The city clerk shall set for public hearing before the next regularly scheduled planning commission meeting those tentative maps for all subdivisions which will not require a final map. 
D.  Twenty (20) days shall be allowed for the various agencies, departments and officials to review the tentative map and related documents and report in writing, through the committee, to the planning commission, stating whether or not the map and documents are in conformity with the requirements of this title and other applicable provisions of law and/or with the standards and requirements of such agency, or what measures will be necessary to accomplish such conformity. A copy of such written report shall be mailed or otherwise delivered to the subdivider prior to planning commission action on the tentative map. 
E.  The city clerk shall call a meeting of the committee to discuss the proposed subdivisions with the subdividers to indicate any actions necessary to make the map acceptable for filing or to accept the map as officially filed. 
F.  A tentative map shall be considered officially filed, and shall be so endorsed and dated by the city clerk, at such time as the map and all related notations, statements and reports required by this title have been submitted to, processed, and found to be in complete and proper form by the Committee, all required fees have been paid, and the environmental Quality Act and the city guidelines has been completed. 
G.  Within ten (10) days from the date of official filing of a tentative map, the committee shall prepare a report thereon and the city clerk shall place the item for consideration of the map on the agenda of the next planning commission meeting. 
(Prior code §§ 12204.12, 12204.13, 12204.13A, 12204.14, 12204.15, 12204.16, 12204.17)  
16.16.090 - Tentative map— Consideration by planning commission. 
A.  The planning commission shall consider each tentative map with accompanying statements and documents, the committee report, related department and agency reports to determine whether the map is conformative with the provisions of the law, this title, with the then existing general and specific plan standards and proposals and being consistent with good planning and engineering practice. 
B.  The planning commission will conduct a public hearing on tentative maps for all subdivisions which will not require a final map. Such planning commission hearings shall be after ten (10) days' published notice. The planning commission shall consider all and any comments made at the public hearing. 
C.  The planning commission shall consider also such measures as will promote and protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare, and the environmental values and other assets and conditions making for excellence of residential, commercial, industrial, recreational and other developments. 
D.  The planning commission may require that sites be dedicated or reserved, or fees paid in lieu of such dedication or reservation, for parks, schools, recreation areas, access to public facilities, or other public uses, as permitted or required by the Subdivision Map Act. 
E.  The planning commission may require a waiver of rights of direct access to any existing or proposed street or highway. 
(Prior code §§ 12204.18—12204.21)  
16.16.100 - Tentative maps for subdivisions which do not require a final map—Action by planning commission. 
A.  Within fifty (50) days of the date on which the tentative map which does not require a final map is officially filed and dated in the office of the city clerk, provided that such time limit has not been extended by mutual consent of the subdivider, and the planning commission, the planning commission shall conduct a public hearing and upon the basis of consideration and finding set forth in this chapter approve, conditionally approve or disapprove such tentative map. 
B.  Planning commission action on a tentative map for a subdivision which does not require a final map becomes final if no appeal is taken as provided for in this title. 
(Prior code § 12204.21(A))  
16.16.110 - Tentative maps for subdivision which require a final map—Action by planning commission and city council. 
A.  Within fifty (50) days of the date on which a tentative map for a subdivision which requires a final map is officially filed and dated in the office of the city clerk and unless such time limit has been extended by the consent of subdivider and the planning commission, the planning commission shall upon the basis and consideration of all the findings set forth in this chapter either recommend approval, conditional approval or disapproval for such tentative map. Such recommendation shall within ten (10) days be reported in writing to the city council and the subdivider. 
B.  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of such planning commission recommendations, the city council shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative map, and within ten (10) days of such action shall give written notice thereof to the planning commission and the subdivider. 
C.  Action on a tentative map by the city council shall be final. 
(Prior code §§ 12204.22—12204.24)  
16.16.120 - Tentative map—Additional requirements after approval. 
Following approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall proceed to fulfill all conditions to such approval, and shall cause to be prepared and submitted to the city engineer the plans, specifications and other information related to subdivision improvements in accordance with the land division standards. 
(Prior code § 12204.25)  
16.16.130 - Amendment of tentative map. 
An approved tentative map may be amended by following the same filing and processing requirements as required by Sections 16.16.080 through 16.16.120. Filing fee for an amended tentative map will be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(Prior code § 12204.25(A))  
16.16.140 - Commencement of work without approval prohibited. 
No work on any permanent structure, or on any subdivision improvements on any subdivision site shall be commenced without the approval and authorization of the city engineer, and no work on the site which is in conflict with the approved tentative map shall be permitted. 
(Prior code § 12204.26)  
Chapter 16.20 - FINAL MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.20.010 - Time limit for submittal. 
Within twenty-four (24) months after approval or conditional approval of the tentative map or maps, the subdivider may cause the subdivision, or any portion thereof, to be surveyed and a final map to be prepared in accordance with the tentative map as approved. 
(Prior code § 12204.27)  
16.20.020 - Extension. 
Upon application of the subdivider prior to the expiration of the twenty-four (24) month period, three extensions not exceeding one year each may be granted by the planning commission. The subdivider's application for extension must be accompanied by a fifty dollar ($50.00) filing fee and payment of all city engineer and city attorney costs incurred up to the date of the request for extension. In the event the planning commission denies a subdivider's application for extension, the subdivider may appeal to the city council, and the action of the city council shall be final. 
(Prior code § 12204.28)  
16.20.030 - Failure to submit final map—Termination of proceedings. 
Any failure to submit, process and record a final map within twenty-four (24) months from the date of approval or conditional approval of the tentative map, or any extension thereof granted by the planning commission shall terminate all proceedings. Before a final map thereafter may be recorded, a new tentative map shall be required to be submitted, processed and approved. 
(Prior code § 12204.29)  
16.20.040 - Final map—Contents. 
A subdivider shall submit to the city clerk, in complete and approvable form the following: 
A.  Ten (10) legible prints of the final map, together with the original tracing and a reproducible copy; 
B.  Subdivision improvement plans, and plan, map and field checking fees, as provided in the land division standards; 
C.  Traverse sheets showing closures and computation of all distances, angles and courses shown on the final map, ties to existing and proposed monuments, and adjacent subdivisions, street centerlines and highway stations. The traverse of the exterior boundaries of the tract and of lots and blocks shall close within a limit of error of one in five thousand (5,000); 
D.  Design calculations as required by the land division standards; 
E.  A certificate from the county assessor regarding liens for unpaid taxes, a tax bond if required, and a guarantee of title issued by a title company for the benefit protection of the city; 
F.  An instrument restricting vehicular traffic over the side lines of any road or highway, when and if the same is required; 
G.  A geologic and soil report or a soil investigation report by a soils engineer in the form prescribed by the city engineer unless this requirement is waived in writing by the city engineer; 
H.  Improvement bonds, subdivision agreements and such other documents as are required by this title and the land division standards. 
(Prior code § 12204.30)  
16.20.050 - Final map—Form. 
The final map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, shall be based upon a survey and shall conform to all of the following provisions: 
A.  It shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester base film. Certificates, affidavits and acknowledgments may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on polyester base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility. 
B.  The size of each sheet shall be eighteen (18) by twenty-six (26) inches. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch. The scale of the map shall be large enough to show all details clearly and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown. 
C.  The tract designation, all drawings, certificates, acknowledgments, endorsements, offers and acceptances of dedication, and notarial seals shall be within the marginal lines. The first sheet of the map shall contain all certificates, acknowledgments, endorsements, offers and acceptances of dedication and notarial certificates, and no signed certificates shall appear on any other sheet. 
D.  The title sheet of the final map shall contain the tract number and designation and such other descriptive matter as may be necessary. Below the tract designation shall appear a subtitle consisting of a general description of all the property being subdivided by reference to recorded deeds or to maps which have been previously recorded or by reference to the plat of a United States survey. Reference to tracts and subdivisions in the description must be worded identically with original records and references to book and page of record must be complete. The basis of bearing for the survey shall be clearly noted. 
E.  The final map shall particularly define and designate all lots or parcels, including those reserved for private purposes, all parcels offered for dedication for any purpose, with all dimensions, boundaries and courses clearly shown and defined in every case. No ditto marks shall be used. Parcels offered for dedication but not accepted shall be designated by letter. 
F.  The map shall show clearly what stakes, monuments, or other evidences were found on the ground to determine the boundaries of the tract, and the names of owners of adjoining properties. 
G.  The map shall show all information, data and monuments necessary to locate and retrace any and all exterior boundary lines, and lot and block lines. It shall also show bearings and distances of straight lines and radii, central angle and arc length for all curves, and such information as may be necessary to determine the location of the centers of curves, bearings and tangent distances and radii, central angle, and arc lengths of all lots. Where streets intersect on curves, centerline lengths, radii and deltas, and centerline intersection points shall be shown. 
H.  The map shall show chord length at the setback line on lots located on a curve or having side lines at angles other than ninety (90) degrees. 
I.  Wherever the city engineer has established the center of a street or alley, the data shall be shown on the final map, indicating all monuments found and making reference to a field book or map. If the points were reset by ties, the fact shall be stated. 
J.  The map shall show the line of extreme high water in case the subdivision is adjacent to a stream, channel, or subject to periodic inundation by water. 
K.  Each parcel shall be numbered and each block may be numbered or lettered. Each street shall be named. 
L.  The exterior boundary of the land included within the subdivision shall be indicated by distinctive symbols and clearly so designated. The map shall show the definite location of the subdivision, and particularly its relation to surrounding surveys. 
M.  When a soils report has been prepared, this fact shall be noted on the final map, together with the date of the report and the name of the engineer making the report. 
N.  The total width of all street rights-of-way shall be shown, as well as the widths of rights-of-way for flood control or drainage channels, and any other rights-of-way. 
O.  The map shall show all easements of record and easements to be recorded. If any easement is not definitely located of record, a statement of such easement must appear on the title sheet. Easements for storm drains, sewers, public utilities and other purposes shall be clearly defined. Distances and bearings on the side lines of lots which are cut by an easement must be so shown that the map will indicate clearly the actual length of the lot lines. The width of the easement and the length and bearings of the lines thereof and sufficient ties to definitely locate the easement with respect to the subdivision must be shown. 
P.  In order to avoid duplication, names to be used for new streets shall be subject to the approval of the planning commission. If any designations be numbers, they shall be spelled out completely, using hyphens in such forms as "Twenty-Third Street." The words "Avenue," "Boulevard," "Place," etc., shall be spelled out in full. Names of newly dedicated portions of streets shall be shown in or arrowed to the dedicated portion. 
(Prior code § 12204.31)  
16.20.060 - Final map—Filing and processing. 
A.  When the city engineer finds that all requirements for submittal of a final subdivision map have been complied with, he shall date and sign his file copy to that effect, and notify the subdivider and/or his engineer and the committee that the map has been filed. Within five days of the date of filing, the committee may meet to review the map and submit comments thereon to the city engineer. 
B.  Within twenty (20) days of the date of filing, and when the map is complete and in order, the city engineer shall sign the certificate on the original tracing thereof and submit the map, and all related bond and agreement forms and other documents, to the planning commission for recommendation to the city council. 
C.  Following approval of the map and related documents by the planning commission and city council, the city clerk shall submit the map to the county clerk. 
(Prior code § 12204.32)  
Chapter 16.24 - PARCEL MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.24.010 - Time limit for submittal. 
Within twenty-four (24) months after the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map of a subdivision for which a final map is not required by this title, the subdivider may cause the subdivision to be surveyed and a parcel map to be prepared in accordance with the tentative map as approved. 
(Prior code § 12204.33(a))  
16.24.020 - Extension. 
Upon application of the subdivider prior to the expiration of the twenty-four (24) month period, three extensions not exceeding one year each may be granted by the planning commission. The subdivider's application for extension must be accompanied by a fifty dollar ($50.00) filing fee and payment of all city engineer and city attorney costs incurred up to the date of the request for extension. In the event the planning commission denies a subdivider application for extension, the subdivider may appeal to the city council, and the action of the city council shall be final. 
(Prior code § 12204.33(b))  
16.24.030 - Failure to submit parcel map—Termination of proceedings. 
Any failure to submit, process and record a parcel map within twenty-four (24) months from the date of approval or conditional approval of the tentative map, or any extension thereof granted by the planning commission, shall terminate all proceedings. Before a parcel map may thereafter be recorded, a new tentative map shall be required to be submitted, processed and approved. 
(Prior code § 12204.33(c))  
16.24.040 - Parcel map—Contents. 
The subdivider shall submit to the city clerk, in complete and approvable form, the following: 
A.  Two legible prints of the parcel map, together with the original tracing and a reproducible copy; 
B.  Traverse sheets showing closures and computation of all distances, angles and courses shown on the final map, ties to existing and proposed monuments, and adjacent subdivisions, street centerlines and highway stations. The traverse of the exterior boundaries of the tract and of lots and blocks shall close within a limit of error of one in five thousand (5,000); 
C.  Map checking fees, as required by the land division standards. 
(Prior code § 12204.33(d))  
16.24.050 - Parcel map—Form. 
The parcel map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, shall show the location of streets and property lines bounding the property and shall conform to all of the following provisions: 
A.  It shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester base film. Certificates may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on polyester base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility. 
B.  The size of each sheet shall be eighteen (18) by twenty-six (26) inches. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch. The scale of the map shall be large enough to show all details clearly and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown. 
C.  Each parcel shall be numbered or otherwise designated. 
D.  The exterior boundary of the land included within the subdivision shall be indicated by distinctive symbols and clearly so designated. 
E.  The map shall show the location of each parcel and its relation to surrounding surveys. The location of any remainder of the original parcel shall be shown, but need not be shown as a matter of survey but only by reference to the existing record boundaries of such remainder if such remainder has a gross area of five acres or more. 
F.  The map shall include a certificate, signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title interest in the real property subdivided, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the parcel map. 
G.  The map shall include certificates for signature by the engineer or surveyor, city engineer and county recorder, as required by the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Prior code § 12204.34)  
16.24.060 - Parcel map—Processing. 
A.  Within twenty (20) days after receiving the parcel map, or within such additional time as may be reasonably necessary, the city engineer shall determine whether the map is in proper form and that all conditions of tentative map approval and provisions of law have been complied with, and he shall examine it for survey information and other required information shown thereon. 
B.  When he is satisfied that the map is technically correct, and in compliance with the provisions of this title and other provisions of law, the city engineer shall submit the map to the city council and following city council approval he shall sign the city engineer certificate on the original map tracing and submit it to the county recorder for filing. 
(Prior code § 12204.35)  
Chapter 16.28 - DESIGN STANDARDS AND IMPROVEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
16.28.010 - Conformance required. 
All subdivision of land which area subject to the provisions of this title shall conform to the regulations set out in this chapter and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 12205)  
16.28.020 - Construal of provisions. 
The regulations, standards and procedures provided in this chapter shall be construed to be the minimum necessary to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare, and they may be made more restrictive in cases where the planning commission finds such action is necessary to protect the public interest and to ensure sound planning standards and, on the advice of the city engineer, to insure sound engineering standards. 
(Prior code § 12205.01)  
16.28.030 - Design standards—Streets and highways. 
A.  The street and highway design shall conform both in width and alignment to any general plan of streets and highways approved by the city council, and rights-of-way for any street or highway indicated on the general plan shall be dedicated. 
B.  The street and highway design shall conform to any proceedings affecting the subdivision which may have been initiated by the city council or approved by the council upon initiation by other legally constituted bodies of the city, county or state. If a parcel of land to be subdivided includes a portion of the right-of-way to be acquired for a highway, freeway or parkway, the subdivider may be required to either dedicate or withhold from subdivision all the area included in such right-of-way. 
C.  Service Roads and Off-street Parking. When lots proposed for commercial or industrial uses front on any major or secondary street or highway, the subdivider may be required to dedicate and improve a service road to provide ingress and egress to and from such lots, in lieu thereof, if approved by the planning commission, the subdivider may dedicate for public use and improve an area adjacent to such lots for off-street parking purposes. When any lots proposed for residential use front on a freeway, state highway or parkway, the subdivider may be required to dedicate and improve a service road at the front of such lots. In addition to any requirements for a service road, the planning commission may require adequate off-street parking areas for all lots proposed for commercial or industrial use. 
D.  Nonaccess and Planting Strips. When the rear or side lines of any lots border a major highway or parkway, the subdivider may be required to execute and deliver to the city an instrument prohibiting the right of ingress and egress to such lots across the side lines of such highway or parkway. When the rear or side lines of any lots border any freeway, state highway or parkway, the subdivider may be required to dedicate and improve a planting strip or construct a fence adjacent thereto. 
E.  Alleys. When lots are proposed for commercial or industrial uses, alleys at least twenty-four (24) feet in width shall be provided at the rear thereof with adequate ingress and egress for truck traffic. 
F.  Street Names. All street names must be as approved by the planning commission and no duplication of street names shall be permitted. 
(Prior code § 12205.02)  
16.28.040 - Design standards— Easements. 
The subdivider may be required to grant easements not less than six feet in width along lot lines for public utility, sanitary sewer and drainage purposes, provided easements of lesser width may be allowed when approved by the city engineer. Easements for overhead pole lines and anchors shall be provided at the rear of all lots except where alleys are available. Power and telephone facilities may, in whole or in part, be required to be installed underground. 
(Prior code § 12205.03)  
16.28.050 - Design standards—Lots. 
A.  The size and shapes of lots shall be in conformance with the minimum requirements of the land division standards and with any additional requirements established by zoning regulations effective in the area of the proposed subdivision or as shown on the zoning map. 
B.  The side lines of all lots so far as possible shall be at right angles to streets or radial or approximately radial to curved streets and to the center points of cul-de-sac turning circles. 
C.  No lot shall be divided by a city boundary line. 
D.  Interior lots having double frontage will not be approved. 
(Prior code § 12205.04)  
16.28.060 - Design standards— Walkways. 
The subdivider may be required to dedicate and improve walkways twelve (12) feet wide through long blocks, or to provide access to schools, parks and other public areas. 
(Prior code § 12205.05)  
16.28.070 - Design standards— Watercourses. 
The subdivider may be required to dedicate easements for watercourses or drainageways in their original locations or in approved relocations. Widths and locations of such easements shall be subject to approval by the city engineer. 
(Prior code § 12205.06)  
16.28.080 - Design standards—Land subject to inundation. 
If any portion of any land within the boundaries of the subdivision is subject to overflow, inundation or flooding by stormwaters, that portion of the subdivision shall be clearly indicated on the final map or parcel map. 
(Prior code § 12205.07)  
16.28.090 - Installation of improvements required. 
All improvements shall be installed by, or be the responsibility of, the subdivider in accordance with the land division standards, a public document on file in the office of the city clerk, and shall further be installed in accordance with all applicable laws, rules or regulations of the state of California, or any board, bureau, commission, or other competent authority thereof. Such improvements shall be subject to inspection by the city engineer, and approval by the city council. Such improvements shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  Land grading and improvement; 
B.  Street, alley, walkway and off-street parking, grading and paving; 
C.  Curbs, gutters, sidewalks and landscaping in rights-of-way; 
D.  Sanitary sewers, storm drains and appurtenances; 
E.  Street lighting systems; 
F.  Fire hydrants; 
G.  Electric, gas and water utility systems; 
H.  Street signs, warning and safety devices. 
(Prior code § 12206)  
16.28.100 - Improvements—Plan checking and inspection fees. 
A.  Review of improvement plans and inspection of improvement construction shall be charged a fee equal to the actual costs incurred by the city. 
B.  A deposit of five hundred dollars ($500.00) is required with the submittal of plans for plan checking and a deposit equal to two percent of the estimated cost of construction is required for inspection. 
C.  Funds will be drawn down to pay city costs. Additional funds will be required if fund balance is not adequate to pay city costs. Unused funds will be reimbursed when plan check and inspection are complete. 
(Prior code § 12205.08)  
16.28.110 - Improvements—Standards. 
Land division standards shall contain standards for street and lot design, for street widths, grades and curves, for sewerage, water supply and fire protection, for all improvements to be installed, including public utilities, for office and field checking of maps and survey data, for construction inspections, fee schedules, forms for bonds and agreements and such other matters as may be included therein by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 12206.01)  
16.28.120 - Additional documentation. 
The planning commission may require that a subdivider provide such documents, including but not restricted to deeds, dedications, grants, restrictions, easements and rights-of-way, as it deems necessary to effect a sound and proper plan of land division. 
(Prior code § 12206.02)  
16.28.130 - Rezone request. 
The planning commission may require a request for change of zoning to insure compatibility of plans and regulation. 
(Prior code § 12206.03)  
16.28.140 - Private streets permitted when. 
The planning commission may permit private streets in subdivisions which are subject to the provisions of this title in cases where the committee finds and reports that such streets provide local access to parcels to be created, and do not constitute elements of arterial or collector streets systems necessary to serve areas beyond the bounds of the subdivision site. Subdivisions in which private streets are permitted shall be subject to all provisions of this title except as otherwise or as additionally provided in this section: 
A.  Private streets shall be constructed in conformity with land division standards. 
B.  Provisions for maintenance of private streets shall be required by the planning commission, and bonds or other guarantees of compliance with such provisions may be required. 
(Prior code § 12206.04)  
16.28.150 - Special features. 
The planning commission may recommend approval of subdivision plans which include the clustering of development sites in combination with the preservation of open space and plans which include airports, golf courses and other types of recreational facilities and other such special features intended for the common usage of owners and guests, provided that such features are in conformity with zoning, lot area and density standards on an averaged overall lots plus open space basis, and other provisions of law. In such cases: 
A.  The planning commission shall require provisions for proper construction of such special features. 
B.  The planning commission shall require provisions for preservation of open spaces and adequate maintenance and operation of all such features, and may require bonds or other guarantees of compliance with such requirements. 
C.  The planning commission may approve such division plans under existing P-D zoning, or may require P-D zoning or other appropriate zoning as a condition to approval of the division. 
(Prior code § 12206.05)  
16.28.160 - Agreement for completion of improvements. 
Concurrently with the acceptance of the final map, the subdivider shall enter into an agreement with the city council agreeing to have the improvements completed within the time clause guaranteeing the workmanship and materials provided in all improvements for a twelve (12) month period after acceptance of the improvements by the city council. Such agreement may provide for extension of time under specified conditions. The agreement may also provide for the termination of the agreement upon a reversion to acreage or revocation of all or part of the subdivision. 
(Prior code § 12207)  
16.28.170 - Improvement security. 
A.  To assure that the improvements required by this title are satisfactorily completed, adequate improvement security shall be furnished by the subdivider for the cost of the improvements according to the plans and specifications in a sum or amount equal to the estimate approved by the city engineer. Partial release of such improvement security may be made in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  The improvement security shall be released by the city engineer upon acceptance of the work or upon revocation or reversion to acreage of the subdivision and abandonment of all streets and easements, except the security in the amount specified by the city engineer to guarantee workmanship and materials shall remain in full force and effect for one year after acceptance of the improvements. 
(Prior code §§ 12208, 12208.01)  
16.28.180 - Exceptions. 
A.  The director of public works is authorized to approve exceptions from the maximum width specified for driveways in the land division standards, upon a showing of necessity for reasonable access to property for the proposed use. 
B.  The committee may recommend that the planning commission authorize conditional exceptions to any other requirements and regulations set forth in this title. 
C.  Application for any such exception shall be made by written petition of the subdivider stating fully the grounds of the application and the facts relied upon by the petitioner. Such petition shall be filed with the tentative map. In order for the property referred to in the petition to come within the provisions of this section, the committee must find that all of the following facts apply with respect to the subject property: 
1.  That there are special circumstances or conditions of topography, size, shape or location affecting the property; 
2.  That the exception recommended is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner; 
3.  That the granting of the exception will not adversely affect the general plan; 
4.  That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which the property is situated, and will not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations on other properties in the vicinity. 
D.  In recommending authorization of any exceptions under this section, the committee shall prepare a report to the planning commission containing all facts and findings in connection therewith. The report shall set forth the exception as recommended and the conditions designated. Upon receipt of such report the planning commission may recommend approval of the tentative map with or without the exceptions and conditions recommended. 
(Prior code §§ 12209, 12209.01, 12209.02)  
Chapter 16.32 - VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.32.010 - Citation and authority. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1) of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the state of California (hereinafter referred to as the Vesting Tentative Map Statute), and may be cited as the vesting tentative map ordinance. 
(Prior code § 12250)  
16.32.020 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  It is the purpose of this chapter to establish procedures necessary for the implementation of the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. Except as otherwise set forth in the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this title shall apply to this chapter. 
B.  To accomplish this purpose, the regulations outlined in this chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, and for the promotion of orderly growth and development. 
(Prior code § 12251)  
16.32.030 - Conformance required. 
No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan or not permitted by Title 17 or other applicable provisions of this code. 
(Prior code § 12252)  
16.32.040 - Vesting tentative map defined. 
A.  As used in this chapter, "vesting tentative map" means a tentative map for a residential subdivision, as defined in Chapter 16.08, that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "vesting tentative map" at the time it is filed in accordance with Section 16.32.050, and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction. 
(Prior code § 12253)  
16.32.050 - Filing and processing. 
A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in this title for a tentative map except as hereinafter provided. 
A.  At the time a vesting tentative map is filed it shall have printed conspicuously on its face, the words "vesting tentative map." 
B.  At the time a vesting tentative map is filed a subdivider shall also supply the following information: 
1.  Height, size and location of buildings; 
2.  Sewer, water, storm drain and road details; 
3.  Information on the uses to which the buildings will be put; 
4.  Geological studies; 
5.  Detailed grading plans; 
6.  Flood control information; 
7.  Architectural plans; 
8.  Any information which may be currently required by this title. 
C.  At the time of filing or prior to, a vested tentative map, the applicant must have complied with any rezone, approval or design review required and pay any required fees such as drainage fees. 
(Prior code § 12254)  
16.32.060 - Fees. 
Upon filing a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall pay the fees as set by resolution for the filing and processing of a vesting tentative map. 
(Prior code § 12255)  
16.32.070 - Expiration. 
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same extensions, established by this code for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map. 
(Prior code § 12256)  
16.32.080 - Approval or conditional approval—Vested rights conferred. 
A.  The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards described in Government Code Section 66474.2. However, if Section 66474.2 of the Government Code is repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a permit approval, extension or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following are determined: 
1.  A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both; 
2.  The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with state or federal law. 
C.  The rights referred to in this section shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in Section 16.36.070. If the final map is approved, these rights shall last for the following periods of time: 
1.  An initial time period of twenty-four (24) months. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for such phase is recorded; 
2.  The initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds thirty (30) days, from the date a complete application is filed; 
3.  A subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section expires. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial to city council within fifteen (15) days; 
4.  If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified the rights referred to in this section shall continue until the expiration of that permit or any extension of that permit. 
(Prior code § 12257)  
16.32.090 - Procedure when development inconsistent with zoning regulations. 
A.  Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with the zoning ordinance in existence at that time, that inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The city may deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned on the subdivider, or his or her designee, obtaining the necessary change in the zoning ordinance to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in the zoning ordinance is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall, notwithstanding Section 16.32.080A, confer the vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change in zoning ordinance and the map, as approved. 
B.  The rights conferred by this section shall be for the time periods set forth in Section 16.32.090C. 
(Prior code § 12258)  
16.32.100 - Chapter provisions not exclusive. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, a property owner or his or her designee may seek approvals or permits for development which depart from the ordinances, policies and standards described in this chapter and local agencies may grant these approvals or issue these permits to the extent that the departures are authorized under applicable law. 
(Prior code § 12259)  
Chapter 16.36 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
16.36.010 - Approval requirements. 
A.  No tentative map, final map or parcel map shall be approved unless it meets the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this title; provided, that a final map shall be disapproved only for failure to meet or perform requirements or conditions which were applicable to the subdivision at the time of approval of the tentative map. Disapproval of a map shall be accompanied by a finding, by the city council, identifying the requirements or conditions which have not been met or performed. 
B.  The city council may waive the provisions of this section when the council determines that the failure of the map is the result of a technical and inadvertent error which does not materially affect the validity of the map. Such waiver and determination shall be included in the city council action to approve the map. 
(Prior code § 12203)  
16.36.020 - Denial of final or tentative map when. 
A.  The planning commission and city council shall deny approval of a final or tentative subdivision map if it makes any of the following findings: 
1.  That the proposed map is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans; 
2.  That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans; 
3.  That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development; 
4.  That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development; 
5.  That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and unavoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat; 
6.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems; 
7.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. The city council may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements, for access or for use, will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This subdivision shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction; 
8.  That the discharge of waste from the proposed subdivision into the city sewer system would result in violation, or add to a violation, of existing requirements prescribed by a California Regional Water Quality Control Board. 
B.  The planning commission and city council shall not deny approval of a final subdivision map pursuant to subsection A of this section if it has previously approved a tentative map for the proposed subdivision and it finds that the final map is in substantial compliance with the previously approved tentative map. 
(Prior code §§ 12203.01, 12203.02)  
16.36.030 - Correction and amendment of maps. 
After a final map or parcel map has been filed in the office of the county recorder, it may be amended by a certificate of correction or an amending map. Such certificates or maps shall be processed in accordance with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Prior code § 12204.36)  
16.36.040 - Certificate of compliance. 
A certificate of compliance for a specific parcel of land may be issued by the city engineer upon his finding that such parcel was established in compliance with all applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this code. A fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be charged for each certificate of compliance. 
(Ord. 2000-06 § 1: prior code § 12204.36(A))  
16.36.050 - Reversion to acreage. 
Subdivided real property may be reverted to acreage in accordance with the requirements and procedures specified in the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Prior code § 12204.37)  
16.36.060 - Merger of contiguous parcels under common ownership without reversion to acreage. 
Contiguous parcels under common ownership may be merged without reverting to acreage. 
A.  An application for merger shall be in the same form as an application for a certificate of compliance, and shall include a preliminary title report and legal description of the property as a single merged parcel; 
B.  An application for merger shall be approved by the city administrator/planner and/or his/her designee after review by other affected departments/divisions (prior to approval, all encumbrances, including bonded indebtedness, shall be modified to apply uniformly to the entire modified parcel, rather than to the portions of the modified parcel corresponding to the separate lots prior to the merger); 
C.  All persons owning an interest in the real properties to be merged shall consent to the merger by executing an owner's certificate consenting to merger; 
D.  The city administrator/planner and/or his/her designee shall record a certificate of compliance, including the owner's consent to merger, as set forth in this title, to evidence the merger of the properties. 
(Ord. 96-07 § 1: prior code § 12200.05)  
16.36.070 - Appeal to planning commission. 
Appeal from an action by the committee may be made to the planning commission within ten (10) days from such action. An appeal shall be submitted in written form to the secretary of the planning commission, and shall be placed on the agenda of the next commission meeting. The commission shall take action thereon within forty (40) days from the date of submittal. 
(Prior code § 12210.01)  
16.36.080 - Appeal to city council. 
A.  Any person who is dissatisfied with an action of the planning commission may, within ten (10) days after such action, appeal in writing to the city council for a public hearing. Within fifteen (15) days of any such appeal, the planning commission shall forward the map or other documents to the city council for review. A public notice of such hearing shall be made by the city clerk, and the hearing shall be held within the time limit required by the Map Act. The city council may continue such hearing from time to time, not to exceed fifteen (15) days from the date of first hearing without mutual consent. 
B.  At the time fixed for the hearing, the city council shall hear testimony of representatives of the commission, of any witnesses on its behalf, of the petitioner, and of any other parties at interest. 
C.  The city council shall consider the record and such additional evidence as may be offered and may affirm, reverse or modify, in whole or in part, the order, requirement, decision, recommendation, interpretation or ruling appealed from, or make and substitute such other or additional decision or determination as it may find warranted under law and facts. 
D.  The decision of the city council as a result of such hearing shall be expressed by a motion in writing, and the city council shall forthwith transmit a copy thereof to the subdivider and the commission. 
(Ord. 96-11 § 43; prior code §§ 12210.02—12210.05)  
16.36.090 - Conflict of provisions. 
Whenever conflict occurs between any provision of this title and any other provision of law, the more restrictive of such provisions shall prevail. 
(Prior code § 12212.01)  
16.36.100 - Permit of license in conflict with provisions prohibited. 
All departments, officials and public employees of the city vested with the duty or authority to issue permits shall conform to the provisions of this title and shall not wilfully issue any permit or license for use, construction or purpose in conflict with the provisions of this title; and any such permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this title shall be null and void. 
(Prior code § 12211 (part))  
16.36.110 - Certain prohibited actions voidable. 
Any deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell, or assignment, allocation, division or grant of entities of usage made contrary to the provisions of this title is voidable to the extent and in the manner provided in Section 66499.32 of the Government Code of the state of California. 
(Prior code § 1211.01)  
16.36.120 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any violation of this title shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as set forth in Section 1.12.010 of this code by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation of this title continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. 96-11 § 44; prior code § 12211 (part))  
Title 17 - ZONING 
Chapters:  
Chapter 17.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.04.010 - Zoning ordinance adopted. 
There is adopted a zoning ordinance for the city of Orland, state of California, as provided by Title 7 of the Government Code of the State of California. This ordinance constitutes a specific plan for the use of land and buildings. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.04.020 - Purpose. 
This title is adopted to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare, to provide a plan for sound and orderly development, to ensure social and economic stability within the various zones established in this title, to provide for consistency of land use regulations with the adopted general plan. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.04.030 - Interpretation authority. 
A.  Additionally, city staff responsible for administering this ordinance may interpret the provisions of all zones. City staff interpretations shall not circumvent other available established procedures such as conditional use permits and variances, and findings shall clearly be set forth by city staff documenting the interpretation. The planning commission shall review any appeals of a staff interpretation. 
B.  The planning commission, by writing findings adopted by the commission, may interpret any of the provisions of the title and may determine what additional uses may be permitted with or without use permits in any zone because of similarity and compatibility with listed uses. Said findings shall clearly set forth the justification for the interpretation. Such interpretations shall not be used to circumvent other available established procedures such as conditional use permits and variances. 
C.  The city council, on its own initiative or upon receipt of an appeal from any such interpretation or determination, may confirm, reverse or modify the action of the planning commission. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.04.040 - Limitations on land use and structures. 
Except as otherwise provided in this title: 
A.  Use Requirements. No building or part thereof or other structure shall be erected, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land, building, structure or premises be used, designated or intended to be used for any purpose or in any manner other than is included among the uses listed in this title as permitted in the zone in which such building, land or premises is located. 
B.  Height Requirements. No building or part thereof or structure shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed in height the limit designated in this title for the zone in which such building is located except as provided in Chapter 17.76 of this title. 
C.  Area Requirements. No building or part thereof or structure shall be erected nor shall any existing building be altered, enlarged or rebuilt or moved into any zone, nor shall any open space be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity to the yard, building site area, and building location regulations designated in this title for the zone in which such building or open space is located. 
D.  Duplicate Use of Open Space and Yards. No yard or other spaces provided about any buildings for the purpose of complying with provisions of this title shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a building on any other building site unless specifically permitted elsewhere in this title. 
E.  No building other than residential shall be used, occupied, or business license issued to/for without city approval and a safety inspection performed by the building department. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.04.050 - General plan amendments. 
The city's general plan may be amended pursuant to California Government Code Section 65358. The fee for any application for amendment shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
Chapter 17.08 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.08.010 - Generally. 
Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions set forth or otherwise provided for in this section shall be used in the interpretation and construction of this title. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular; the word "buildings" shall include the word "structure," and word "used" shall include "arranged, designed, constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased or intended to be used," and the word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.020 - Abut, abutting, adjoining. 
"Abut," "abutting," or "adjoining" all mean contiguous to or touching. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.030 - Access, vehicular. 
"Access" means the physical means by which an individual in a vehicle is able to enter upon public or private property from a street. "Ingress" and "egress" are other words for access. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.040 - Accessory use, structure. 
A.  "Accessory use" means a land use that is associated with an existing permitted or conditional use within a zoning district. 
B.  "Accessory structure" means a usual and customary building normally associated with a permitted or conditional use. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.050 - Acre. 
"Acre" means a measure of real property equaling forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.060 - Administrative permit. 
"Administrative permit" means any permit listed in Section 17.80.060 of this title and issued as a ministerial act by the city. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.070 - Agriculture equipment sales. 
"Agriculture equipment sales" means a business which is primarily engaged in the sale of equipment, vehicles, materials, supplies and tools to serve farming, ranching or timber interests and businesses. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.080 - Agriculture product processing, canning. 
"Agriculture product processing, canning" means the conversion of raw agriculture products into marketable commodities. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.090 - Agriculture product sales. 
"Agriculture product sales" means the sale of food or fiber commodities from the property where produced with stands for the purpose of displaying and selling these commodities. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.095 - Agricultural worker housing. 
"Agricultural worker housing" means housing for agricultural employees consisting of six or fewer persons in a single family home. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § I)  
17.08.100 - Airport. 
"Airport" or "heliport" means a place on land or water, where aircraft may land and take off, receive and disembark passengers or cargo, may take on fuel, purchase accessories or obtain service or repair. "Airstrip" also means airport. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.110 - Alley. 
"Alley" means a public or private thoroughfare which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.120 - Apartment. 
"Apartment" means a dwelling unit located within a structure that contains one or more attached dwelling units in which the units are available for rent or lease. "Apartment" also means an individual unit within a multiple-family residential development. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.130 - Apartment complex. 
"Apartment complex" means a multiple-family residential project or development. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.140 - Area. 
"Area" means a piece of land that can be definitively described and located with specific boundaries. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.145 - Accessory dwelling unit. 
"Accessory dwelling unit" means an attached or a detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. It shall have a separate exterior entrance and include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling is situated. An accessory dwelling unit also includes the following: 
A.  An efficiency unit, occupancy by no more than two persons which have a minimum floor area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet and which may also have partial kitchen or bathroom facilities, as defined in Section 17958.1 of [the] Health and Safety Code. 
B.  A manufactured home, as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03 , Exh. A)  
17.08.150 - Automobile sales. 
"Automobile sales" means a land use in which the primary business is based upon retail or wholesale transactions involving the transfer of title to motor vehicles including automobiles, light utility vehicles, trucks, motorcycles, recreation vehicles, and all terrain vehicles. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.160 - Automobile service. 
"Automobile service" means a land use which is involved in the business of repairing, modifying and maintaining motor vehicles. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.170 - Automobile service station. 
"Automobile service station" means any place where motor fuel or lubricating oil or grease is offered for sale to the public and deliveries are made directly into vehicles. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.180 - Automobile salvage yard. 
"Automobile salvage yard" means an individual or entity engaged in the business of acquiring or buying salvage automobiles(including nonrepairable vehicles) for resale in their entirety or as spare parts, or rebuilding, restoration or crushing of such vehicles. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.190 - Bar, club, lounge. 
"Bar," "club," or "lounge" means a land use in which the primary activity is the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption. A bar, club, or lounge may also provide entertainment for its patrons. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.200 - Base zoning district. 
"Base zoning district" means the underlying zone that dictates land use and primary development standards. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.210 - Bed and breakfast inn. 
"Bed and breakfast inn" means a business which involves accommodations in five or fewer guest rooms potentially with breakfast available for guests of the inn. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.220 - Block. 
"Block" means all property facing one side of the street or between a street and the railroad right-of-way, property along a dead-end street, or un-subdivided land. The intercepting street determines only the boundary of the block on the side of the street that it intercepts. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.230 - Boarding house. 
"Boarding house" is a structure where lodging and meals for boarders are provided for compensation. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.240 - Bottling plant. 
"Bottling plant" means a land use in which beverages, including, water, are processed for sale, resale, or distribution. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.250 - Building. 
"Building" means structure. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.260 - Building coverage. 
"Building coverage" means the percentage of land area covered by the building footprint. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.270 - Building footprint. 
"Building footprint" means the land area covered by a building as measured at its perimeter foundation walls including any roofed area that may not have perimeter foundation walls. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.280 - Building official. 
"Building official" means the person in charge of the city building department or department head. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.285 - Building inspector. 
"Building inspector" means the person performing the city's building inspections. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.290 - Building, residential. 
"Residential building" means a building designed to be used exclusively for dwelling purposes. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.300 - Building setback. 
"Building setback" means the required minimum distance from a property line or edge of a road easement or property right-of-way to the closest point of any building. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.310 - Building site. 
"Building site" means the portion of a parcel of land, in a single or joint ownership, and occupied or to be occupied by a building, together with such open spaces as are required by the terms of this title. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.320 - Business. 
"Business" means a land use established for the purposes of commerce and as a means of generating revenue or income. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.330 - Business, wholesale. 
"Wholesale business" means the selling of commodities in large quantities, as to retailers or jobbers rather than to consumers directly, but not including the storing and/or sale of any material or commodity, and not including the processing or manufacture of any product or substance. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.340 - California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
"California Environmental Quality Act" means a state law requiring state and local agencies to regulate activities with consideration for environmental protection. If a proposed activity has the potential for a significant adverse environmental impact, an Environmental Impact Report (EIR) must be prepared and certified as to its adequacy before taking action on the proposed project. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.350 - Campground. 
"Campground" means a parcel of land upon which individuals may occupy locations for overnight accommodations in a recreational vehicle, tent or cabin. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.360 - Carport. 
"Carport" means a structure which is attached or detached from another building, and which is open on at least two sides with a covering for vehicle storage. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.370 - Cemetery. 
"Cemetery" means a place for the interment of the remains of the deceased either by burial, cryostorage, mausoleum, or cremation. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.380 - Centerline. 
"Centerline" means the line located equidistant from the edges of an easement or right-of-way. Centerline of a road right-of-way or easement does not necessarily mean the center of the physical location of the road. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.390 - Church. 
"Church" means a land use that is used for the purposes of conducting religious services and religious education. Whether or not any reference is made, a church includes all other places of worship for any denomination. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.400 - City. 
"City" means the city of Orland. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.410 - City council. 
"City council" means the city council of the city of Orland. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.420 - Civic center. 
"Civic center" means an area developed or to be developed with any of the following public buildings or uses including offices, libraries, playgrounds, parks, assembly halls, police stations and fire stations. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.430 - CEQA guidelines. 
"CEQA guidelines" means the procedures and guidelines for implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) including any specific requirements adopted by the city of Orland. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.440 - Clinic. 
"Clinic" means a land use which is established for the purposes of providing a health or lifestyle related service for humans and animals. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.450 - Combining district, combining zone. 
"Combining district" or "combining zone" means a land use classification that combines with a base zone to add additional planning opportunities to the use of land. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.460 - Commercial. 
"Commercial" means a use related to commerce and the production of revenue or income. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.470 - Community care facility. 
"Community care facility" means a residential facility for the care and housing of six or fewer persons which may be developmentally disabled, seniors, alcoholics in recovery, and other similar facilities licensed by the state. The state has determined that six or fewer is considered to be a residential use. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.480 - Conditional use permit. 
"Conditional use permit" means a land use permit issued in a zone for uses which have the potential to be incompatible with neighboring land uses and zoning and are to be permitted following a public hearing in which interested parties have the opportunity to comment. "Use permit" also means conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.490 - Construction. 
"Construction" means the physical development of a parcel, including site excavation and grading, framing and finishing, up to the point of final inspection, use, or occupancy, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.500 - Consumer service. 
"Consumer service" means a business which derives its principal revenue from offering an intangible product for sale, or provides a service. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.510 - Contractor's equipment yard. 
"Contractor's equipment yard" means a parcel of land that is used for the temporary or ongoing outside storage of equipment, tools, materials, and vehicles used in the performance of a contractor's business. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.520 - Corner lot. 
"Corner lot" means a lot that has two or more parcel lines contiguous to a public street. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.530 - Date of decision. 
"Date of the decision" granting or denying a permit under this title means the date on which the decision is announced or final vote taken. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.540 - Day-care center, family and adult day-care home. 
A.  "Day-care center" means a land use to which children are taken for care and/or educational experience, other than that of a public or private school, while parents or legal guardians are unavailable to watch the children for periods of less than eighteen (18) hours with no land-use limit on the number of children within the facility unless otherwise specified in the facility's permit. 
B.  "Small family day-care home" means a day-care center in the home of the person operating the facility, and providing care for no more than eight children, including children who are members of the provider's family. (Health and Safety Code Section 1597.44) 
C.  "Large family day-care home" means a day-care center in the home of the person operating the facility, and providing care for no more than fourteen (14) children, including children who are members of the provider's family. (Health and Safety Code Section 1597.46) 
D.  "Day health care center" means a land use to which adults, generally those over the age of sixty (60), are taken for care or activities while the children or guardians of the adults are unavailable to watch or care for the adult. (Health and Safety Code Section 1570.7) 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.550 - Density. 
"Density" means either of the following: 
A.  For residential use, density means the number of dwelling units per acre. 
B.  For nonresidential use, density means the percentage of lot coverage. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.553 - Density bonus. 
"Density bonus" means a density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the applicable zoning ordinance and land use element of the general plan. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § I)  
17.08.560 - Density, gross. 
"Gross density" means the total number of units permitted under the property's general plan designation or zone district before streets or other dedications are provided. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.570 - Density, net. 
"Net density" means the total number of units permitted under the property's general plan designation or zone district excluding street area and other dedications. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.580 - District. 
"District" means a portion of the city within which certain uses of lands, buildings or structures are permitted or prohibited, and within which certain yards and other open spaces are required and certain height limits are established for the same as set forth in this title. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.590 - Drive in restaurant/drive-up window. 
"Drive in restaurant/drive-up window" means a restaurant where customers are either served outside of the building with a walk up window, a drive up window for vehicles, or otherwise served in their vehicle without having to enter the restaurant. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.600 - Duplex. 
"Duplex" means a dwelling unit that consists of two independent units that are attached. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.610 - Dwelling. 
A.  "Dwelling" means any building or portion thereof designed or used for habitation or residential occupancy. 
B.  "Dwelling, single-family" means any building or portion thereof which contains one dwelling unit. 
C.  "Dwelling, two-family" (or duplex) means any building or portion thereof which contains two dwelling units. 
D.  "Dwelling, multiple" (or triplex for three units; fourplex for four units; or multi-family residential) as defined means any building or portion thereof which contains three or more dwelling units within one structure. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.620 - Dwelling unit. 
"Dwelling unit" means a single residential unit designed for human habitation. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.630 - Easement. 
"Easement" means any legal right defined as an easement in the California Code of Civil Procedure, Section 800 et al. Generally, an easement is a right to the use of another's land. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.640 - Electronic component assembly. 
"Electronic component assembly" means an industrial use in which the manufactured goods are assembled from components manufactured elsewhere. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.650 - Electronic component manufacturing. 
"Electronic component manufacturing" means an industrial use in which components for use in electronic equipment are manufactured from raw materials. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.655 - Emergency shelters. 
"Emergency shelters" means housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or households may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § I)  
17.08.660 - Explosive. 
"Explosive" means and includes any chemical compound or mechanical mixture, that is commonly used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion, and that contains any oxidizing and combustible units, packing, that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion, or by detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing effects on contiguous objects or of destroying life or limb. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.670 - Exterior side yard. 
"Exterior side yard" means the required side yard setback area on any corner lot adjacent to a public street. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.680 - Family. 
"Family" means a group of individuals with a common bond by means of blood, marriage, or conscientiously established relations living together as a housekeeping unit sharing a dwelling unit. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.690 - Fence, wall. 
"Fence" or "wall" means a structure constructed of posts, supports, and cross members that serves as an obstruction to mark property lines or delineate or restrict access to a portion of property. Fences for the purpose of this chapter includes walls, hedges, and screen plantings. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.700 - Flea market. 
"Flea market" means a temporary land use in which a series of booths, tables, or other temporary display areas are set up in which an individual, persons, vendors, group, organization, or business which offer both new and used merchandise for retail trade. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.710 - Frontage. 
"Frontage" means the total distance along a property line that abuts a public street or streets. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.720 - Garage. 
"Garage" means a structure intended for use for storage of vehicles and other items. This definition does not replace the definition of a garage in the California Building Code. A garage may be incorporated within a building. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.730 - Garage sale. 
"Garage sale" means a garage, yard, lawn, patio or similar type sale held anywhere on the premises in any residential zone for the purpose of disposing of personal property. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.740 - General plan. 
"General plan" means the city of Orland general plan as currently adopted including all amendments. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.750 - Government code. 
"Government code" means the California Government Code. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.760 - Gross floor area. 
"Gross floor area" means the total square footage of a structure as measured around the exterior perimeter including any non-walled areas under roof and any outside storage or sales areas. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.770 - Gross land area. 
"Gross land area" means the area of the parcel exclusive of any required public dedication. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.780 - Group care home. 
"Group care home" means a facility licensed by the state pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 1502 et seq. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.790 - Guest house. 
"Guest house" means a detached living quarter of permanent construction, without kitchens, which are clearly subordinate and incidental to the use of the main building on the same lot. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.800 - Health and safety code. 
"Health and safety code" means the California Health and Safety Code, also written H&S. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.810 - Height. 
"Height" means the vertical distance from the base elevation at the point of measurement to the highest point on the structure, excluding chimneys, antennae, and similar nonstructural elements. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.820 - Heliport. 
"Heliport" means "airport" as defined herein. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.830 - Highway. 
"Highway" means a state route as defined by the state of California Department of Transportation, CALTRANS. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.840 - Home occupation. 
"Home occupation" means a business located in a home that is subservient to the use of the dwelling as a residence. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.850 - Hospital. 
"Hospital" means a land use in which intensive and general medical care is provided for patients on an emergency in- and out-patient basis. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.860 - Hotel. 
"Hotel" means a land use in which there are six or more rooms for transient occupancy. Motel and hotel are synonymous. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.870 - Household pets. 
"Household pets" means domestic animals or fowl normally kept in the house for company or pleasure and not for profit, such as dogs, cats, canaries, parrots, but not including a sufficient number of dogs to constitute a kennel as defined herein. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.880 - Indemnification. 
"Indemnification" means compliance with a request to relieve the city of liability or to accept the costs for defending the city from any action brought as a result of the project. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.890 - Industry. 
"Industry" means the manufacturing, fabrication, processing, reduction or assembly of any article, substance or commodity which results in a new product from the original materials. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.900 - Interior side yard. 
"Interior side yard" means the required setback area from any property line between two parcels, neither of which are public streets. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.910 - Junk. 
"Junk" means, but is not limited to, trash; refuse; paper; glass; cans; bottles; rags; ashes; trimming from lawns, yards, trees, and shrubbery, including plants and leaves; and other solid waste or salvageable materials other than garbage; inoperable appliances, parts, tools; inoperable and unregistered vehicles; vehicle parts; vehicle hulks; discarded furniture; dirt; rocks; and materials from the demolition, alteration or construction of buildings or structures, unless such dirt, rock, or other materials from demolition, alteration or construction are being used for purposes of fill. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.920 - Junkyard. 
"Junkyard" means a place in which junk, salvaged materials or products, scrap, or other waste materials are stored, broken up, dismantled, sorted, distributed, or sold privately or commercially. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.930 - Kennel. 
"Kennel" means a land use where four or more dogs four months or older and/or four cats six weeks or older are bred, raised, trained, or boarded. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.940 - Landfill. 
"Landfill" means a parcel of land that is appropriately licensed for the storage of solid waste. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.950 - Landscaping. 
"Landscaping" means the replacement of developed or excavated areas of a parcel with introduced new living vegetation, shrubbery, trees, ground cover and combinations thereof. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.960 - Living area. 
"Living area" means the interior habitable area for a dwelling unit, including basements and attics, but does not include a garage or any accessory structure. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.970 - Lot. 
"Lot" means a legally established parcel of land. 
A.  "Corner lot" means a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets, where they intersect at an interior angle of not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. If the intersection angle is more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees, the lot is considered an interior lot. 
B.  "Flag lot" means a lot having access from the building site to a public street by means of private right-of-way strip that is owned in fee. 
C.  "Interior lot" means a lot abutting only one street. 
D.  "Key lot" means an interior lot, the front of which adjoins the side property line of a corner lot. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.980 - Lot coverage. 
"Lot coverage" means the percent of lot covered by all building footprints. Means the same as "Site coverage." 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.990 - Lot depth. 
"Lot depth" means the average distance from the property line fronting a road or road easement to the rear or opposite property line. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1000 - Lot frontage. 
"Lot frontage" means the width of the lot fronting on a road or private road easement, measured along the property line. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1010 - Lot line. 
A.  "Lot line" means any legally described parcel line as follows: 
B.  "Front lot line" is the shortest property line along the road or road easement. 
C.  "Side lot line" is the property line intersecting with the front lot line and dividing the parcel from other adjacent parcels or another public street. 
D.  "Exterior lot line" is the property line intersecting with the front lot line and contiguous with a public street on a corner lot. 
E.  "Interior lot line" is any property line dividing the parcel from other adjacent parcels. 
F.  "Rear lot line" is the property line opposite the front lot line. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1020 - Lot width. 
"Lot width" means the distance from one side property line to the other side property line measured along the front building setback line. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1030 - Manufactured housing. 
"Manufactured housing" means H.U.D. standard manufactured housing (on a permanent foundation) that are constructed entirely in the factory, and which since June 15, 1976, have been regulated by the federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 under the administration of U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). (See "Mobile home" and "Modular unit") 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1040 - Mobile home. 
"Mobile home" means H.U.D. standard manufactured housing (not on a permanent foundation) or a non-permanent shelter as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 396 and Health and Safety Code Section 18008. (See "Manufactured housing" and "Modular unit") 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1050 - Mobile home park. 
"Mobile home park" is any area or tract of land where two or more mobile home lots (spaces) are rented or leased, held out for rent or lease, or were formerly held out for rent or lease and later converted to a subdivision, cooperative, condominium, or other form of residential ownership, to accommodate manufactured homes or mobile homes used for human habitation. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1060 - Modular unit, factory built house. 
"Modular house" and "factory built house" means a house built in components to the standards of the California Building Code at a location other than the site upon which the house is delivered and installed. Differs from mobile homes and manufactured housing by (in addition to lacking an integral chassis or permanent hitch to allow future movement) being subject to California housing law design standards. Also called factory-built housing and regulated by state law of that title. (See "Mobile home" and "Manufactured housing") 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1070 - Motel. 
"Motel" means a land use in which there are six or more rooms for transient occupancy. Motel and hotel are synonymous. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1080 - Net land area. 
"Net land area" means the area of land remaining after any required public dedication. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1090 - Nonconforming building or use. 
A.  "Nonconforming building" means a structure that does not conform to present regulations. 
B.  "Nonconforming use" means a land use which does not conform to present regulations. 
C.  "Legally existing" means a use that predates present regulations but was legally constructed or established at the time the use or construction first commenced. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1100 - Nursery. 
"Nursery" or "plant nursery" means a business which is primarily engaged in the raising, propagation, growth, or sales of vegetation, plants and supplies. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1110 - Occupancy. 
"Occupancy" means the establishment of a use within a structure or upon a parcel of land, including and not limited to, installing display fixtures in a completed structure, stocking of inventory, or commencing temporary or permanent residency, whether or not a structure has been subject to an approved final inspection or a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1120 - Off-site. 
"Off-site" means an improvement or other reference concerning a proposed project or subject property which is not located on the parcel under discussion. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1130 - On-site. 
"On-site" means an improvement or other reference concerning the subject property under discussion. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1140 - Open space. 
"Open space" means the portion of the lot or parcel from the ground upward that is unoccupied by buildings, structures, parking lots and driveways, except as otherwise permitted by city regulations. Clubhouses, recreation buildings, pools, saunas, interior walkways, paths and similar amenities may be included in open space. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1150 - Parcel, lot. 
"Parcel" or "lot" means a described area of land within an ownership. Parcel may also mean a parcel established for tax purposes, sometimes called an assessor's parcel. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1160 - Park, playground. 
"Park" or "playground" means a land use which is established for the purpose of providing passive or active recreation on a public or private basis. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1170 - Parking area. 
"Parking area" means the paved portion of a parcel which is developed for the storage of vehicles. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1180 - Paved. 
"Paved" means that the required surface typically used for parking, driveways or other vehicular access is improved with concrete, asphaltic concrete, or other similar material capable of handling the type of vehicular traffic anticipated with the proposed use. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1190 - Permit. 
"Permit" means an authorization to proceed issued by the city for a specific activity. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1200 - Planned community. 
"Planned community" means a large-scale development whose essential features are a definable boundary; a consistent, but not necessarily uniform, character; overall control during the development process by a single development entity; private ownership of recreation amenities; and enforcement of covenants, conditions, and restrictions by a master community association. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1210 - Planned unit development. 
"Planned unit development" means a description of a proposed unified development, consisting at a minimum of a map and adopted ordinance setting forth the regulations governing, and the location and phasing of all proposed uses and improvements to be included in the development. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1220 - Planning commission. 
"Planning commission" means the body appointed by the Orland city council to review planning matters assigned pursuant to the city code. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1230 - Planning department. 
"Planning department" means the city-appointed or designated staff of the city of Orland to assist the city with planning-related matters. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1240 - Planning director. 
"Planning director" means the person appointed or designated to assist the city with planning-related matters. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1245 - Pre-occupancy inspection. 
"Pre-occupancy inspection" means a required inspection before any existing building and/or structure other than residential, is used, occupied or business license is issued to/for. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1250 - Professional office. 
"Professional office" means a nonretail or noncommercial wholesale activity wherein professional service is typically provided to the public, or the office is the headquarters for a commercial or industrial activity. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1260 - Property line. 
"Property line" is a legal boundary describing a parcel of land. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1270 - Public agency. 
"Public agency" means a political subdivision, federal, state, or local government or its departments, or governmental jurisdictions or districts. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1280 - Public Resources Code. 
"Public Resources Code" means the California Public Resources Code, also written PRC. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1290 - Public services. 
"Public services" means services needed for development of a parcel of land. This may include, but is not limited to, electricity, access, water, sewage collection and treatment, and telecommunications. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1300 - Public utility buildings and uses. 
"Public utility buildings and uses" means buildings, structures and uses of a public business which provides a general service to the public, such as telecommunications, electricity, water, or other services. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1310 - Recreational vehicle park. 
"Recreational vehicle park" means any area or tract of land or a separate section within a mobile home park, where two or more lots are rented or leased or held out for rent, or lease to owners or users of recreational vehicles or tents. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1320 - Recreational vehicle storage. 
"Recreational vehicle storage" means a commercial activity in which recreation vehicles are garaged either within a building, or an open enclosure for payment of a rental fee. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1330 - Rest home. 
"Rest home" means a building where two or more infirm or aged persons are housed for compensation. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1340 - Right-of-way, public. 
"Public right-of-way" is a strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a road, trail, water line, sanitary sewer and/or other public uses. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1350 - Rooming house. 
"Rooming house" means the same as "boarding house" as set forth herein. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1370 - School. 
"School" means an institution, public or private, established for the purpose of educating a class of students at any grade level, either for profit or nonprofit purposes. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1380 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-03, Exh. A, adopted Aug. 20, 2018, repealed § 17.08.1380, which pertained to second dwelling unit, and derived from Ord. No. 2007-05 § 3 (part).  
17.08.1390 - Shopping center. 
"Shopping center" means a commercial center, or group of commercial establishments, planned, developed, managed and maintained as a unit, with common off-street parking provided to serve all uses on the property. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1400 - Side and front on corner lots. 
The front yard (of a corner lot) may face either street frontage of a corner lot, at the option of the owner. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1410 - Sign. 
"Sign" means any device capable of visual communications or attraction, including declarations, announcements, demonstrations, displays, insignias, trademarks, or symbols, used for the purpose of informing, advertising, or promoting any business, place, or event. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1412 - Single-room occupancy (SRO) housing. 
"Single-room occupancy housing" means a compact dwelling unit with limited cooking and living facilities designed primarily for one individual and within a multiple-unit structure. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § I)  
17.08.1415 - Site Plan Review. 
"Site plan" means a plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensions, all of the buildings, structures and uses and the exact manner of development proposed for a specific parcel of land. A "site plan" application may be approved by the city manager, or his/her nominee, without the necessity of public notice, a public hearing, or planning commission action if findings required for approval (Section 17.82.050) can be made. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1420 - Street. 
"Street" means a public thoroughfare accepted by the city which affords principal means of access to abutting property, including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road, except an "alley" as defined herein. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1430 - Structure. 
"Structure" means shelter, building, dwelling unit, or other physical development upon the land to house, protect, store, or cover persons or things. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1440 - Structure alteration. 
"Structure alteration" means any change in supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1445 - Supportive housing. 
"Supportive housing" means housing with no limit on length of stay. that is occupied by the target populations, and that is linked to onsite or offsite services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § I)  
17.08.1450 - Temporary use. 
"Temporary use" means a land use which may occur on a parcel of land for a limited time as may be authorized herein. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1454 - Transitional housing. 
"Transitional housing" means a building configured as rental housing development, but operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § I) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-02, § I, adopted Feb. 18, 2014, set out provisions designated as § 17.08.1455. Inasmuch as said section already exists, the provisions have been redesignated as § 17.08.1454, at the discretion of the editor.  
17.08.1455 - Truck, catering. 
"Catering truck" means any licensed, motorized vehicle wherein or wherefromwrapped or pre-packaged food, foodstuffs, products, liquids or material intended or food or drink for human consumption are sold, served, distributed, or offered for sale at retail or given away to the public. Catering trucks shall require a city-issued business license and shall be required to provide documentation that the use has been approved by the Glenn County Public Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, adopted Dec. 3, 2012, set out provisions designated as § 17.08.1460. Inasmuch as said section already exists, the provisions have been redesignated as § 17.08.1455, at the discretion of the editor.  
17.08.1456 - Truck, food. 
"Food truck" means any licensed, motorized vehicle or mobile food unit which is stored on a privately-owned lot and where food is prepared on the premises and service to the customer is by means of a window or opening on the side of the vehicle. Food trucks shall require a city-issued business license and shall be required to provide documentation that the use has been approved by the Glenn County Public Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, adopted Dec. 3, 2012, set out provisions designated as § 17.08.1470. Inasmuch as said section already exists, the provisions have been redesignated as § 17.08.1456, at the discretion of the editor.  
17.08.1460 - Use. 
"Use" means the activity that takes place on a parcel of land. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1470 - Variance. 
"Variance" means a discretionary entitlement which permits the departure from the strict application of the development standards contained in this title. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1475 - Vending cart. 
"Vending cart" means a mobile, non-motorized, movable cart from which pre-packaged food stuffs to include but no be limited to ice cream, flowers, and/or nonalcoholic beverages are provided, or offered for sale or sold, to the public with or without charge. Vending carts shall require a city-issued business license and shall be required to provide documentation that the use has been approved by the Glenn County Public Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, adopted Dec. 3, 2012, set out provisions designated as § 17.08.1500. Inasmuch as said section already exists, the provisions have been redesignated as § 17.08.1475, at the discretion of the editor.  
17.08.1480 - Yard. 
"Yard" means the area between a property line and required setback line with any lot. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1490 - Yard, front. 
"Front yard" means a yard extending across the full width of the front portion of the lot measured from the front line of the lot to the nearest line of a building or structure wall or required front setback line, whichever is closer to the property line. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1500 - Yard, rear. 
"Rear yard" means a yard extending across the full width of the rear portion of the lot measured between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the building or structure wall or required rear yard setback line, whichever is closer to the property line. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.08.1510 - Yard, side. 
"Side yard" means a yard between the side line of the lot and nearest structure setback or required side yard setback line, whichever is closer to the property line and extending from the front yard of the lot to the rear yard. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
Chapter 17.12 - ZONING DISTRICTS DESIGNATED 
Sections: 
 
17.12.010 - Principal zones established. 
The several zones established, and into which the city may be divided, are as follows: 
Zone 	Abbreviation 	Intended Land Use Designation 
Residential one-family 	R-1 	Low Density Residential, R-L 
Residential two-family 	R-2 	Medium Density Residential, R-M 
Residential multiple family 	R-3 	High Density Residential, R-H 
Neighborhood commercial 	C-1 	Commercial, C 
Community commercial 	C-2 	Commercial, C 
Highway service commercial 	C-H 	Commercial, C 
Limited industrial 	M-L 	Light Industrial/ Commercial, I-L/C 
Heavy industrial 	M-H 	Heavy Industrial, I-H 
Open space 	O-S 	Open Space/Resource Conservation, OS/RC 
Planned development 	P-D 	Any Designation 
Public facilities 	P-F 	Public Facility, P-F 
Floodway conservation 	F-W 	Any Designation 
 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.12.020 - Location and boundaries of zones. 
The designation, location and boundaries of the aforementioned zones, shall be delineated on the zoning map of the city which shall be adopted by an ordinance of the Orland city council. Such map and all notations, references, dates and other information shown thereon shall be a part of these regulations and subject thereto, and such map as adopted and/or amended from time to time by ordinance of the Orland city council constitutes Section 17.12.030 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.12.030 - Zoning map. 
This section consists of the zoning map of the city referenced in Section 17.12.020 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.12.040 - Determination of uncertain boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various zones, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  Streets or Alleys. Where the indicated zoning boundaries are approximately street or alley lines, the centerlines of such streets or alleys shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
B.  Lot Lines. Where the zoning boundaries are not shown to be streets or alleys, and where the indicated boundaries are approximately lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundaries of such zone, unless such boundaries are otherwise indicated. 
C.  Scale on Map—Determination by Commission. Where property is indicated on a zoning map as acreage and not subdivided into lots and blocks, or where the zone boundary lines are not approximately street, alley or lot lines, the zone boundary line shall be determined by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.12.050 - Classification applies to all incorporated territory. 
All incorporated territory of the city shall be classified as specified by the zoning map adopted as a part of this title. Property hereafter annexed to the city shall be classified as R-1 zoned in accordance with the provision of Section 65859 of the (California) Government Code. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.12.060 - Prezones. 
Property shall be prezoned prior to annexation. Prezoning will be accomplished in the same manner as zoning within the city and the application fee shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.12.070 - Split zoning. 
Parcels with split zoning may be developed in conformance with the applicable zone district as long as each zoned area meets the minimum parcel size requirement for the zone. If the zoned area does not have sufficient area to meet the minimum parcel size requirement for the zone district, such area may only be used for purposes permitted in the applicable zone district upon approval of a use permit. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
Chapter 17.14 - MARIJUANA DISTRIBUTION FACILITIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-01 , § 3, adopted Jan. 17, 2017, changed the title of Ch. 17.14 from "Medical Marijuana Distribution Facilities" to read as herein set out. 
 
17.14.010 - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
"Marijuana distribution facility" has the same meaning as set forth in Section 5.30.10 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3; Ord. No. 2017-01 , § 3)  
17.14.020 - Marijuana distribution facilities. 
A.  Marijuana distribution facilities are prohibited in the city of Orland, and no person shall operate or locate a marijuana distribution facility in the city of Orland. The city shall not issue, approve, or grant any permit, license, or other entitlement for the establishment or operation of a marijuana distribution facility in the city of Orland. 
B.  This chapter does not apply where preempted by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3; Ord. No. 2017-01 , § 3) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-01 , § 3, adopted Jan. 17, 2017, changed the title of § 17.14.020 from "Medical marijuana distribution facilities" to read as herein set out.  
17.14.030 - Violations—Penalty. 
A.  Any use or condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provisions of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be abated by the city pursuant to the procedures set forth in this code. 
B.  Each violation of this chapter and each day a violation of this chapter continues to exist shall be considered a separate and distinct violation. 
C.  All means of enforcement authorized under this code may be used to address violations of this chapter, including but not limited to: Civil penalties, nuisance abatement, civil actions, and administrative citations. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3)  
Chapter 17.16 - MARIJUANA CULTIVATION 
 
17.16.010 - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
"Marijuana" shall have the same meaning as that set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 11018. 
"Marijuana cultivation" means the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, or processing of all marijuana, including medical marijuana. 
"Medical marijuana" means marijuana that has been recommended by a licensed physician in strict accordance with California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.5 through Section 11362.83, inclusive, commonly referred to as the Compassionate Use Act and the Medical Marijuana Program. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 6)  
17.16.020 - Marijuana cultivation. 
Marijuana cultivation by any person or entity is prohibited in all zone districts within the city of Orland. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 6)  
17.16.030 - Violations—Penalty. 
A.  Any use or condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provisions of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be abated by the city pursuant to the procedures set forth in this code. 
B.  Each violation of this chapter and each day a violation of this chapter continues to exist shall be considered a separate and distinct violation. 
C.  All means of enforcement authorized under this code may be used to address violations of this chapter, including but not limited to: civil penalties, nuisance abatement, civil actions, and administrative citations. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 6)  
Chapter 17.20 - R-1 RESIDENTIAL ONE-FAMILY ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.20.010 - Purpose and applicability. 
The residential one-family or R-1 zone is intended to be applied in areas of the city where topography, access, utilities, public services and general conditions make the areas suitable and desirable for single-family home development. This district permits a variable minimum lot size to be established upon zoning of the project site, as a means to provide greater variation in residential environments. The regulations of this chapter and the provisions of Chapter 17.76 shall apply in all residential one-family or R-1 zones. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.20.020 - Principal permitted uses. 
Principal permitted uses in the R-1 zone are as follows: 
A.  One single-family dwelling; 
B.  Crop and tree farming; 
C.  Second dwellings in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.76.130; 
D.  Renting of one room to not more than two persons not employed on the premises; 
E.  Yard sales as defined and permitted in Section 17.76.160; 
F.  Domestic pets and other animals and fowl may be kept in conformity with health department standards; 
G.  Pre-manufactured structures in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.76.120; 
H.  Patio covers and shade structures that satisfy the provisions of Section 17.20.060(F); 
I.  Small family day care homes; 
J.  Large family day care homes subject to the provisions of Section 17.76.070; 
K.  Community care facilities with six or less persons as provided by California H&S Code Section 1569.13; 
L.  Tract sales offices in conjunction with sale of lots in a subdivision subjectto provisions of Section 17.76.140; 
M.  Agricultural worker housing; 
N.  Supportive housing: 
O.  Transitional housing. 
P.  Accessory dwelling units subject to the provisions of Section 17.76.130. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § II; Ord. No. 2018-03 , Exh. A)  
17.20.030 - Administratively permitted uses. 
Administratively permitted uses in an R-1 zone are as follows: 
A.  Accessory structures typically occurring in residential areas; 
B.  Home occupations in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.76.060; 
C.  One detached storage building or garage in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.20.060(E). 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.20.040 - Conditional uses requiring use permits. 
Conditional use permits requiring use permits in the R-1 zone are as follows: 
A.  Guest houses and servants' quarters; 
B.  Public and private noncommercial recreational facilities; 
C.  Public and private schools, churches, public parks, public buildings, and golf courses; 
D.  Bed and breakfasts; 
E.  Communication towers and support facilities in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.85; 
F.  Public utility buildings and uses; 
G.  Private institutions, including private schools, day care centers, rest homes, sanitariums, convalescent homes, homes for the elderly and similar operations; 
H.  Home occupations not consistent with the provisions of Section 17.76.060; 
I.  Mobile home parks and subdivisions subject to a minimum of six thousand (6,000) square feet for each space or lot; 
J.  Temporary dwelling for the convalescence of the immediate family members in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.76.040. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.20.050 - Lot requirements. 
A.  Upon zoning of a residential project an area designation shall be selected using either, R-1, R-1 10,000, R-1 15,000, or R-1 20,000. The zoning map shall show the approved lot area designation. 
B.  Lot requirements in the R-1 zones are as follows: 
	R-1 	R-1 
10,000 	R-1 
15,000 	R-1 
20,000 
Minimum lot area 	6,000 	10,000 	15,000 	20,000 
Minimum lot area corner lot 	7,000 	10,000 	15,000 	20,000 
Minimum lot width 	60 feet 	80 feet 	90 feet 	100 feet 
Minimum corner lot width 	70 feet 	80 feet 	90 feet 	100 feet 
 
C.  Maximum lot depth; three times lot width. 
D.  Maximum building coverage: forty (40) percent. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.20.060 - Design requirements. 
Design requirements for structures in the R-1 zone are as follows: 
A.  Minimum building width: twenty (20) feet; 
B.  Minimum roof slope: 3:12; 
C.  Minimum roof eave overhang, twelve (12) inches; 
D.  An enclosed garage for at least two cars shall be provided for all new construction. The garage shall be at least twenty (20) feet by twenty (20) feet with a minimum sixteen (16) foot wide garage door. Driveway access shall be paved; 
The maximum height for a detached garage or carport is fifteen (15) feet. Additional height above fifteen (15) feet may be granted up to a maximum of twenty-five (25) feet whereby an additional one foot of building setback is provided for each additional foot of building height. 
E.  A single detached storage or shop building shall meet the following criteria: 
1.  The storage or shop building shall conform to the maximum building coverage requirements, 
2.  The height of the storage building shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet, 
3.  The roof pitch and construction materials of the building shall be similar to that of the dwelling unit, 
4.  Shall not be located in any required front yard (closest to the front property line) or in front of the primary structure, whichever distance is greater, 
5.  Consistent with setbacks for this zone district, 
6.  The storage building shall not be equipped with electrical service or plumbing of any kind; 
F.  Patio covers and shade structures shall meet the following criteria. Those not meeting this criteria shall meet the yard, height and design criteria for main buildings: 
1.  Set back a minimum of five feet from the rear and side yard property line, 
2.  Open on at least two sides, 
3.  Maximum height: twelve (12) feet, 
4.  Minimum six-foot spacing on support posts shall be provided; 
G.  Heating and air conditioning units may be located in the side yard of those lots where a dwelling exists at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
H.  At a minimum, the following landscaping is required: 
1.  The required front yard shall be landscaped and not used for parking. The only area not landscaped within the required front yard is the driveway access to the required parking area, which shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in width. 
2.  Landscaping within the front setback area shall include one, fifteen (15) gallon-sized tree for each fifty (50) feet of frontage, and at least one gallon-sized shrub for each five feet of frontage. 
3.  In addition to the required trees and shrubs, the landscaped area may also be planted with lawn or ground cover plants. Other decorative non-plant ground covers may be used as long as they do not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of this landscaped area. 
4.  Where landscaping is provided, adequate irrigation and maintenance thereof shall be provided, including replacement of dead trees, shrubs, vines or other ground cover required pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1(Exh. A))  
17.20.070 - Setbacks. 
A.  Minimum yards in the R-1 zone are as follows: 
Main building: 
Front: twenty (20) feet; 
Rear: twenty (20) feet; 
Side: five feet. Side setback on a corner lot facing the street shall not be less than twenty (20) feet. 
Accessory structures: 
Front: thirty-five (35) feet; 
Rear: twenty (20) feet, unless otherwise specified herein; 
Side: five feet, unless otherwise specified herein. 
B.  Exceptions to the minimum yards established above are as follows: 
1.  Detached accessory buildings shall not be located within five feet of any main building, nor within five feet of a side lot line, nor encroach on any easement. Accessory buildings attached to main buildings shall be structurally a part thereof and shall comply with main building yard requirements. 
2.  If the property abuts a public alley, the rear setback shall be as detailed in Table: R-1 Structure Setbacks of this section. 
3.  The rear setback for a detached garage that meets the following requirements shall be as detailed in Table: R-1 Structure Setbacks of this section: 
a.  The height shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet; 
b.  The roof pitch and construction materials of the garage shall be similar to that of the dwelling unit. 
4.  Where more than one-half of the block is occupied with buildings, the required front yard may be reduced to the average of those of the improved sites, but in no case shall be less than twelve (12) feet. 
5.  If any building is so located on a lot that the front faces any side lot line, it shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet from such side lot line. 
6.  Hedges and shrubs shall not be permitted more than three feet in height within twenty (20) feet of the front street corner of corner lots. 
7.  All fences within a front yard setback area, or side yard setback area of a corner lot, shall not exceed three feet in height. All fences not within such setback areas shall not exceed six feet in height. 
8.  Outdoor swimming pools and spas located within ten (10) feet of any side yard, rear yard or structure, shall be set back from said side yard, rear yard of structure a distance equal to the depth of the pool within said ten (10) foot area, but in no instance shall the setback be less than five feet. Pools and spas shall not be located in a required front yard. 
9.  Setbacks for all other garages or accessory structures not otherwise described herein shall be as detailed in Table: R-1 Structure Setbacks of this section. 
R-1 STRUCTURE SETBACKS 
Yard 	Structure 	Setback 
Front 	House/Main Building 	20 
	Garage 	20 
	Accessory Structure 	Not allowed 
	Pool or spa 	Not allowed 
Side (interior lot) 	House/Main Building 	5 
	Garage 	5 
	Patio covers and shade structures 	5 
	Accessory 	5 
	House facing side yard 	25 
Side yard facing street (corner lot) 	House/Main Building 	20 
	Garage (at same front plane as house) 	20 
	Garage (behind rear plane of house, with alley access only) 	10 
	Accessory structure (same plane as house) 	20 
	Accessory structure (behind rear plane of house) 	10 
Rear 	House/Main Building 	20 
	Garage (detached, no alley) 	10 
	Garage (on alley) 	Zero, if min. 24' backup available into alley 
	Garage or accessory structure in rear yard abutting land on which no structure can be built (example: abutting US Bureau of Reclamation ditch right-of-way) 	Zero 
	Accessory structure (on alley) 	Zero 
	Accessory structure (no alley): 	
	Less than or equal to 120 square foot footprint, and less than or equal to six feet tall 	Zero 
	Metal sided and roofed 	
	Structure less than or equal to six feet tall 	Zero 
	Metal sided and roofed 	
	Structure greater than six feet tall 	1' for each foot of height above six feet, up to ten feet 
	Non-metal sided and roofed structure greater than 120 square feet and greater than six feet tall 	Minimum 5', plus 1' for each foot of height above 6', up to 10' 
	Patio covers and shade structures 	10 
 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1(Exh. A))  
17.20.080 - Height. 
Maximum building height in the R-1 zone is thirty-five (35) feet except where otherwise restricted herein for specified accessory buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1(Exh. A))  
Chapter 17.24 - R-2 RESIDENTIAL TWO-FAMILY ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.24.010 - Purpose and applicability. 
The residential two-family or R-2 zone is intended to apply in areas of the city where it is reasonable to permit and protect low-density residential developments. The regulations of this chapter and provisions of Chapter 17.76 shall apply in all residential two-family or R-2 zones. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.24.020 - Principal permitted uses. 
Principal permitted uses in the R-2 zone are as follows: 
A.  Single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and triplexes; 
B.  Renting of one room to not more than two persons not employed on the premises; 
C.  Second dwellings in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.76.130; 
D.  Pre-manufactured structures in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.76.120; 
E.  Community care facilities with six or fewer persons as provided by California H&S Code Section 1569.13; 
F.  Small family day care homes; 
G.  Large family day care homes subject to the provisions of Section 17.76.070; 
H.  Crop and tree farming; 
I.  Agricultural worker housing; 
J.  Supportive housing; 
K.  Transitional housing. 
L.  Accessory dwelling units subject to the provisions of Section 17.76.130. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § III; Ord. No. 2018-03 , Exh. A)  
17.24.030 - Administratively permitted uses. 
Administratively permitted uses in the R-2 zone are as follows: 
A.  Home occupations in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.76.060; 
B.  Yard sales as defined and permitted in Section 17.76.160; 
C.  One detached storage building or shop in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.24.060(E); 
D.  Patio covers and shade structures that satisfy the provisions of Section 17.24.060(F); 
E.  Tract sales offices in conjunction with sale of lots in a subdivision subject to provisions of Section 17.76.140. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.24.040 - Conditional uses requiring use permits. 
Conditional uses requiring use permits in the R-2 zone are as follows: 
A.  Multiple dwellings (apartments, townhouses, condominium and fourplex development) greater than four families per structure; 
B.  Guest houses and servants' quarters; 
C.  Public and private noncommercial recreation facilities; 
D.  Public and private schools, churches, public parks, public buildings and golf courses; 
E.  Temporary dwelling for the convalescence of the immediate family members in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.76.040; 
F.  Public utility buildings and uses; 
G.  Private institutions, including day care centers, rest homes, sanitariums, convalescent homes, homes for the elderly and similar operations; 
H.  Home occupations not consistent with the provisions of Section 17.76.060; 
I.  Communication towers and support facilities in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.85; 
J.  Mobile home parks and subdivisions subject to a minimum of four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet for each space or lot. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.24.050 - Lot requirements. 
Lot requirements in the R-2 zone are as follows: 
A.  Minimum lot area: six thousand (6,000) square feet for interior lots, seven thousand (7,000) square feet for corner lots, but not less than four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet for each dwelling unit; 
B.  Minimum lot width: sixty (60) feet for interior lots, seventy (70) feet for corner lots; 
C.  Maximum lot depth: three times lot width; 
D.  Maximum building coverage: sixty (60) percent. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.24.060 - Design requirements. 
Design requirements for structures in the R-2 zone are as follows: 
A.  Minimum building width: twenty (20) feet; 
B.  Minimum roof slope: 3:12; 
C.  Minimum roof overhang: twelve (12) inches; 
D.  A carport or enclosed garage for each dwelling unit shall be provided for all new construction as follows: 
1.  Single-family: two on-site covered spaces, 
2.  Duplex or triplex: one covered and one uncovered on-site space. 
When required, a two-space carport or garage shall be at least twenty (20) feet by twenty (20) feet (interior dimensions) with a minimum sixteen (16) foot wide garage door. 
The maximum height for a detached garage or carport is fifteen (15) feet. Additional height above fifteen (15) feet may be granted up to a maximum of twenty-five (25) feet whereby an additional one foot of building setback is provided for each additional foot of building height. 
Each required covered and uncovered parking space shall be paved and shall be a minimum of ten (10) foot by twenty (20) foot (except as otherwise provided in Section 17.76.100 of this code). Driveway access from street to all on-site parking spaces shall be paved; 
E.  A single detached storage or shop building shall meet the following criteria: 
1.  The storage or shop building shall conform to the maximum building coverage requirements, 
2.  The height of the storage building shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet, 
3.  The roof pitch and construction materials of the building shall be similar to that of the dwelling unit, 
4.  Shall not be located in any required front yard (closest to the front property line) or in front of the primary structure, whichever distance is greater, 
5.  Consistent with setbacks for this zone district; 
F.  Patio covers and shade structures shall meet the following criteria. Those not meeting these criteria shall meet the yard, height and design criteria for main buildings: 
1.  Set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the rear and side yard property line, 
2.  Open on at least two sides, 
3.  Maximum height: twelve (12) feet, 
4.  Minimum six-foot spacing on support posts shall be provided; 
G.  Heating and air conditioning units may be located in the side yard of those lots where a dwelling exists at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter; 
H.  At a minimum, the following landscaping is required: 
1.  The required front yard shall be landscaped and not used for parking. The only area not landscaped within the required front yard is the driveway access to the required parking area, which shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in width. 
2.  Landscaping within the front setback area shall include one fifteen (15) gallon-sized tree for each fifty (50) feet of frontage, and at least one gallon-sized shrub for each five feet of frontage. 
3.  In addition to the required trees and shrubs, the landscaped area may also be planted with lawn or ground cover plants. Other decorative non-plant ground covers may be used as long as they do not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of this landscaped area. 
4.  Where landscaping is provided, adequate irrigation and maintenance thereof shall be provided, including replacement of dead trees, shrubs, vines or other ground cover required pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1(Exh. A))  
17.24.070 - Setbacks. 
A.  Minimum yards in the R-2 zone are as follows: 
Main buildings: 
Front: twenty (20) feet; 
Rear: twenty (20) feet; 
Side: five feet. Side setback on a corner lot facing the street shall not be less than twenty (20) feet. 
Accessory buildings: 
Front: thirty-five (35) feet; 
Rear: twenty (20) feet, unless otherwise specified herein; 
Side: five feet, unless otherwise specified herein. Side setback on a corner lot facing a street shall not be less than twenty (20) feet. 
B.  Exceptions to the minimum yards established above are as follows: 
1.  Cornices, eaves, canopies, bay windows, chimneys and similar architectural features may extend a maximum of two and one-half feet into such yards. Uncovered porches or stairways, fire escapes or landings may extend a maximum of six feet into front or rear yards and three feet into side yards. 
2.  Detached accessory buildings shall not be located within five feet of any main building, nor within five feet of a side lot line, nor encroach on any easement. Accessory buildings attached to main buildings shall be structurally a part thereof and shall comply with main building yard requirements. 
3.  If the property abuts a public alley, the rear setback shall be as detailed in Table: R-2 Structure Setbacks of this section. 
4.  The rear setback for a detached garage that meets the following requirements shall be as detailed in Table: R-2 Structure Setbacks of this section: 
a.  The height shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet; 
b.  The roof pitch and construction materials of the garage shall be similar to that of the dwelling unit; and 
c.  The garage walls shall be parallel and/or perpendicular to the property lines. Any garage wall which is both parallel to and within twenty (20) feet from the property line(s) shall be approved by the city building official. 
5.  Where more than one-half of the block is occupied with buildings, the required front yard may be reduced to the average of those of the improved sites, but in no case shall be less than twelve (12) feet. 
6.  If any building is so located on a lot that the front faces any side lot line, it shall be at least twenty (20) feet from such side lot line. 
7.  Hedges and shrubs shall not be permitted more than three feet in height within twenty (20) feet of the front street corner of corner lots. 
8.  All fences within a front yard setback area, or side yard setback area of a corner lot, shall not exceed three feet in height. All fences not within such setback areas shall not exceed six feet in height. 
9.  Outdoor swimming pools and spas located within ten (10) feet of any side yard, rear yard or structure, shall be set back from said side yard, rear yard or structure a distance equal to the depth of the pool within said ten (10) foot area, but in no instance shall the setback be less than five feet. Pools and spas shall not be located in a required front yard. 
R-2 STRUCTURE SETBACKS 
Yard 	Structure 	Setback 
Front 	House/Main Building 	20 
	Garage 	20 
	Accessory Structure 	Not allowed 
	Pool or spa 	Not allowed 
Side (interior lot) 	House/Main Building 	5 
	Garage 	5 
	Patio covers and shade structures 	5 
	Accessory 	5 
	House facing side yard 	25 
Side yard facing street (corner lot) 	House/Main Building 	20 
	Garage (at same front plane as house) 	20 
	Garage (behind rear plane of house, with alley access only) 	10 
	Accessory structure (same plane as house) 	20 
	Accessory structure (behind rear plane of house) 	10 
Rear 	House/Main Building 	20 
	Garage (detached, no alley) 	10 
	Garage (on alley) 	Zero, if min. 24' backup available into alley 
	Garage or accessory structure in rear yard abutting land on which no structure can be built (example: abutting US Bureau of Reclamation ditch right-of-way) 	Zero 
	Accessory structure (on alley) 	Zero 
	Accessory structure (no alley): 	
	Less than or equal to 120 square foot footprint, and less than or equal to six feet tall 	Zero 
	Metal sided and roofed 	
	Structure less than or equal to six feet tall 	Zero 
	Metal sided and roofed 	
	Structure greater than six feet tall 	1' for each foot of height above six feet, up to ten feet 
	Non-metal sided and roofed structure greater than 120 square feet and greater than six feet tall 	Minimum 5', plus 1' for each foot of height above 6', up to 10' 
	Patio covers and shade structures 	10 
 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1(Exh. A))  
17.24.080 - Height. 
Maximum building height in the R-2 zone is thirty-five (35) feet except where otherwise restricted herein for specified accessory buildings. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
Chapter 17.28 - R-3 RESIDENTIAL MULTIPLE FAMILY-PROFESSIONAL ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.28.010 - Purpose and applicability. 
The residential multiple family or R-3 zone is intended to apply to areas of the city where it is reasonable to permit and project high-density apartment development and for professional offices with a conditional use permit. The regulations of this chapter and provisions of Chapter 17.76 shall apply in all residential multiple family, apartment-professional or R-3 zones. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.28.020 - Principal permitted uses. 
Principal permitted uses in the R-3 zone are as follows: 
A.  Single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and triplexes; 
B.  Multiple dwellings (duplex, triplex, or fourplex) for not more than four families per structure; 
C.  Second dwellings in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.76.130; 
D.  Pre-manufactured structures in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.76.120; 
E.  Small family day care homes; 
F.  Agricultural worker housing; 
G.  Emergency shelters; 
H.  Supportive housing; 
I.  Transitional housing. 
J.  Accessory dwelling units subject to the provisions of Section 17.76.130. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § IV; Ord. No. 2018-03 , Exh. A)  
17.28.030 - Administratively permitted uses. 
Administratively permitted uses in the R-3 zone are as follows: 
A.  Home occupations in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.76.060; 
B.  Rooming and boarding houses; 
C.  Yard sales as defined and permitted in Section 17.76.160; 
D.  One detached storage building or shop in accordance with the provisions of Sections 17.28.060(E); 
E.  Patio covers and shade structures that satisfy the provisions of Section 17.28.060(F); 
F.  Tract sales offices in conjunction with sale of lots in a subdivision subject to provisions of Section 17.76.140; 
G.  Public and quasi-public uses of an administrative, recreational, public service or cultural nature including city, county, state, or federal administrative centers, courts, libraries, museums, police and fire stations, schools and other public buildings and structures (fairgrounds and civic centers); parks and recreation, public playgrounds, cemeteries, reservoir, historical sites and monuments, wastewater treatment, airport and corporation yard; 
H.  Single-room occupancy (SRO) housing. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § V)  
17.28.040 - Conditional uses requiring use permits. 
Conditional uses requiring use permits in the R-3 zone are as follows: 
A.  Multiple dwellings (apartment, townhouses or condominium development) greater than four families per structure; or greater than four units per parcel; 
B.  Hotels, motels; 
C.  Private institutions, including day care centers, rest homes, sanitariums, convalescent homes, homes for the elderly and similar operations; 
D.  Professional offices; 
E.  Guest houses and servants' quarters; 
F.  Boardinghouse and rooming houses; 
G.  Public and private noncommercial recreation facilities; 
H.  Public and private schools, churches, public parks, public buildings and golf courses; 
I.  Temporary dwelling for the convalescence of the immediate family members in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.76.040; 
J.  Beds and breakfasts; 
K.  Public utility buildings and uses; 
L.  Home occupations not consistent with the provisions of Section 17.76.060; 
M.  Communication towers and support facilities; 
N.  Crop and tree farming; 
O.  Manufactured home parks or subdivisions subject to a minimum of three thousand (3,000) square feet for each space or lot; 
P.  Social halls, fraternal and social organizations; 
Q.  Mortuaries; 
R.  Small animal hospitals completely enclosed within a building. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.28.050 - Lot requirements. 
Lot requirements in the R-3 zone are as follows: 
A.  Minimum lot area: two thousand (2,000) square feet of lot area for four or less units; three thousand three hundred (3,300) square feet of lot area for four or greater units; 
B.  Minimum lot width: sixty (60) feet and seventy (70) feet for corner lots; 
C.  Maximum lot depth: three times lot width; 
D.  Maximum building coverage; seventy (70) percent. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.28.060 - Design requirements. 
Design requirements for structures in the R-3 zone are as follows: 
A.  Minimum building width: twenty (20) feet; 
B.  Minimum roof slope: 3:12; 
C.  Minimum roof eave overhang: twelve (12) inches; 
D.  A carport or enclosed garage for each dwelling unit shall be provided for all new construction as follows: 
1.  Single-family: two on-site "covered" spaces, 
2.  Duplex, triplex or fourplex: one covered and one uncovered on-site space, 
3.  Other multifamily (use of "covered" spaces is optional): 
a.  Studio or one-bedroom units: 1.5 on-site spaces per unit, 
b.  Two or more bedrooms per unit: two on-site spaces per unit. 
When required, a two-space carport or garage shall be at least twenty (20) feet by twenty (20) feet (interior dimensions) with a minimum sixteen (16) foot wide garage door. Each required covered and uncovered parking space shall be paved and shall be a minimum of ten (10) foot by twenty (20) foot (except as otherwise prohibited in Section 17.76.100 of this code). Driveway access from street to all on-site parking spaces shall be paved; 
The maximum height for a detached garage or carport is fifteen (15) feet. Additional height above fifteen (15) feet may begranted up to a maximum of twenty-five (25) feet whereby an additional one foot of building setback is provided for each additional foot of building height. 
E.  A single detached storage or shop building shall meet the following criteria: 
1.  The storage or shop building shall conform to the maximum building coverage requirements, 
2.  The height of the storage building shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet, 
3.  The roof pitch and construction materials of the building shall be similar to that of the dwelling unit, 
4.  Shall not be located in any required front yard (closest to the front property line) or in front of the primary structure, whichever distance is greater, 
5.  Consistent with setbacks for this zone district; 
F.  Patio covers and shade structures shall meet the following criteria. Those not meeting this criteria shall meet the yard, height and design criteria for main buildings: 
1.  Set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the rear and side yard property line, 
2.  Open on at least two sides, 
3.  Maximum height: twelve (12) feet, 
4.  Minimum six-foot spacing on support posts shall be provided; 
G.  Heating and air conditioning units may be located in the side yard of those lots where a dwelling exists at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter; 
H.  At a minimum, the following landscaping is required: 
1.  The required front yard shall be landscaped and not used for parking. The only area not landscaped within the required front yard is the driveway access to the required parking area, which shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in width, 
2.  Landscaping within the front setback area shall include one fifteen (15) gallon-sized tree for each fifty (50) feet of frontage, and at least one gallon-sized shrub for each five feet of frontage, 
3.  In addition to the required trees and shrubs, the landscaped area may also be planted with lawn or ground cover plants. Other decorative, non-plant ground covers may be used as long as they do not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of this landscaped area, 
4.  Where landscaping is provided, adequate irrigation and maintenance thereof shall be provided, including replacement of dead trees, shrubs, vines or other ground cover required pursuant to this section; 
I.  Any multifamily project of fifteen (15) or more units shall provide the following recreation area: 
1.  A defined and fenced play area which may include fixed play equipment, ball courts, swimming or wading pools and similar child play facilities, 
2.  The play area shall not be less than five hundred (500) square feet, or twenty-five (25) square feet for each apartment unit, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1(Exh. A))  
17.28.070 - Setbacks. 
A.  Minimum yard requirements in the R-3 zone are as follows: 
Main building: 
1.  Front: twenty (20) feet; 
2.  Rear: fifteen (15) feet, twenty-five (25) feet if adjacent to an R-1 zone district; 
3.  Side: five feet, fifteen (15) feet if adjacent to an R-1 zone district. Side setback on a corner lot facing the street shall not be less than twenty (20) feet. 
Accessory building: 
1.  Front: thirty-five (35) feet; 
2.  Rear: fifteen (15) feet, unless otherwise specified herein; 
3.  Side: five feet, unless otherwise specified herein. Side setback on a corner lot facing a street shall not be less than twenty (20) feet. 
B.  Special Yards for Dwelling Groups. The distance between separate buildings of a dwelling group shall be not less than twelve (12) feet. The distance between the front of any dwelling unit in the group and any side lot line shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet. 
C.  Exceptions to the minimum yards established above are as follows: 
1.  Cornices, eaves, canopies, bay windows, chimneys and similar architectural features may extend a maximum of two and one-half feet into such yards. Uncovered porches or stairways, fire escapes or landings may extend a maximum of six feet into front or rear yards and three feet into side yards. 
2.  Detached accessory buildings shall not be located within five feet of any main building, nor within five feet of a side lot line, nor encroach on any easement. Accessory buildings attached to main buildings shall be structurally a part thereof and shall comply with main building yard requirements. 
3.  If the property abuts a public alley, the rear setback shall be as detailed in Table: R-3 Structure Setbacks of this section. 
4.  The rear setback for a detached garage that meets the following requirements shall be as detailed in Table: R-3 Structure Setbacks of this section: 
a.  The height shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet; 
b.  The roof pitch and construction materials of the garage shall be similar to that of the dwelling unit; and 
c.  The garage walls shall be parallel and/or perpendicular to the property lines. Any garage wall which is both parallel to and within twenty (20) feet from the property line(s) shall be approved by the city building official. 
5.  Where more than one-half of the block is occupied with buildings, the required front yard may be reduced to the average of those of the improved sites, but in no case shall be less than twelve (12) feet. 
6.  If any building is so located on a lot that the front or rear thereof faces any side lot line, it shall be at least twenty (20) feet from such side lot line. 
7.  Hedges and shrubs shall not be permitted more than three feet in height within twenty (20) feet of the front street corner of corner lots. 
8.  All fences within a front yard setback area, or side yard setback area of a corner lot, shall not exceed three feet in height. All fences not within such setback areas shall not exceed six feet in height. 
9.  Outdoor swimming pools and spas located within ten (10) feet of any side yard, rear yard or structure, shall be set back from said side yard, rear yard or structure a distance equal to the depth of the pool within said ten (10) foot area, but in no instance shall the setback be less than five feet. Pools and spas shall not be located in a required front yard. 
R-3 STRUCTURE SETBACKS 
Yard 	Structure 	Setback 
Front 	House/Main Building 	20 
	Garage 	20 
	Accessory Structure 	Not allowed 
	Pool or spa 	Not allowed 
Side (interior lot) 	House/Main Building 	5 
		(15' if adjacent to R-1) 
	Garage 	5 
	Patio covers and shade structures 	5 
	Accessory 	5 
	House facing side yard 	25 
Side yard facing street (corner lot) 	House/Main Building 	20 
	Garage (at same front plane as house) 	20 
	Garage (behind rear plane of house, with alley access only) 	10 
	Accessory structure (same plane as house) 	20 
	Accessory structure (behind rear plane of house) 	10 
Rear 	House/Main Building 	15 
		(25' if adjacent to R-1) 
	Garage (detached, no alley) 	10 
	Garage (on alley) 	Zero, if min. 24' backup available into alley 
	Garage or accessory structure in rear yard abutting land on which no structure can be built (example: abutting US Bureau of Reclamation ditch right-of-way) 	Zero 
	Accessory structure (on alley) 	Zero 
	Accessory structure (no alley): 	Zero 
	Less than or equal to 120 square foot footprint, and less than or equal to six feet tall 	Zero 
	Metal sided and roofed 	
	Structure less than or equal to six feet tall 	Zero 
	Metal sided and roofed 	
	Structure greater than six feet tall 	1' for each foot of height above six feet, up to ten feet 
	Non-metal sided and roofed structure greater than 120 square feet and greater than six feet tall 	Minimum 5', plus 1' for each foot of height above 6', up to 10' 
	Patio covers and shade structures 	10 
 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1(Exh. A))  
17.28.080 - Height. 
Maximum building height in the R-3 zone is forty-five (45) feet except where otherwise restricted herein for specified accessory buildings. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
Chapter 17.36 - C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.36.010 - Purpose and applicability. 
The neighborhood commercial or C-1 zone is intended to provide for neighborhood shopping centers which will provide convenient sales and service facilities to residential areas, without detracting from the residential desirability of such areas. The regulations of this chapter and the provisions of Chapter 17.76 shall apply in all neighborhood commercial or C-1 zones. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.36.020 - Principal permitted uses. 
Principal permitted uses in the C-1 zone are as follows: 
A.  Social halls, fraternal and social organizations and clubs; 
B.  Professional and business offices, private schools and instruction studios; 
C.  Stores, agencies and services of a light commercial character, conducted entirely within an enclosed building, such as: 
1.  Alcoholic beverage sales off-site, 
2.  Bakeries, 
3.  Banks, 
4.  Barber and beauty shops, 
5.  Bookstores, 
6.  Cafes and delis, 
7.  Chamber of commerce office, 
8.  Clothing apparels, 
9.  Coin-operated dry cleaning and laundry facilities, 
10.  Copy and quick print store, 
11.  Crop and tree farming, 
12.  Electronics stores, 
13.  Flower shops, 
14.  Food markets under five thousand (5,000) square feet, 
15.  Gift stores, 
16.  Hardware and appliance stores, 
17.  Public utility buildings less than five thousand (5,000) square feet, 
18.  Jewelry shops, 
19.  Meat markets, 
20.  Music stores, 
21.  Novelty and specialty shops, 
22.  Nursery, 
23.  Radio and television sales and services, 
24.  Restaurants with no on-site or off-site alcoholic sales (outside seating acceptable), 
25.  Sewing and crafts, 
26.  Sporting goods, 
27.  Studios, 
28.  Tailor shops, 
29.  Travel agency, 
30.  Tux rentals, 
31.  TV sales and service, 
32.  Utility office, 
33.  Variety stores; 
D.  Other uses which the city planner determined by written findings are similar to the above. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.36.030 - Administratively permitted uses. 
Administratively permitted uses in the C-1 zone are as follows: 
A.  Antique shops. 
B.  Catering trucks. 
C.  Food trucks. 
D.  Used furniture store. 
E.  Stands for the purpose of displaying and selling agricultural, floricultural or products produced or grown on the premises, provided that there shall be only one for contiguous land under single ownership. The ground coverage of the stand shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet and be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the adjacent street or highway. (Ord. 2003-03 § 3 (part) and Ord. 2007-05; 9-4-07). Other uses which the city planner determined by written findings are similar to the above. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1)  
17.36.040 - Conditional uses requiring use permits. 
Conditional uses requiring use permits in the C-1 zone are as follows: 
A.  Dwellings, associated with a permitted or conditional use; multiple family dwellings subject to the provisions of the R-3 zone district; 
B.  Stores, agencies, and services of a light commercial character, conducted entirely within an enclosed building, such as: 
1.  Automobile service station, 
2.  Communication towers and support facilities in accordance with Chapter 17.85, 
3.  Drugstores, over five thousand (5,000) square feet, 
4.  Dry cleaning and laundry agencies, 
5.  Food markets over five thousand (5,000) square feet, 
6.  Private institutions including day care centers, hospitals, rest homes, sanitariums, convalescent homes, homes for the elderly and similar operations, 
7.  Public utility buildings over five thousand (5,000) square feet; 
C.  Uses which the city planner determines by written findings are similar to the above, pursuant to Section 17.04.030. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.36.050 - Lot requirements. 
Lot requirements in the C-1 zone are as follows: 
A.  Minimum lot area: six thousand (6,000) square feet for parcels located within a C-1 zone district existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Six thousand (6,000) square feet for parcels being rezoned and located adjacent to an existing C-1 zone. Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet for parcels being rezoned to C-1 not adjacent to an existing C-1 zone and for parcels created after adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
B.  Minimum lot width: one hundred (100) feet except those parcels existing at the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter with a width less than one hundred (100) feet, shall not be reduced to less than sixty (60) feet. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.36.060 - Design requirements. 
New development shall adhere to the character of the existing neighborhood and be integrated into the surrounding development. New development shall not dominate or interfere with the established character of its neighborhood. Site design of projects shall be cohesive both functionally and visually. 
Design requirements for structures in the C-1 zone are as follows: 
A.  Compliance with parking and landscaping requirements of Sections 17.76.100 and 17.76.110; 
B.  Maximum building coverage not to exceed sixty (60) percent of the lot; 
C.  At a minimum, the following landscaping is required: 
1.  The required front yard shall be landscaped and not used for parking. The only area not landscaped within the required front yard is the driveway access to the required parking area, which shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in width, 
2.  Landscaping within the front setback area shall include one fifteen (15) gallon-sized tree for each fifty (50) feet of frontage, and at least one gallon-sized shrub for each five feet of frontage, 
3.  In addition to the required trees and shrubs, the landscaped area may also be planted with lawn or ground cover plants. Other decorative non-plant ground covers may be used as long as they do not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of this landscaped area, 
4.  Where landscaping is provided, adequate irrigation and maintenance thereof shall be provided, including replacement of dead trees, shrubs, vines or other ground cover required pursuant to this section; 
D.  When the subject site immediately adjacent to a residential zone district, the following standards shall apply: 
1.  A solid six-foot masonry wall shall be placed on the property line, reduced to thirty-six (36) inches within the required C-1 zone front setback area, 
2.  All exterior lighting shall be designed to reflect away from the adjacent residential area, or down to the ground within the commercial site. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.36.065 - Site design. 
A.  New projects shall be compatible with their surrounding development in intensity, setbacks, building forms, material, color, and landscaping: 
1.  Site design shall respect existing roadway patterns and driveways. New curb cuts shall be aligned with existing driveways and streets, when applicable. 
2.  Develop transition between projects with different uses and intensities to provide a cohesive visual and functional shift. Create transition by using appropriate setbacks, gradual building height, bulk, and landscaping. 
3.  Integrate perimeter landscaping with the landscaping of adjacent developments. 
4.  Minimize paved areas for curb cuts and parking on the street frontage of projects to maintain a continuous and attractive streetscape. 
5.  Preserve natural site features such as mature trees, views, etc., and incorporate into the site design of the new project. 
6.  Site design of projects shall be compatible with and protect existing nearby heritage structures and trees. 
7.  Link on-site walkways to the public sidewalk system outside the project site for ease of pedestrian access. 
8.  Provide pedestrian links between residential developments and nearby employment and shopping center, schools, and parks to encourage pedestrian activities. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.36.070 - Site organization. 
A.  Locate site components such as structures, parking driveways, walkways, landscaping and open spaces to maximize visual appeal and functional efficiency. Security kiosks and gates shall be located to allow queuing for at least three cars. 
B.  Emphasize the pleasant components of the project such as existing trees and views, and disguise its less desirable scenes such as parking areas, loading and service areas through placement and design of structures and landscaping. 
C.  Siting of noise and odor generating functions on a site shall not create a nuisance for the adjacent properties. 
D.  Orientation of buildings on a site shall relate to each other and to buildings on adjacent sites for aesthetic organization. The front of one building shall not face the back of another. In these instances, an increased setback between buildings may be required to meet the standards of the California Building Code. 
E.  Street frontages shall not be dominated by surface parking to encourage pedestrian orientation and a continuous streetscape. Limit paved areas on street frontages to one double row of parking and locate the rest of the parking elsewhere on the site. 
F.  Where half or more of the parking is located at the rear of a retail/office building, provide main entries in the front and rear of buildings for convenient access. 
G.  Site design of projects shall have external orientation for a positive street experience. Orient buildings toward public streets and provide view corridors into the project site. View corridors may be provided by controlling the spacing and angles of building on the site and by providing open vistas and plazas. 
H.  Building facades shall be lively and include windows and main entries which face public streets for a pedestrian friendly environment. 
I.  Provide convenient and safe pedestrian and automobile access to the site from adjacent streets. 
J.  Define site boundaries by landscaping and bands of decorative paving to announce entry into the site. 
K.  Every project shall have a main entry, defined by landscaping and other decorative features. Main entrances to all buildings shall be well defined. 
L.  Design and locate a project's internal circulation pattern for maximum ease of movement and a minimum of safety hazards. 
M.  Consider energy efficiency in the siting of buildings. Shading of structures and parking areas is recommended. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.36.075 - Open space. 
A.  Design each project site for maximum utility of open space for ventilation, sunlight, recreation, and views for both new and existing buildings. 
B.  In business parks and strip shopping centers, open space areas are recommended. 
C.  Open space areas may include benches, art, landscape, water, and hardscape features, as approved by the city. 
D.  Provide direct access to common useable open space from all buildings. Common open spaces shall be useable for recreational purposes (landscaping strips of less than fifty (50) feet in width between buildings does not constitute useable common open space). 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.36.080 - Scale and character. 
A.  Break up large buildings into groups of smaller segments whenever possible, to appear smaller in mass and bulk. This may require increasing setbacks to comply with the standards of the California Building Code. 
B.  Adjacent buildings shall be compatible in height and scale. 
C.  Buildings and additions shall not shade more than ten (10) percent of the structures or open space areas on adjacent properties for proper solar access. 
D.  Buildings shall maintain similar horizontal and vertical proportions with the adjacent facades to maintain architectural unity. 
E.  Step back upper stories of buildings three stories or taller from public roads and adjacent low scale development to reduce the bulk impact. 
F.  Maintain the dominant existing scale of an area. 
G.  Placement of windows and openings on second story additions shall not create a direct line of sight into the living space or the back yard of adjacent properties to maintain privacy. 
H.  Buildings shall maintain visually interesting activities at the street level by placing active facades with windows and openings on the street side to promote pedestrian activities. 
I.  Interrupt front facades on large structures by various architectural elements such as trellises, balconies, steps, openings, etc., about every thirty (30) feet to appear smaller in scale. 
J.  Choose inset, multi-pane windows over a continuous band of single pane windows, to create a sense of scale. 
K.  Maintain the scale and character of the existing main structure in building additions by retaining similar proportions and rhythm present on the main structures. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.36.085 - Architecture and design. 
A.  Maintain diversity and individuality in style but be compatible with the character of the neighborhood. 
B.  In areas where no prevailing architectural style exists, maintain the general neighborhood character by the use of similar scale, forms and materials providing that it enhances the neighborhood. The scale, forms, and materials shall be approved by the city. 
C.  Develop a comprehensive architectural theme for multi-building complexes. Unify various site components through the use of similar designs, material, and colors. The designs, material, and colors shall be approved by the city. 
D.  "Corporate architecture" and generic designs are not recommended. Design each project specifically with respect to its own surrounding environment. 
E.  Buildings shall have three distinct components: base, middle, and top. Define each component by horizontal and vertical articulation. 
F.  Link buildings and sites together by proper building orientation, landscaping, and similarly designed building and site components. 
G.  Buildings on corner lots shall demonstrate a strong tie to the public streets. Enhance street corners by special design features such as celebrated main entrances, or landscape features. 
H.  Include decorative building elements in the design of all buildings. Add more interest to buildings by incorporating changes in wall plane and height, arcades, porticos, trellises, porches, balconies, dormers, windows, openings, etc. 
I.  Repeat design and decorative building elements in all elevations and the roof as well as the front facade. 
J.  Windows and openings shall be consistent with the architectural style of buildings and maintain similar proportions and rhythm with those on adjacent buildings. 
K.  Provide clear windows on street level on retail buildings to create interest for pedestrians. 
L.  Define building entries by use of human scale architectural elements such as arches, posts, awnings, etc. Orient main entries toward public streets. 
M.  Awnings and canopies shall be compatible with the building design and shall conform to Section 17.78.200 of this title. 
N.  Awnings shall not cover or replace facade articulation by wrapping around buildings in continuous bands. Place awning only on top of doors, windows, and other openings. 
O.  Design fire escapes and exterior stairs, elevator shafts, and balconies as part of the building, not as separate elements. 
P.  Exterior remodeling of older buildings being occupied by new tenants is strongly encouraged. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.36.090 - Accessory utility buildings. 
A.  The style, material, and color of accessory buildings visible from public streets shall be the same as those of the main building. 
B.  Accessory buildings shall be proportional to the main structures in size and bulk. Accessory buildings may not dominate any site areas. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.36.095 - Roof. 
A.  New roofs shall be consistent in form and shape with the dominant roof form in the neighborhood. 
B.  Buildings in, or adjacent to, residential neighborhoods, with predominately gabled roofs, shall have gabled roofs to create a residential scale and character. 
C.  Long horizontal roof lines are not allowed. Interrupt roof line by architectural treatment and features. The maximum allowable unbroken roof line is thirty (30) feet. 
D.  Vary roof levels and forms on a large building to create diversity and to decrease the apparent scale of the building. 
E.  Include roofs on all elevations, not just on the front facades of buildings. Roof forms shall express entrances to buildings. 
F.  Roofs shall be an integral part of building design. False mansard roofs are not allowed. 
G.  Include architectural elements such as projecting cornices in design of flat roofs to define the edge of the roof. 
H.  Parapets and roof screens shall be integrated architecturally into building designs. Placement, material, and color of roof screens shall not impact the building architecture or roof form. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.36.100 - Material and color. 
A.  Develop a comprehensive material and color scheme for each project to tie in the various parts of the project. Choose variety of colors and materials to add interest to buildings. Colors and materials shall be approved by the city. 
B.  Avoid large expanses of smooth surfaces such as concrete or glass. Use materials with a sense of scale and texture. 
C.  Avoid large expanses of highly reflective surfaces and mirror glass exterior walls to prevent heat and glare impacts on the adjacent public streets and properties. 
D.  Choose high quality materials and paint to prevent degradation and for ease of maintenance. 
E.  Use wrought iron, cast iron, or high quality wood for decorative features and trims. Vertical sliding panels (i.e. T-111) are prohibited. 
F.  Coordinate exterior colors of adjacent structures on the same or adjacent sites. 
G.  Strong, bright contrasting colors shall be used for ornaments and accent only. 
H.  Coordinate color and material of building additions with those of the principal structure. 
I.  Wall and ground sign design material and color shall be compatible with the principal building on the site and shall comply with Chapter 17.78, Sign Ordinance, of the Orland Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.36.105 - Service facilities. 
A.  Locate service areas and drives away from public streets and nearby residential uses. Place service facilities in the least visible areas. 
B.  Provide convenient access for all service and emergency vehicles. Separate service drives from other on-site circulation patterns when possible. 
C.  Fully screen all service facilities from the public street and adjoining properties. Doors for service facilities shall be recessed and integrated into the overall design of the building. 
D.  Screening devices shall have a similar design and material to the main structures on the site, and shall be incorporated into the site design of the project. 
E.  Fences, walls, dense landscaping, berming, or any combination of the above, may be used to screen service areas and facilities. 
F.  In multi-building complexes, service areas shall be combined or located next to each other to minimize the visual and noise impact on the surrounding uses. 
G.  Service facilities shall be easily accessible for service vehicles and tenants. Service yards shall be located so as to minimize interaction between service vehicles and automobiles. 
H.  Service facilities shall be separated from pedestrian walkways to increase safety. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.36.110 - Mechanical equipment. 
A.  Mechanical equipment shall not be located in any front setback area between the public street and building. 
B.  Mechanical equipment shall be located far enough from adjacent properties to not cause noise impacts. Noise level at property line may not exceed fifty (50) dBA in or adjacent to residential areas and seventy-five (75) dBA in all commercial and industrial zones. 
C.  Fully screened roof top equipment by parapet walls or a roof well on all four sides. 
D.  Avoid individual screening of a group of equipment on a single roof. Contain all equipment within same roof screen. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.36.115 - Lighting. 
A.  Light fixture design shall be compatible with the design and the use of the principal structure on the site. Light fixtures shall be equipped with appropriate reflectors and shielded to prevent illumination of the adjacent properties. 
B.  Incorporate placement of light fixtures into the landscape scheme of the project. Show location and type of all exterior lights on the landscape plans. 
C.  Height of any light poles shall be appropriate for the project and surrounding environment. Height of the light poles shall not exceed that of the main building. 
D.  Use bollard type luminaries, maximum of eight feet high for pedestrian areas. 
E.  Shield light sources to prevent any glare or direct illumination on public streets, adjacent properties, highways, or Interstate "5." 
F.  All area lights shall be energy efficient type (High Pressure Sodium or equivalent). 
G.  All on-site pedestrian and automobile traffic areas shall be well lit for safety and security. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.36.120 - Trash enclosures. 
A.  All development in this zoning district shall provide for adequate storage of trash and recyclable materials in containers in enclosed areas. 
B.  Trash enclosures shall be conveniently accessible by collection trucks. Access driveways shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) feet in width. 
C.  Enclosures shall not be located in setback, landscaped, or parking areas. 
D.  Adequate turn around areas for collection trucks shall be provided. 
E.  A concrete pad in front of and within enclosures to prevent damage to pavement is required. 
F.  Trash enclosures shall screen trash containers on all four sides. The height of enclosures shall fully screen the containers. 
G.  A roof shall be provided for trash enclosures when visible from any upper story. 
H.  The style, material, and color of enclosures shall be similar to those of the main structure. 
I.  Enclosures shall be made of masonry or wood and match the main building in finish and color. Enclosures may be masonry or wood, painted to match the main building. 
J.  Steel enclosure gates are required as a minimum standard. 
K.  When visible from public rights-of-way, redwood slatted cyclone fencing may be acceptable, but depending on the design of the main buildings, wood, concrete, or stucco is encouraged. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.36.125 - Professional offices and buildings. 
A.  Professional office buildings shall have the highest quality architecture and be oriented toward streets. 
B.  For office buildings, a combination of hardscape such as textured paving, water fountains, and landscaping shall be used to provide strong emphasis to focal points and entrances to the buildings. 
C.  In multi-building complexes, buildings and offices shall be most visible from a public right-of-way. 
D.  When there are two or more buildings located on site, buildings shall be oriented toward public streets and provide view corridors into the project site. View corridors may be provided by controlling the spacing and angles of buildings on the site and by providing vistas and plazas. 
E.  The site boundaries and main entrances shall be defined by both landscaping and decorative paving. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.36.130 - Setbacks. 
Minimum yards in the C-1 zone are as follows: 
A.  Front: ten (10) feet, except that where frontage is in a block which is partially in residential zone, the front yard shall be the same as that required in such residential zone; 
B.  Rear: fifteen (15) feet, except that where a rear yard abuts on an alley, such rear yard shall not be less than five feet; 
C.  Side: none, except that a side yard of an interior lot abutting a residential zone shall be not less than the front yard required in such residential zone; 
D.  Adjacent buildings shall have compatible front setbacks to maintain visual continuity of the streetscape. Setback infill projects in areas with different front setbacks at a distance equal to the average setbacks of buildings on either side not to exceed fifty (50) percent of the minimum setback requirements of the Zoning Code. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.36.135 - Height. 
Maximum building height in the C-1 zone is thirty-five (35) feet (single story). 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.36.140 - Site plan review. 
Prior to application for a building permit, the applicant shall submit to the city of Orland a complete site plan application with all applicable fees and all other documents necessary for review by the city to ensure compliance with all requirements of the Orland Municipal Code (OMC). A "site plan" application may be approved by the city manager or his/her nominee, without the necessity of public notice, a public hearing or planning commission action if findings required for approval (Section 17.82.050 of this title) can be made. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.36.145 - Fences and walls. 
A.  All fences and fencing materials require a fencing permit approved by the city of Orland planning department prior to installation. Ty-vek or like materials, corrugated materials, tin, aluminum, bamboo, hay, and other materials deemed by the city to be unacceptable are prohibited. All fencing material and fence construction shall be approved by the city in accordance with the Orland Municipal Code and the California Building Code, prior to construction of the fence. 
B.  Any masonry and stucco walls require a building permit if greater than three feet in height. 
C.  Fences and walls shall be compatible in style and material with the main structures on a site. 
D.  To avoid the monotony of long, solid walls and fences around the perimeter of projects, variation in height, texture and color is recommended with approval by the city. 
E.  Signs, lights, and other street furniture incorporated into the design of fences and walls are encouraged. 
F.  Barbed wire fencing is prohibited. All chain link fencing requires slats. 
G.  Screening devices shall be made of opaque (solid) materials such as wood or masonry blocks. 
H.  Fences and walls used for noise control shall be made of materials most suited for noise reduction, and which minimize reflective sound. 
I.  Security fencing and gates shall be of an open type to allow for maximum visibility of the secured area. Wrought iron and cast iron fences are recommended for security fences and gates for all uses. 
J.  Fencing shall be a maximum of six feet in height. Fencing over six feet in height, excepting subsection B above, shall require a building permit. All corner lots, including corners on alleys, shall be a maximum of three feet in height within the front and exterior side yard setback areas. 
K.  All fences shall be made of durable and weather-resistant materials as approved by the city. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
Chapter 17.40 - C-2 COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.40.010 - Purpose and applicability. 
The community commercial or C-2 zone is intended to apply to areas where more complete commercial facilities are necessary for community convenience. Typically this zone will be applied in downtown Orland and in shopping centers. The regulations of this chapter and the provisions of Chapter 17.76 shall apply in all community commercial or C-2 zones. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.40.020 - Principal permitted uses. 
Principal permitted uses in the C-2 zone are as follows: 
A.  The following uses conducted entirely within an enclosed building: 
1.  Alcoholic beverage sales, on- and off-site; 
2.  Art galleries and studios; 
3.  Bakery, retail; 
4.  Banks other financial institutions; 
5.  Barber and beauty shops; 
6.  Bike sales/repair; 
7.  Book store; 
8.  Clothing and apparel sales; 
9.  Computer sales; 
10.  Drug stores, over five thousand (5,000) square feet; 
11.  Fire stations; 
12.  Food stores; 
13.  Government offices; 
14.  Hardware stores; 
15.  Health clubs; 
16.  Nursery; 
17.  Offices, administrative, professional and business; 
18.  Party rentals; 
19.  Pet stores; 
20.  Photography studios; 
21.  Post office; 
22.  Public utility buildings; 
23.  Restaurants; 
24.  Senior center; 
25.  Tailor shops. 
B.  Other uses which the city planner determines by written findings are similar to the above. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.40.030 - Administratively permitted uses. 
A.  Administratively permitted uses in a C-2 zone are as follows: 
Antique shops; 
Appliance sales and repair; 
Auto part sales, no repairs; 
Carpet/flooring sales; 
Catering/food trucks; 
Cleaners and Laundromats; 
Dwellings, second floor only; 
Electric appliances repair; 
Fireworks sales; 
Food trucks; 
Medical clinics and offices; 
Medical labs; 
Produce stand(s); 
Restaurants with outdoor eating areas; 
Secondhand store in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.20.060; 
Studios and instructional studios; 
Video stores. 
(Ord. 2003-03 § 3 (part) and Ord. 2007-05; 9-4-07) 
B.  Other uses which the city planner determines by written findings are similar to the above. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1; Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1(Exh. A))  
17.40.040 - Conditional uses requiring use permits. 
A.  Conditional uses requiring use permits in the C-2 zone are as follows: 
1.  Airports, heliports, and landing strips; 
2.  Animal hospital and veterinary office; 
3.  Automobile repair and sales; 
4.  Automobile service stations; 
5.  Bowling alleys; 
6.  Carpentry and cabinet making shops; 
7.  Catering truck(s)/food truck(s); 
8.  Churches; 
9.  Clothing manufacturer; 
10.  Contractor's yards; 
11.  Communication towers and support facilities; 
12.  Convalescent homes; 
13.  Day care centers; 
14.  Drive-in restaurants and restaurants with drive-up windows; 
15.  Dry cleaning plants; 
16.  Dwellings, ground floor; 
17.  Electric motor repair; 
18.  Equipment rentals with outdoor storage; 
19.  Flea market(s); 
20.  Handicraft manufacturer; 
21.  Homes for the elderly; 
22.  Hospitals; 
23.  Hotels, motels, boarding and rooming houses; 
24.  Kennels, boarding where animals are housed within structures; 
25.  Lumberyards; 
26.  Lodges and temples; 
27.  Metal working shops; 
28.  Muffler shops; 
29.  Paint booth; 
30.  Plumbing shops; 
31.  Printing and lithography; 
32.  Private institutions including rest homes, sanitariums, and convalescent homes; 
33.  Recycling facility; 
34.  Schools, public and private; 
35.  Sign shops; 
36.  Storage warehouses; 
37.  Social halls; 
38.  Theaters; 
39.  Tire sales repair shops. 
B.  Uses listed above in Section 17.40.020 which are not entirely enclosed. 
C.  Uses that the city planner determines by written findings are similar to the above, pursuant to Section 17.04.030. 
D.  Residential uses. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.40.050 - Lot requirements. 
Lot requirements in the C-2 zone are as follows: 
A.  Minimum lot area: six thousand (6,000) square feet for parcels located within a C-2 zone district existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter on July 7, 2003. Six thousand (6,000) square feet for parcels being rezoned and located adjacent to an existing C-2 zone. Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet for parcels being rezoned to C-2 not adjacent to an existing C-2 zone. 
B.  Minimum lot width: one hundred (100) feet (except those parcels existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter). Those preexisting parcels with a width less than one hundred (100) shall not be reduced to less than sixty (60) feet. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.40.060 - Design requirements. 
New development shall adhere to the character of the existing neighborhood and be integrated into the surrounding development. New development shall not dominate or interfere with the established character of its neighborhood. Site design of projects shall be cohesive both functionally and visually. 
Design requirements for structures in the C-2 zone are as follows: 
A.  Compliance with parking and landscaping requirements of Sections 17.76.100 and 17.76.110, except in the area bounded by the Union Pacific Railroad tracks to the west, Tehama Street to the north, Third Street to the east and Yolo Street to the south. 
B.  Within this area known as downtown Orland, compliance with the parking provisions of Sections 17.76.100 and 17.76.110 is temporarily waived until one of the following actions occurs: 
1.  A parking district is formed within this area providing financing for public off-street parking; or 
2.  The city initiates and adopts an ordinance repealing the exception for this area and/or adopts other standards for the downtown area. (Note: This exception is currently provided since ample on-street parking exists to serve the businesses in the area, and numerous buildings are vacant, not creating a parking demand. Further, the exception may encourage some redevelopment of this area.) 
C.  Maximum building coverage: sixty (60) percent and up to one hundred (100) percent coverage by parking/paved areas. 
D.  When the subject site is immediately adjacent to a residential zone district, the following standards shall apply: 
1.  A solid six-foot masonry wall shall be placed on the property line, reduced to three feet within the required front setback area of the adjacent residential area. 
2.  All exterior lighting shall be designed to reflect away from the adjacent residential area, or down to the ground within the commercial site. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.40.065 - Site design. 
A.  New projects shall be compatible with their surrounding development in intensity, setbacks, building forms, material, color, and landscaping: 
1.  Site design shall respect existing roadway patterns and driveways. New curb cuts shall be aligned with existing driveways and streets, when applicable. 
2.  Develop transition between projects with different uses and intensities to provide a cohesive visual and functional shift. Create transition by using appropriate setbacks, gradual building height, bulk, and landscaping. 
3.  Integrate perimeter landscaping with the landscaping of adjacent developments. 
4.  Minimize paved areas for curb cuts and parking on the street frontage of projects to maintain a continuous and attractive streetscape. 
5.  Preserve natural site features such as mature trees, views, etc., and incorporate into the site design of the new project. 
6.  Site design of projects shall be compatible with and protect existing nearby heritage structures and trees. 
7.  Link on-site walkways to the public sidewalk system outside the project site for ease of pedestrian access. 
8.  Provide pedestrian links between residential developments and nearby employment and shopping center, schools, and parks to encourage pedestrian activities. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.40.070 - Site organization. 
A.  Locate site components such as structures, parking driveways, walkways, landscaping and open spaces to maximize visual appeal and functional efficiency. Security kiosks and gates shall be located to allow queuing for at least three cars. 
B.  Emphasize the pleasant components of the project such as existing trees and views, and disguise its less desirable scenes such as parking areas, loading and service areas through placement and design of structures and landscaping. 
C.  Siting of noise and odor generating functions on a site shall not create a nuisance for the adjacent properties. 
D.  Orientation of buildings on a site shall relate to each other and to buildings on adjacent sites for aesthetic organization. The front of one building shall not face the back of another. In these instances, an increased setback between buildings may be required to meet the standards of the California Building Code. 
E.  Street frontages shall not be dominated by surface parking to encourage pedestrian orientation and a continuous streetscape. Limit paved areas on street frontages to one double row of parking and locate the rest of the parking elsewhere on the site. 
F.  Where half or more of the parking is located at the rear of a retail/office building, provide main entries in the front and rear of buildings for convenient access. 
G.  Site design of projects shall have external orientation for a positive street experience. Orient buildings toward public streets and provide view corridors into the project site. View corridors may be provided by controlling the spacing and angles of building on the site and by providing open vistas and plazas. 
H.  Building facades shall be lively and include windows and main entries which face public streets for a pedestrian friendly environment. 
I.  Provide convenient and safe pedestrian and automobile access to the site from adjacent streets. 
J.  Define site boundaries by landscaping and bands of decorative paving to announce entry into the site. 
K.  Every project shall have a main entry, defined by landscaping and other decorative features. Main entrances to all buildings shall be well defined. 
L.  Design and locate a project's internal circulation pattern for maximum ease of movement and a minimum of safety hazards. 
M.  Consider energy efficiency in the siting of buildings. Shading of structures and parking areas is recommended. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.40.075 - Open space. 
A.  Design each project site for maximum utility of open space for ventilation, sunlight, recreation, and views for both new and existing buildings. 
B.  In business parks and strip shopping centers, open space areas are recommended. 
C.  Open space areas may include benches, art, landscape, water, and hardscape features, as approved by the city. 
D.  Provide direct access to common useable open space from all buildings. Common open spaces shall be useable for recreational purposes (landscaping strips of less than fifty (50) feet in width between buildings does not constitute useable common open space). 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.40.080 - Scale and character. 
A.  Break up large buildings into groups of smaller segments whenever possible, to appear smaller in mass and bulk. This may require increasing setbacks to comply with the standards of the California Building Code. 
B.  Adjacent buildings shall be compatible in height and scale. 
C.  Buildings and additions shall not shade more than ten (10) percent of the structures or open space areas on adjacent properties for proper solar access. 
D.  Buildings shall maintain similar horizontal and vertical proportions with the adjacent facades to maintain architectural unity. 
E.  Step back upper stories of buildings three stories or taller from public roads and adjacent low scale development to reduce the bulk impact. 
F.  Maintain the dominant existing scale of an area. 
G.  Placement of windows and openings on second story additions shall not create a direct line of sight into the living space or the back yard of adjacent properties to maintain privacy. 
H.  Buildings shall maintain visually interesting activities at the street level by placing active facades with windows and openings on the street side to promote pedestrian activities. 
I.  Interrupt front facades on large structures by various architectural elements such as trellises, balconies, steps, openings, etc., about every thirty (30) feet to appear smaller in scale. 
J.  Choose inset, multi-pane windows over a continuous band of single pane windows, to create a sense of scale. 
K.  Maintain the scale and character of the existing main structure in building additions by retaining similar proportions and rhythm present on the main structures. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.40.085 - Architecture and design. 
A.  Maintain diversity and individuality in style but be compatible with the character of the neighborhood. 
B.  In areas where no prevailing architectural style exists, maintain the general neighborhood character by the use of similar scale, forms and materials providing that it enhances the neighborhood. The scale, forms, and materials shall be approved by the city. 
C.  Develop a comprehensive architectural theme for multi-building complexes. Unify various site components through the use of similar designs, material, and colors. The designs, material, and colors shall be approved by the city. 
D.  "Corporate architecture" and generic designs are not recommended. Design each project specifically with respect to its own surrounding environment. 
E.  Buildings shall have three distinct components: base, middle, and top. Define each component by horizontal and vertical articulation. 
F.  Link buildings and sites together by proper building orientation, landscaping, and similarly designed building and site components. 
G.  Buildings on corner lots shall demonstrate a strong tie to the public streets. Enhance street corners by special design features such as celebrated main entrances, or landscape features. 
H.  Include decorative building elements in the design of all buildings. Add more interest to buildings by incorporating changes in wall plane and height, arcades, porticos, trellises, porches, balconies, dormers, windows, openings, etc. 
I.  Repeat design and decorative building elements in all elevations and the roof as well as the front facade. 
J.  Windows and openings shall be consistent with the architectural style of buildings and maintain similar proportions and rhythm with those on adjacent buildings. 
K.  Provide clear windows on street level on retail buildings to create interest for pedestrians. 
L.  Define building entries by use of human scale architectural elements such as arches, posts, awnings, etc. Orient main entries toward public streets. 
M.  Awnings and canopies shall be compatible with the building design and shall conform to Section 17.78.200 (Sign Ordinance) of this title. 
N.  Awnings shall not cover or replace facade articulation by wrapping around buildings in continuous bands. Place awning only on top of doors, windows, and other openings. 
O.  Design fire escapes and exterior stairs, elevator shafts, and balconies as part of the building, not as separate elements. 
P.  Exterior remodeling of older buildings being occupied by new tenants is strongly encouraged. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.40.090 - Accessory utility buildings. 
A.  The style, material, and color of accessory buildings visible from public streets shall be the same as those of the main building. 
B.  Accessory buildings shall be proportional to the main structures in size and bulk. Accessory buildings may not dominate any site areas. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.40.095 - Roof. 
A.  New roofs shall be consistent in form and shape with the dominant roof form in the neighborhood. 
B.  Buildings in, or adjacent to, residential neighborhoods, with predominately gabled roofs, shall have gabled roofs to create a residential scale and character. 
C.  Long horizontal roof lines are not allowed. Interrupt roof line by architectural treatment and features. The maximum allowable unbroken roof line is thirty (30) feet. 
D.  Vary roof levels and forms on a large building to create diversity and to decrease the apparent scale of the building. 
E.  Include roofs on all elevations, not just on the front facades of buildings. Roof forms shall express entrances to buildings. 
F.  Roofs shall be an integral part of building design. False mansard roofs are not allowed. 
G.  Include architectural elements such as projecting cornices in design of flat roofs to define the edge of the roof. 
H.  Parapets and roof screens shall be integrated architecturally into building designs. Placement, material, and color of roof screens shall not impact the building architecture or roof form. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.40.100 - Material and color. 
A.  Develop a comprehensive material and color scheme for each project to tie in the various parts of the project. Choose variety of colors and materials to add interest to buildings. Colors and materials shall be approved by the city. 
B.  Avoid large expanses of smooth surfaces such as concrete or glass. Use materials with a sense of scale and texture. 
C.  Avoid large expanses of highly reflective surfaces and mirror glass exterior walls to prevent heat and glare impacts on the adjacent public streets and properties. 
D.  Choose high quality materials and paint to prevent degradation and for ease of maintenance. 
E.  Use wrought iron, cast iron, or high quality wood for decorative features and trims. Vertical sliding panels (i.e. T-111) are prohibited. 
F.  Coordinate exterior colors of adjacent structures on the same or adjacent sites. 
G.  Strong, bright contrasting colors shall be used for ornaments and accent only. 
H.  Coordinate color and material of building additions with those of the principal structure. 
I.  Wall and ground sign design material and color shall be compatible with the principal building on the site and shall comply with Chapter 17.78, Sign Ordinance, of the Orland Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.40.105 - Service facilities. 
A.  Locate service areas and drives away from public streets and nearby residential uses. Place service facilities in the least visible areas. 
B.  Provide convenient access for all service and emergency vehicles. Separate service drives from other on-site circulation patterns when possible. 
C.  Fully screen all service facilities from the public street and adjoining properties. Doors for service facilities shall be recessed and integrated into the overall design of the building. 
D.  Screening devices shall have a similar design and material to the main structures on the site, and shall be incorporated into the site design of the project. 
E.  Fences, walls, dense landscaping, berming, or any combination of the above, may be used to screen service areas and facilities. 
F.  In multi-building complexes, service areas shall be combined or located next to each other to minimize the visual and noise impact on the surrounding uses. 
G.  Service facilities shall be easily accessible for service vehicles and tenants. Service yards shall be located so as to minimize interaction between service vehicles and automobiles. 
H.  Service facilities shall be separated from pedestrian walkways to increase safety. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.40.110 - Mechanical equipment. 
A.  Mechanical equipment shall not be located in any front setback area between the public street and building. 
B.  Mechanical equipment shall be located far enough from adjacent properties to not cause noise impacts. Noise level at property line may not exceed fifty (50) dBA in or adjacent to residential areas and seventy-five (75) dBA in all commercial and industrial zones. 
C.  Fully screened roof top equipment by parapet walls or a roof well on all four sides. 
D.  Avoid individual screening of a group of equipment on a single roof. Contain all equipment within same roof screen. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.40.115 - Lighting. 
A.  Light fixture design shall be compatible with the design and the use of the principal structure on the site. Light fixtures shall be equipped with appropriate reflectors and shielded to prevent illumination of the adjacent properties. 
B.  Incorporate placement of light fixtures into the landscape scheme of the project. Show location and type of all exterior lights on the landscape plans. 
C.  Height of any light poles shall be appropriate for the project and surrounding environment. Height of the light poles shall not exceed that of the main building. 
D.  Use bollard type luminaries, maximum of eight feet high for pedestrian areas. 
E.  Shield light sources to prevent any glare or direct illumination on public streets, adjacent properties, highways, or Interstate "5." 
F.  All area lights shall be energy efficient type (High Pressure Sodium or equivalent). 
G.  All on-site pedestrian and automobile traffic areas shall be well lit for safety and security. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.40.120 - Trash enclosures. 
A.  All development in this zoning district shall provide for adequate storage of trash and recyclable materials in containers in enclosed areas. 
B.  Trash enclosures shall be conveniently accessible by collection trucks. Access driveways shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) feet in width. 
C.  Enclosures shall not be located in setback, landscaped, or parking areas. 
D.  Adequate turn around areas for collection trucks shall be provided. 
E.  A concrete pad in front of and within enclosures to prevent damage to pavement is required. 
F.  Trash enclosures shall screen trash containers on all four sides. The height of enclosures shall fully screen the containers. 
G.  A roof shall be provided for trash enclosures when visible from any upper story. 
H.  The style, material, and color of enclosures shall be similar to those of the main structure. 
I.  Enclosures shall be made of masonry or wood and match the main building in finish and color. Enclosures may be masonry or wood, painted to match the main building. 
J.  Steel enclosure gates are required as a minimum standard. 
K.  When visible from public rights-of-way, redwood slatted cyclone fencing may be acceptable, but depending on the design of the main buildings, wood, concrete, or stucco is encouraged. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.40.125 - Professional offices and buildings. 
A.  Professional office buildings shall have the highest quality architecture and be oriented toward streets. 
B.  For office buildings, a combination of hardscape such as textured paving, water fountains, and landscaping shall be used to provide strong emphasis to focal points and entrances to the buildings. 
C.  In multi-building complexes, buildings and offices shall be most visible from a public right-of-way. 
D.  When there are two or more buildings located on site, buildings shall be oriented toward public streets and provide view corridors into the project site. View corridors may be provided by controlling the spacing and angles of buildings on the site and by providing vistas and plazas. 
E.  The site boundaries and main entrances shall be defined by both landscaping and decorative paving. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.40.130 - Fences and walls. 
A.  All fences and fencing materials require a fencing permit approved by the city of Orland planning department prior to installation. Ty-vek or like materials, corrugated materials, tin, aluminum, bamboo, hay, and other like materials deemed by the city to be unacceptable are prohibited. All fencing material and fence construction shall be approved by the city in accordance with the Orland Municipal Code and the California Building Code, prior to construction of the fence. 
B.  Any masonry and stucco walls require a building permit if greater than three feet in height. 
C.  Fences and walls shall be compatible in style and material with the main structures on a site. 
D.  To avoid the monotony of long, solid walls and fences around the perimeter of projects, variation in height, texture and color is recommended with approval by the city. 
E.  Signs, lights, and other street furniture incorporated into the design of fences and walls are encouraged. 
F.  Barbed wire fencing is prohibited. All chain link fencing requires slats. 
G.  Screening devices shall be made of opaque (solid) materials such as wood or masonry blocks. 
H.  Fences and walls used for noise control shall be made of materials most suited for noise reduction, and which minimize reflective sound. 
I.  Security fencing and gates shall be of an open type to allow for maximum visibility of the secured area. Wrought iron and cast iron fences are recommended for security fences and gates for all uses. 
J.  Fencing shall be a maximum of six feet in height. Fencing over six feet in height, excepting subsection B above, shall require a building permit. All corner lots, including corners on alleys, shall be a maximum of three feet in height within the front and exterior side yard setback areas. 
K.  All fences shall be made of durable and weather-resistant materials as approved by the city. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.40.135 - Setbacks. 
Minimum yards in the C-2 zone are as follows: 
A.  Front: none, except when the front yard is across the street from a residential zone, then a ten (10) foot setback is required; 
B.  Rear: none, except where a rear yard abuts a residential zone the minimum setback shall be fifteen (15) feet. If the rear yard abuts an alley, such rear yard shall not be less than five feet; 
C.  Side: none, except that a side yard of an interior lot abutting a residential zone shall be not less than the front yard required in such residential zone; 
D.  Adjacent buildings shall have compatible front setbacks to maintain visual continuity of the streetscape. Setback infill projects in areas with different front setbacks at a distance equal to the average setbacks of buildings on either side not to exceed fifty (50) percent of the minimum setback requirements of the zoning code. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.40.140 - Height. 
Maximum building height in the C-2 zone is forty-five (45) feet. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.40.145 - Site plan review. 
Prior to application for a building permit, the applicant shall submit to the city of Orland a complete site plan application with all applicable fees and all other documents necessary for review by the city to ensure compliance with all requirements of the Orland Municipal Code (OMC). A "site plan" application may be approved by the city manager or his/her nominee, without the necessity of public notice, a public hearing or planning commission action if findings required for approval (Section 17.82.050 of this title) can be made. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
Chapter 17.42 - DT-MU DOWNTOWN MIXED USE ZONE 
 
17.42.010 - Purpose and applicability. 
The downtown mixed use or DT-MU zone is intended to apply to areas in the historic downtown area and other areas as deemed appropriate. The purpose of the downtown mixed use zoning designation is to allow for and encourage a broader mix of uses and a more urban pattern of development than exists in the city today, while respecting its historic context and creating a vibrant, pedestrian-friendly environment. The regulations of this chapter and the provisions of Chapter 17.76 shall apply in all downtown mixed use or DT-MU zones. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06) 
_____ 
17.42.020 - Principal permitted and prohibited uses. 
A.  Permitted and Prohibited Uses: 
P = Primary Permitted Uses; X = Not Allowed; C = Conditional Use 
Type of Use 	DT-MU 
Residential Use Group (see Section 17.42.040.C.1. and 2.) 	
Bed and breakfast inn 	C 
Boarding and rooming house 	C 
Dwelling(s), ground floor 	C 
Dwelling(s), basement or second floor or above 	P 
Emergency shelters 	P 
Live/work dwelling 	P 
	
Office/Professional Use Group 	
Bank (no drive-thru) 	P 
Bank (drive-thru) 	C 
Office 	P 
	
Commercial/Service/Retail Use Group 	
Adult entertainment 	X 
Alcoholic beverage sales (accessory to restaurant) 	P 
Alcoholic beverages and liquor, retail 	P 
Amusement arcade 	C 
Amusement services, sales and service 	C 
Appliance sales and repair 	C 
Art galleries and studios 	P 
Auto part sales, no repairs 	C 
Auto repair and sales 	C 
Automobile service station 	C 
Bakery 	P 
Bar 	P 
Bike sales/repair 	P 
Book store 	P 
Brew pub 	P 
Carpet and floor covering, retail 	P 
Caterer 	P 
Child care facility 	C 
Christmas tree sales 	P 
Communication towers and support facilities 	C 
Equipment rental (within a building) 	C 
Farmers' market 	P 
Food stores 	P 
Furniture and home furnishings, office and home (including rental) 	P 
Gaming (limited) 	P 
Gaming establishment (non-restricted) 	C 
Hardware stores 	P 
Health and fitness club 	P 
Hotel 	C 
Medical clinics, labs, and offices 	C 
Nursery 	P 
Outdoor merchandise display 	P 
Outside storage (accessory to primary use) 	C 
Parking lot, public or private (as primary use) 	C 
Pet stores 	P 
Pharmacy 	P 
Photography studios 	P 
Restaurant, drive-though 	C 
Restaurant, with or without outdoor seating 	P 
Retail and personal services 	P 
Second hand businesses 	P 
Theater 	P 
Veterinary clinic 	C 
Wedding chapel 	P 
Civic and Institutional Use Group 	
Church, temple, house of worship 	P 
Convention center 	P 
Fire stations 	P 
Fraternal association 	P 
Jail or correctional facility 	X 
Library 	P 
Museum 	P 
Open space 	P 
Park 	P 
Post office 	P 
Public parking garage 	P 
Public utility buildings 	P 
School, college or university and vocational 	C 
Senior center 	P 
 
(Ord. No. 2013-06; Ord. No. 2014-02, § VI) 
_____ 
17.42.030 - Conditional use criteria. 
A.  In addition to findings listed in [Section] 17.80.040 of the Orland Municipal Code, findings of evidence must indicate that the proposed use is consistent and compatible with the character and intent for the historic downtown area in which it is proposed; 
B.  Incorporates or can be incorporated as part of a broader mix of uses to support an active "pedestrian-oriented" environment within the downtown. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06)  
17.42.040 - Mix of uses. 
The following standards and guidelines apply in the DT-MU zone: 
A.  Mix of uses encouraged: To provide for a balance of commercial, office, residential, and civic uses, new development is encouraged to include a mix of two or more distinct types of permitted uses. 
B.  Required mix of uses for sites greater than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet: All development on sites that exceed fifty thousand (50,000) square feet (roughly two blocks) shall include at least one use from the Commercial/Service Retail Use Group as identified in Section 17.42.020. 
C.  Ground floor uses: The incorporation of retail shops and/or restaurants is encouraged at the street level to promote a more active environment for pedestrians and to support residential and office uses located within the same building or nearby. This configuration of uses is particularly encouraged in the city's existing downtown area and along Walker Street/Newville Road frontage, as well as adjacent to major public spaces, where a high level of activity and visibility is desirable. If a limited portion of a structure's ground level will be devoted to retail or restaurant space, such space should be located along those facades adjacent to or most visible from primary street frontages or major pedestrian walkways. 
1.  Fifty (50) percent of the ground floor square footage must be used for commercial purposes; and 
2.  If the structure is along a street, the street frontage is required to be used for commercial purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06)  
17.42.050 - Lot requirements. 
Lot requirements in the DT-MU zone are as follows: 
A.  Minimum lot area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet for parcels being rezoned and located adjacent to an existing DT-MU zone. Ten thousand (10,000) square feet for parcels being rezoned to DT-MU not adjacent to an existing DT-MU zone. 
B.  Minimum lot width: One hundred (100) feet. 
C.  Street frontage and access: Thirty (30) feet minimum. 
D.  Building frontage: Minimum building frontage to be seventy (70) percent of lot width. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06)  
17.42.060 - Block size. 
The purpose of this section is to maintain a well-defined pattern of urban blocks within the downtown that provide frequent connections to adjacent neighborhoods and serve as a framework for a varied mix of uses while allowing for the incorporation of some larger developments that require the consolidation of two or more blocks, where appropriate. 
A.  To the maximum extent feasible, new development shall work within the framework of the downtown's existing grid pattern of blocks to avoid interrupting the grid pattern, creating large "superblocks," and limiting access to adjacent neighborhoods. 
B.  Maximum block lengths resulting from block consolidation shall be limited to four hundred twenty (420) feet. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06)  
17.42.070 - Design requirements. 
New development shall adhere to the character of the existing neighborhood and be integrated into the surrounding development. New development shall not dominate or interfere with the established character of its neighborhood. Site design of projects shall be cohesive both functionally and visually. 
Design requirements for structures in the DT-MU zone are as follows: 
A.  Maximum building coverage: sixty (60) percent and up to one hundred (100) percent coverage by parking/paved areas. 
B.  When the subject site is immediately adjacent to a residential zone district, the following standards shall apply: 
1.  A solid six-foot masonry wall shall be placed on the property line, reduced to three feet within the required front setback area of the adjacent residential area; and 
2.  All exterior lighting shall be designed to reflect away from the adjacent residential area, or down to the ground within the commercial site. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06)  
17.42.080 - On-site parking requirements. 
A.  Compliance with parking and landscaping requirements of Sections 17.76.100 and 17.76.110, except in the area bounded by the Union Pacific Railroad tracks to the west, Tehama Street to the north, Third Street to the east and Yolo Street to the south. Within this area known as downtown, compliance with the parking provisions of Sections 17.76.100 and 17.76.110 is temporarily waived until one of the following actions occurs: 
1.  A parking district is formed within this area providing financing for public off-street parking; or 
2.  The city initiates and adopts an ordinance repealing the exception for this area and/or adopts other standards for the downtown area. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06)  
17.42.090 - Site design. 
A.  New projects shall be compatible with their surrounding development in intensity, setbacks, building forms, material, color, and landscaping. 
1.  Site design shall respect existing roadway patterns and driveways. When applicable, new curb cuts shall be aligned with existing driveways and streets; 
2.  Develop transitions between projects with different uses and intensities to provide a cohesive visual and functional shift. Create transitions by using appropriate setbacks, gradual building height, bulk, and landscaping; 
3.  Integrate perimeter landscaping with the landscaping of adjacent development; 
4.  Minimize paved areas for curb cuts and parking on the street frontage of projects to maintain a continuous and attractive streetscape; 
5.  Preserve natural site features such as mature trees, views, etc., and incorporate into the site design of the new project; 
6.  Site design of projects shall be compatible with and protect existing nearby heritage structures and trees; 
7.  Link on-site walkways to the public sidewalk system outside the project site for ease of pedestrian access; and 
8.  Provide pedestrian links between residential developments and nearby employment and shopping center, schools, and parks to encourage pedestrian activities. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06)  
17.42.100 - Site organization. 
A.  Locate site components such as structures, parking driveways, walkways, landscaping and open spaces to maximize visual appeal and functional efficiency. Security kiosks and gates shall be located to allow queuing for at least three cars. 
B.  Emphasize the pleasant components of the project such as existing trees and views, and disguise its less desirable scenes such as parking areas, loading and service areas through placement and design of structures and landscaping. 
C.  Siting of noise and odor generating functions on a site shall not create a nuisance for the adjacent properties. 
D.  Orientation of buildings on a site shall relate to each other and to buildings on adjacent sites for aesthetic organization. The front of one building shall not face the back of another. In these instances, an increased setback between buildings may be required to meet the standards of the building codes. 
E.  Street frontages shall not be dominated by surface parking to encourage pedestrian orientation and a continuous streetscape. Limit paved areas on street frontages to one double row of parking and locate the rest of the parking elsewhere on the site. 
F.  Where half or more of the parking is located at the rear of a retail/office building, provide main entries in the front and rear of buildings for convenient access. 
G.  Site design of projects shall have external orientation for a positive street experience. Orient buildings toward public streets and provide view corridors into the project site. View corridors may be provided by controlling the spacing and angles of buildings on the site and by providing open vistas and plazas. 
H.  Building facades shall be lively and include windows and main entries which face public streets for a pedestrian friendly environment. 
I.  Provide convenient and safe pedestrian and automobile access to the site from adjacent streets. 
J.  Define site boundaries by landscaping and bands of decorative paving to announce entry into the site. 
K.  Every project shall have a main entry, defined by landscaping and other decorative features. Main entrances to all buildings shall be well defined. 
L.  Design and locate a project's internal circulation pattern for maximum ease of movement and a minimum of safety hazards. 
M.  Consider energy efficiency in the siting of buildings. Shading of structures and parking areas is recommended. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06)  
17.42.110 - Open space. 
A.  Design each project site for maximum utility of open space for ventilation, sunlight, recreation, and views for both new and existing buildings. 
B.  In business parks and strip shopping centers, open space areas are recommended. 
C.  Open space areas may include benches, art, landscape, water, and hardscape features, as approved by the city. 
D.  Provide direct access to common useable open space from all buildings. Common open spaces shall be useable for recreational purposes (landscaping strips of less than fifty (50) feet in width between buildings does not constitute useable common open space). 
(Ord. No. 2013-06)  
17.42.120 - Scale and character. 
A.  Break up large buildings into groups of smaller segments whenever possible, to appear smaller in mass and bulk. This may require increasing setbacks to comply with the standards of the building codes. 
B.  Adjacent buildings shall be compatible in height and scale. 
C.  Buildings and additions shall not shade more than ten (10) percent of the structures or open space areas on adjacent properties for proper solar access. 
D.  Buildings shall maintain similar horizontal and vertical proportions with the adjacent facades to maintain architectural unity. 
E.  Step back upper stories of buildings three stories or taller from public roads and adjacent low scale development to reduce the bulk impact. 
F.  Maintain the dominant existing scale of an area. 
G.  Placement of windows and openings on second story additions shall not create a direct line of sight into the living space or the back yard of adjacent properties to maintain privacy. 
H.  Buildings shall maintain visually interesting activities at the street level by placing active facades with windows and openings on the street side to promote pedestrian activities. 
I.  Interrupt front facades on large structures by various architectural elements such as trellises, balconies, steps, openings, etc., about every thirty (30) feet to appear smaller in scale. 
J.  Choose inset, multi-pane windows over a continuous band of single pane windows, to create a sense of scale. 
K.  Maintain the scale and character of the existing main structure in building additions by retaining similar proportions present on the main structure. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06)  
17.42.130 - Architecture and design. 
A.  Maintain diversity and individuality in style but be compatible with the character of the neighborhood. 
B.  In areas where no prevailing architectural style exists, maintain the general neighborhood character by the use of similar scale, forms and materials providing that it enhances the neighborhood. The scale, forms, and materials shall be approved by the city. 
C.  Develop a comprehensive architectural theme for multi-building complexes. Unify various site components through the use of similar designs, material, and colors. The designs, material, and colors shall be approved by the city. 
D.  "Corporate architecture" and generic designs are not recommended. Design each project with respect to the surrounding environment. 
E.  Buildings shall have three distinct components: base, middle, and top. Define each component by horizontal and vertical articulation. 
F.  Link buildings and sites together by proper building orientation, landscaping, and similarly designed buildings and site components. 
G.  Buildings on corner lots shall demonstrate a strong tie to the public streets. Enhance street corners by special design features such as celebrated main entrances, or landscape features. 
H.  Include decorative building elements in the design of all buildings. Add more interest to buildings by incorporating changes in wall plane and height, arcades, porticos, trellises, porches, balconies, dormers, windows, openings, etc. 
I.  Repeat design and decorative building elements in all elevations and the roof as well as the front facade. 
J.  Windows and openings shall be consistent with the architectural style of buildings and maintain similar proportions and rhythm with those on adjacent buildings. 
K.  Provide clear windows on street level on retail buildings to create interest for pedestrians. 
L.  Define building entries by use of human scale architectural elements such as arches, posts, awnings, etc. Orient main entries toward public streets. 
M.  Awnings and canopies shall be compatible with the building design and shall conform to Section 17.78.200 (Sign Ordinance) of this title. 
N.  Awnings shall not cover or replace facade articulation by wrapping around buildings in continuous bands. Place awning only on top of doors, windows, and other openings. 
O.  Design fire escapes and exterior stairs, elevator shafts, and balconies as part of the building, not as separate elements. 
P.  Exterior remodeling of older buildings being occupied by new tenants is strongly encouraged. 
Q.  Primary building entrances shall be clearly distinguished through the use of one or more of the following features: 
1.  Covered walkways or arcades; 
2.  Awnings, canopies, or porches; and/or 
3.  Projected or recessed building mass. 
R.  Facades of single-use parking structures (e.g. no residential or retail) shall be articulated through the use of three or more of the following architectural features; 
1.  Windows or window openings; 
2.  Masonry columns; 
3.  Decorative wall insets or projections; 
4.  Awnings; 
5.  Changes in color or texture of materials; 
6.  Approved public art; 
7.  Integrated landscape planters; or 
8.  Other features as approved by the city planner. 
S.  Openings in parking structures and podium parking areas shall be designed to screen views of parked cars from surrounding properties through the use of architectural screens or similar features. 
T.  Front parking lots prohibited. 
U.  Off-street parking is not permitted between the front facade of a building and the primary street. Surface parking shall not be located within thirty (30) feet of a corner. 
V.  Residential garage location and design: where lot configurations permit, residential garages shall be located in the rear yard and accessed from the alley or a narrow drive from the street, as traditionally found in downtown's residential neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06)  
17.42.140 - Accessory utility buildings. 
A.  The style, material, and color of accessory buildings visible from public streets shall be the same as those of the main building. 
B.  Accessory buildings shall be proportional to the main structures in size and bulk. Accessory buildings may not dominate any site areas. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06)  
17.42.150 - Roof. 
A.  New roofs shall be consistent in form and shape with the dominant roof form in the neighborhood. 
B.  Buildings in, or adjacent to, residential neighborhoods, with predominately gabled roofs, shall have gabled roofs to create a residential scale and character. 
C.  Long horizontal roof lines are not allowed. Interrupt roof lines by architectural treatment and features. The maximum allowable unbroken roof line is thirty (30) feet. 
D.  Vary roof levels and forms on a large building to create diversity and to decrease the apparent scale of the building. 
E.  Include roofs on all elevations, not just on the front facades of buildings. Roof forms shall express entrances to buildings. 
F.  Roofs shall be an integral part of building design. False mansard roofs are not allowed. 
G.  Include architectural elements such as projecting cornices in design of flat roofs to define the edge of the roof. 
H.  Parapets and roof screens shall be integrated architecturally into building designs. Placement, material, and color of roof screens shall not impact the building architecture or roof form. 
I.  Parapet walls should be used on all flat roof buildings to screen roof-mounted mechanical equipment. Parapets should include a cap and corner detail. 
J.  The visible portion of sloped roofs should be sheathed with a roofing material complementary to the architectural style of the building and other surrounding buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06)  
17.42.160 - Material and color. 
A.  Develop a comprehensive material and color scheme for each project to tie in the various parts of the project. Choose a variety of colors and materials to add interest to buildings. Colors and materials shall be approved by the city. 
B.  Avoid large expanses of smooth surfaces such as concrete or glass. Use materials with a sense of scale and texture. 
C.  Avoid large expanses of highly reflective surfaces and mirror glass on exterior walls to prevent heat and glare impacts on the adjacent public streets and properties. 
D.  Choose high quality materials and paint to prevent degradation and for ease of maintenance. 
E.  Use wrought iron, cast iron, or high quality wood for decorative features and trims. Vertical sliding panels (i.e. T-111) are prohibited. 
F.  Coordinate exterior colors of adjacent structures on the same or adjacent sites. 
G.  Strong, bright contrasting colors shall be used for ornaments and accent only. 
H.  Coordinate color and material of building additions with those of the principal structure. 
I.  Wall and ground sign design material and color shall be compatible with the principal building on the site and shall comply with Chapter 17.78, Sign Ordinance, of the Orland Municipal Code. 
J.  Primary building materials shall be durable and project an image of permanence typical of the downtown's traditional masonry storefronts and public buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06)  
17.42.170 - Service facilities. 
A.  Locate service areas and service driveways away from public streets and nearby residential uses. Place service facilities in the least visible areas. 
B.  Provide convenient access for all service and emergency vehicles. Separate service drives from other on-site circulation patterns when possible. 
C.  Fully screen all service facilities from the public street and adjoining properties. Doors for service facilities shall be recessed and integrated into the overall design of the building. 
D.  Screening devices shall have a similar design and material to the main structures on the site, and shall be incorporated into the site design of the project. 
E.  Fences, walls, dense landscaping, berming, or any combination of the above, may be used to screen service areas and facilities. 
F.  In multi-building complexes, service areas shall be combined or located next to each other to minimize the visual and noise impact on the surrounding uses. 
G.  Service facilities shall be easily accessible for service vehicles and tenants. Service yards shall be located so as to minimize interaction between service vehicles and automobiles. 
H.  Service facilities shall be separated from pedestrian walkways to increase safety. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06)  
17.42.180 - Mechanical equipment. 
A.  Mechanical equipment shall not be located in any front setback area between the public street and building. 
B.  Mechanical equipment shall be located far enough from adjacent properties to not cause noise impacts. Noise level at the property lines may not exceed seventy-five (75) dBA and shall not exceed fifty (50) dBA adjacent to residential areas. 
C.  Fully screened roof top equipment by parapet walls or a roof well on all four sides. 
D.  Avoid individual screening of a group of equipment on a single roof. Contain all equipment within same roof screen. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06)  
17.42.190 - Lighting. 
The purpose of this section is to encourage a safe, appealing, and pedestrian-friendly nighttime environment within the downtown area. 
A.  Exterior Lighting: 
1.  All lighting shall comply with Section 17.40.115. 
2.  Lighting fixtures shall be attractively designed to complement the architecture of the project. Accent lighting should be used to accent landscaping or building details such as tower elements, ornamental windows, and tile. 
3.  Lighting should improve the visual identification of the residence and businesses and create an inviting atmosphere for passersby. 
4.  Wall mounted lights should be used to the greatest extent possible to minimize the total number of freestanding light standards and shall be detailed to complement the building architecture. 
5.  The light sources used in outdoor lighting should provide a warm, calm glow, such as yellow light. 
6.  Street lighting shall be consistent with the city's improvement standards and other adopted lighting standards for the downtown. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06)  
17.42.200 - Trash enclosures. 
A.  All development in this zoning district shall provide for adequate storage of trash and recyclable materials in containers in enclosed areas. 
B.  Trash enclosures shall be conveniently accessible by collection trucks. Access driveways shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) feet in width. 
C.  Enclosures shall not be located in setback, landscaped, or parking areas. 
D.  Adequate turn around areas for collection trucks shall be provided. 
E.  A concrete pad in front of and within enclosures to prevent damage to pavement is required. 
F.  Trash enclosures shall screen trash containers on all four sides. The height of enclosures shall fully screen the containers. 
G.  A roof shall be provided for trash enclosures when visible from any upper story. 
H.  The style, material, and color of enclosures shall be similar to those of the main structure. 
I.  Enclosures shall be made of masonry or wood and match the main building in finish and color. 
J.  Steel enclosure gates are required as a minimum standard. 
K.  When visible from public rights-of-way, redwood slatted cyclone fencing may be acceptable, but depending on the design of the main buildings, wood, concrete, or stucco is encouraged. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06)  
17.42.210 - Professional offices and buildings. 
A.  Professional office buildings shall have the highest quality architecture and be oriented toward streets. 
B.  For office buildings, a combination of hardscape such as textured paving, water fountains, and landscaping shall be used to provide strong emphasis to focal points and entrances to the buildings. 
C.  In multi-building complexes, buildings and offices shall be most visible from a public right-of-way. 
D.  When there are two or more buildings located on site, buildings shall be oriented toward public streets and provide view corridors into the project site. View corridors may be provided by controlling the spacing and angles of buildings on the site and by providing vistas and plazas. 
E.  The site boundaries and main entrances shall be defined by both landscaping and decorative paving. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06)  
17.42.220 - Fences and walls. 
A.  All fences and fencing materials require a fencing permit approved by the city of Orland planning department prior to installation. Ty-vek or like materials, corrugated materials, tin, aluminum, bamboo, hay, and other like materials deemed by the city to be unacceptable are prohibited. All fencing material and fence construction shall be approved by the city in accordance with the Orland Municipal Code and the building codes, prior to construction of the fence. 
B.  Any masonry and stucco walls require a building permit if greater than three feet in height. 
C.  Fences and walls shall be compatible in style and material with the main structures on a site. 
D.  To avoid the monotony of long, solid walls and fences around the perimeter of projects, variation in height, texture and color is recommended with approval by the city. 
E.  Signs, lights, and other street furniture incorporated into the design of fences and walls are encouraged. 
F.  Barbed wire fencing is prohibited. All chain link fencing requires slats. 
G.  Screening devices shall be made of opaque (solid) materials such as wood or masonry blocks. 
H.  Fences and walls used for noise control shall be made of materials most suited for noise reduction, and which minimize reflective sound. 
I.  Security fencing and gates shall be of an open type to allow for maximum visibility of the secured area. Wrought iron and cast iron fences are recommended for security fences and gates for all uses. 
J.  Fencing shall be a maximum of six feet in height. Fencing over six feet in height, excepting subsection (B) above, shall require a building permit. All corner lots, including corners on alleys, shall be a maximum of three feet in height within the front and exterior side yard setback areas. 
K.  All fences shall be made of durable and weather-resistant materials as approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06)  
17.42.230 - Setbacks. 
Minimum yards in the DT-MU zone are as follows: 
A.  Front: None, except when the front yard is across the street from a residential zone, then a ten-foot setback is required; 
B.  Rear: None, except where a rear yard abuts a residential zone the minimum setback shall be fifteen (15) feet. If the rear yard abuts an alley, such rear yard shall not be less than five feet; 
C.  Side: None, except that a side yard of an interior lot abutting a residential zone shall be not less than the side yard required in such residential zone; and 
D.  Adjacent buildings shall have compatible front setbacks to maintain visual continuity of the streetscape. Setback infill projects in areas with different front setbacks at a distance equal to the average setbacks of buildings on either side not to exceed fifty (50) percent of the minimum setback requirements of the zoning code. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06)  
17.42.240 - Height. 
No maximum building height is established in the DT-MU zone. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06)  
17.42.250 - Site plan review. 
Prior to application for a building permit, the applicant shall submit to the city of Orland a complete site plan application with all applicable fees and all other documents necessary for review by the city to ensure compliance with all requirements of the Orland Municipal Code. A "site plan" application may be approved by the city manager or his/her nominee, without the necessity of public notice, a public hearing or planning commission action if findings required for approval (Section 17.82.050 of this title) can be made. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06)  
17.42.260 - Guidelines for the renovation and restoration of existing structures. 
A.  Remodeling with unauthentic false historic details, trims and moldings creates a confusing historical context for the community and should be avoided. 
B.  The use of light gauge metal, steel panels, or other material to make two or more storefronts appear to be a single, larger structure should be avoided. 
C.  Upper story doors and windows and street-level storefronts that have been previously covered, sealed, or filled in should be restored to their original proportions and appearance during the rehabilitation process. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06)  
Chapter 17.44 - C-H HIGHWAY SERVICE COMMERCIAL ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.44.010 - Purpose and applicability. 
The highway service commercial or C-H zone is intended to provide necessary services and convenience for the traveling public along main roads or at highway intersection frontages at proper intervals and locations in developments designed for safety, convenience and suitable appearance. The regulations of this chapter and the provisions of Chapter 17.76 shall apply in all highway service commercial or C-H zones. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.44.020 - Principal permitted uses. 
Principal permitted uses in the C-H zone are as follows: 
A.  All of the uses listed as permitted uses in the C-2 zone, Section 17.40.020; 
B.  The following uses which may be enclosed within a building, or in part or total an open use on the lot: 
1.  Automobile sales and repair, 
2.  Automobile service stations, 
3.  Bowling alley, 
4.  Car wash, 
5.  Crop and tree farming, 
6.  Drive-in restaurants and restaurants with drive-up window, 
7.  Electric motor repair, 
8.  Equipment rental, 
9.  Feed store, 
10.  Glass shop, 
11.  Heating/air, 
12.  Hospitals, 
13.  Hotels, motels, 
14.  Landscape construction, 
15.  Lumberyards, 
16.  Motorcycle sales, 
17.  Motor repair, 
18.  Muffler shop, 
19.  Novelty and specialty shops, 
20.  Nurseries and greenhouses, retail fruit and vegetable stands, 
21.  Paint booth, 
22.  Propane sales, 
23.  Pump sales/repair, 
24.  Radiator shops, 
25.  Senior center, 
26.  Tire sales, 
27.  Towing, 
28.  Trucking, 
29.  Vending repair, 
30.  Veterinary office (no overnight keeping of animals). 
Other uses which the city planner determines by written findings are similar to the above. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.44.025 - Administratively permitted uses. 
A.  Administratively permitted uses in the C-H zone are as follows: 
1.  Catering trucks; 
2.  Food trucks; 
3.  Produce stand(s); 
4.  Fireworks sales. 
B.  Other uses which the city planner determines by written findings are similar to the above pursuant to Section 17.04.030. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1; Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1(Exh. A))  
17.44.030 - Conditional uses requiring use permits. 
A.  Conditional uses requiring use permits are as follows: 
1.  Reserved; 
2.  Airport, helicopters, and landing strips; 
3.  Agricultural supply and product sales; 
4.  Amusement parks, commercial amusement operations; 
5.  Animal hospitals and kennels; 
6.  Boarding and rooming houses; 
7.  Carpentry and cabinet making shops; 
8.  Catering truck(s)/food trucks(s); 
9.  Cement, u-haul; 
10.  Clothing manufacture; 
11.  Communication towers and support facilities in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.85; 
12.  Contractor's yards; 
13.  Dry cleaning plants; 
14.  Dwellings associated with commercial use; 
15.  Fabrication, wood, metal and fiber products; 
16.  Flea market(s); 
17.  Handicraft manufacture; 
18.  Homes for elderly; 
19.  Light industrial uses not listed above as permitted uses; 
20.  Metal working shops; 
21.  Mini-storage facility; 
22.  Plumbing shops; 
23.  Printing and lithography; 
24.  Private institutions including rest homes, sanitariums, and convalescent homes; 
25.  Recreational vehicle storage facility; 
26.  Recycling facility; 
27.  Storage warehouses; 
28.  Surplus sales; 
29.  Truck stops; 
30.  Truck storage, repair, distribution. 
B.  Other uses which the city planner determines by written findings are similar to the above pursuant to Section 17.04.030. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § I)  
17.44.040 - Lot requirements. 
Lot requirements in the C-H district are as follows: 
A.  Minimum lot area: six thousand (6,000) square feet; for parcels located within a C-H zone district existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Six thousand (6,000) square feet for parcels being rezoned and located adjacent to an existing C-H zone. Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet for parcels being rezoned to C-H not adjacent to an existing C-H zone, and for parcels created after adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
B.  Minimum lot width: one hundred (100) feet except those parcels existing at the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter with a width less than one hundred (100) feet, shall not be reduced to less than sixty (60) feet. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.44.050 - Design requirements. 
New development shall adhere to the character of the existing neighborhood and be integrated into the surrounding development. New development shall not dominate or interfere with the established character of its neighborhood. Site design of projects shall be cohesive both functionally and visually. 
Design requirements for structures in the C-H zone are as follows: 
A.  Compliance with parking and landscaping requirements of Sections 17.76.100 and 17.76.110; 
B.  Maximum building coverage not to exceed sixty (60) percent of the lot; 
C.  At a minimum, the following landscaping is required: 
1.  The required front yard shall be landscaped and not used for parking. The only area not landscaped within the required front yard is the driveway access to the required parking area, which shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in width, 
2.  Landscaping within the front setback area shall include one fifteen (15) gallon-sized tree for each fifty (50) feet of frontage, and at least one gallon-sized shrub for each five feet of frontage, 
3.  In addition to the required trees and shrubs, the landscaped area may also be planted with lawn or ground cover plants. Other decorative non-plant ground covers may be used as long as they do not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of this landscaped area, 
4.  Where landscaping is provided, adequate irrigation and maintenance thereof shall be provided, including replacement of dead trees, shrubs, vines or other ground cover required pursuant to this section; 
D.  When the subject site is immediately adjacent to a residential zone district, the following standards shall apply: 
1.  A solid six-foot masonry wall shall be placed on the property line, reduced to three feet within the required front setback area of the adjacent residential zone. 
2.  All exterior lighting shall be designed to reflect away from the adjacent residential area, or down to the ground within the commercial site. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.44.060 - Site design. 
A.  New projects shall be compatible with their surrounding development in intensity, setbacks, building forms, material, color, and landscaping: 
1.  Site design shall respect existing roadway patterns and driveways. New curb cuts shall be aligned with existing driveways and streets, when applicable. 
2.  Develop transition between projects with different uses and intensities to provide a cohesive visual and functional shift. Create transition by using appropriate setbacks, gradual building height, bulk, and landscaping. 
3.  Integrate perimeter landscaping with the landscaping of adjacent developments. 
4.  Minimize paved areas for curb cuts and parking on the street frontage of projects to maintain a continuous and attractive streetscape. 
5.  Preserve natural site features such as mature trees, views, etc., and incorporate into the site design of the new project. 
6.  Site design of projects shall be compatible with and protect existing nearby heritage structures and trees. 
7.  Link on-site walkways to the public sidewalk system outside the project site for ease of pedestrian access. 
8.  Provide pedestrian links between residential developments and nearby employment and shopping center, schools, and parks to encourage pedestrian activities. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.44.065 - Site organization. 
A.  Locate site components such as structures, parking driveways, walkways, landscaping and open spaces to maximize visual appeal and functional efficiency. Security kiosks and gates shall be located to allow queuing for at least three cars. 
B.  Emphasize the pleasant components of the project such as existing trees and views, and disguise its less desirable scenes such as parking areas, loading and service areas through placement and design of structures and landscaping. 
C.  Siting of noise and odor generating functions on a site shall not create a nuisance for the adjacent properties. 
D.  Orientation of buildings on a site shall relate to each other and to buildings on adjacent sites for aesthetic organization. The front of one building shall not face the back of another. In these instances, an increased setback between buildings may be required to meet the standards of the California Building Code. 
E.  Street frontages shall not be dominated by surface parking to encourage pedestrian orientation and a continuous streetscape. Limit paved areas on street frontages to one double row of parking and locate the rest of the parking elsewhere on the site. 
F.  Where half or more of the parking is located at the rear of a retail/office building, provide main entries in the front and rear of buildings for convenient access. 
G.  Site design of projects shall have external orientation for a positive street experience. Orient buildings toward public streets and provide view corridors into the project site. View corridors may be provided by controlling the spacing and angles of building on the site and by providing open vistas and plazas. 
H.  Building facades shall be lively and include windows and main entries which face public streets for a pedestrian friendly environment. 
I.  Provide convenient and safe pedestrian and automobile access to the site from adjacent streets. 
J.  Define site boundaries by landscaping and bands of decorative paving to announce entry into the site. 
K.  Every project shall have a main entry, defined by landscaping and other decorative features. Main entrances to all buildings shall be well defined. 
L.  Design and locate a project's internal circulation pattern for maximum ease of movement and a minimum of safety hazards. 
M.  Consider energy efficiency in the siting of buildings. Shading of structures and parking areas is recommended. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.44.070 - Open space. 
A.  Design each project site for maximum utility of open space for ventilation, sunlight, recreation, and views for both new and existing buildings. 
B.  In business parks and strip shopping centers, open space areas are recommended. 
C.  Open space areas may include benches, art, landscape, water, and hardscape features, as approved by the city. 
D.  Provide direct access to common useable open space from all buildings. Common open spaces shall be useable for recreational purposes (landscaping strips of less than fifty (50) feet in width between buildings does not constitute useable common open space). 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.44.075 - Scale and character. 
A.  Break up large buildings into groups of smaller segments whenever possible, to appear smaller in mass and bulk. This may require increasing setbacks to comply with the standards of the California Building Code. 
B.  Adjacent buildings shall be compatible in height and scale. 
C.  Buildings and additions shall not shade more than ten (10) percent of the structures or open space areas on adjacent properties for proper solar access. 
D.  Buildings shall maintain similar horizontal and vertical proportions with the adjacent facades to maintain architectural unity. 
E.  Step back upper stories of buildings three stories or taller from public roads and adjacent low scale development to reduce the bulk impact. 
F.  Maintain the dominant existing scale of an area. 
G.  Placement of windows and openings on second story additions shall not create a direct line of sight into the living space or the back yard of adjacent properties to maintain privacy. 
H.  Buildings shall maintain visually interesting activities at the street level by placing active facades with windows and openings on the street side to promote pedestrian activities. 
I.  Interrupt front facades on large structures by various architectural elements such as trellises, balconies, steps, openings, etc., about every thirty (30) feet to appear smaller in scale. 
J.  Choose inset, multi-pane windows over a continuous band of single pane windows, to create a sense of scale. 
K.  Maintain the scale and character of the existing main structure in building additions by retaining similar proportions and rhythm present on the main structures. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.44.080 - Architecture and design. 
A.  Maintain diversity and individuality in style but be compatible with the character of the neighborhood. 
B.  In areas where no prevailing architectural style exists, maintain the general neighborhood character by the use of similar scale, forms and materials providing that it enhances the neighborhood. The scale, forms, and materials shall be approved by the city. 
C.  Develop a comprehensive architectural theme for multi-building complexes. Unify various site components through the use of similar designs, material, and colors. The designs, material, and colors shall be approved by the city. 
D.  "Corporate architecture" and generic designs are not recommended. Design each project specifically with respect to its own surrounding environment. 
E.  Buildings shall have three distinct components: base, middle, and top. Define each component by horizontal and vertical articulation. 
F.  Link buildings and sites together by proper building orientation, landscaping, and similarly designed building and site components. 
G.  Buildings on corner lots shall demonstrate a strong tie to the public streets. Enhance street corners by special design features such as celebrated main entrances, or landscape features. 
H.  Include decorative building elements in the design of all buildings. Add more interest to buildings by incorporating changes in wall plane and height, arcades, porticos, trellises, porches, balconies, dormers, windows, openings, etc. 
I.  Repeat design and decorative building elements in all elevations and the roof as well as the front facade. 
J.  Windows and openings shall be consistent with the architectural style of buildings and maintain similar proportions and rhythm with those on adjacent buildings. 
K.  Provide clear windows on street level on retail buildings to create interest for pedestrians. 
L.  Define building entries by use of human scale architectural elements such as arches, posts, awnings, etc. Orient main entries toward public streets. 
M.  Awnings and canopies shall be compatible with the building design and shall conform to Section 17.78.200 (Sign Ordinance) of this title. 
N.  Awnings shall not cover or replace facade articulation by wrapping around buildings in continuous bands. Place awning only on top of doors, windows, and other openings. 
O.  Design fire escapes and exterior stairs, elevator shafts, and balconies as part of the building, not as separate elements. 
P.  Exterior remodeling of older buildings being occupied by new tenants is strongly encouraged. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.44.085 - Accessory utility buildings. 
A.  The style, material, and color of accessory buildings visible from public streets shall be the same as those of the main building. 
B.  Accessory buildings shall be proportional to the main structures in size and bulk. Accessory buildings may not dominate any site areas. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.44.090 - Roof. 
A.  New roofs shall be consistent in form and shape with the dominant roof form in the neighborhood. 
B.  Buildings in, or adjacent to, residential neighborhoods, with predominately gabled roofs, shall have gabled roofs to create a residential scale and character. 
C.  Long horizontal roof lines are not allowed. Interrupt roof line by architectural treatment and features. The maximum allowable unbroken roof line is thirty (30) feet. 
D.  Vary roof levels and forms on a large building to create diversity and to decrease the apparent scale of the building. 
E.  Include roofs on all elevations, not just on the front facades of buildings. Roof forms shall express entrances to buildings. 
F.  Roofs shall be an integral part of building design. False mansard roofs are not allowed. 
G.  Include architectural elements such as projecting cornices in design of flat roofs to define the edge of the roof. 
H.  Parapets and roof screens shall be integrated architecturally into building designs. Placement, material, and color of roof screens shall not impact the building architecture or roof form. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.44.095 - Material and color. 
A.  Develop a comprehensive material and color scheme for each project to tie in the various parts of the project. Choose variety of colors and materials to add interest to buildings. Colors and materials shall be approved by the city. 
B.  Avoid large expanses of smooth surfaces such as concrete or glass. Use materials with a sense of scale and texture. 
C.  Avoid large expanses of highly reflective surfaces and mirror glass exterior walls to prevent heat and glare impacts on the adjacent public streets and properties. 
D.  Choose high quality materials and paint to prevent degradation and for ease of maintenance. 
E.  Use wrought iron, cast iron, or high quality wood for decorative features and trims. Vertical sliding panels (i.e. T-111) are prohibited. 
F.  Coordinate exterior colors of adjacent structures on the same or adjacent sites. 
G.  Strong, bright contrasting colors shall be used for ornaments and accent only. 
H.  Coordinate color and material of building additions with those of the principal structure. 
I.  Wall and ground sign design material and color shall be compatible with the principal building on the site and shall comply with Chapter 17.78, Sign Ordinance, of the Orland Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.44.100 - Service facilities. 
A.  Locate service areas and drives away from public streets and nearby residential uses. Place service facilities in the least visible areas. 
B.  Provide convenient access for all service and emergency vehicles. Separate service drives from other on-site circulation patterns when possible. 
C.  Fully screen all service facilities from the public street and adjoining properties. Doors for service facilities shall be recessed and integrated into the overall design of the building. 
D.  Screening devices shall have a similar design and material to the main structures on the site, and shall be incorporated into the site design of the project. 
E.  Fences, walls, dense landscaping, berming, or any combination of the above, may be used to screen service areas and facilities. 
F.  In multi-building complexes, service areas shall be combined or located next to each other to minimize the visual and noise impact on the surrounding uses. 
G.  Service facilities shall be easily accessible for service vehicles and tenants. Service yards shall be located so as to minimize interaction between service vehicles and automobiles. 
H.  Service facilities shall be separated from pedestrian walkways to increase safety. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.44.105 - Mechanical equipment. 
A.  Mechanical equipment shall not be located in any front setback area between the public street and building. 
B.  Mechanical equipment shall be located far enough from adjacent properties to not cause noise impacts. Noise level at property line may not exceed fifty (50) dBA in or adjacent to residential areas and seventy-five (75) dBA in all commercial and industrial zones. 
C.  Fully screened roof top equipment by parapet walls or a roof well on all four sides. 
D.  Avoid individual screening of a group of equipment on a single roof. Contain all equipment within same roof screen. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.44.110 - Lighting. 
A.  Light fixture design shall be compatible with the design and the use of the principal structure on the site. Light fixtures shall be equipped with appropriate reflectors and shielded to prevent illumination of the adjacent properties. 
B.  Incorporate placement of light fixtures into the landscape scheme of the project. Show location and type of all exterior lights on the landscape plans. 
C.  Height of any light poles shall be appropriate for the project and surrounding environment. Height of the light poles shall not exceed that of the main building. 
D.  Use bollard type luminaries, maximum of eight feet high for pedestrian areas. 
E.  Shield light sources to prevent any glare or direct illumination on public streets, adjacent properties, highways, or Interstate "5." 
F.  All area lights shall be energy efficient type (High Pressure Sodium or equivalent). 
G.  All on-site pedestrian and automobile traffic areas shall be well lit for safety and security. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.44.115 - Trash enclosures. 
A.  All development in this zoning district shall provide for adequate storage of trash and recyclable materials in containers in enclosed areas. 
B.  Trash enclosures shall be conveniently accessible by collection trucks. Access driveways shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) feet in width. 
C.  Enclosures shall not be located in setback, landscaped, or parking areas. 
D.  Adequate turn around areas for collection trucks shall be provided. 
E.  A concrete pad in front of and within enclosures to prevent damage to pavement is required. 
F.  Trash enclosures shall screen trash containers on all four sides. The height of enclosures shall fully screen the containers. 
G.  A roof shall be provided for trash enclosures when visible from any upper story. 
H.  The style, material, and color of enclosures shall be similar to those of the main structure. 
I.  Enclosures shall be made of masonry or wood and match the main building in finish and color. Enclosures may be masonry or wood, painted to match the main building. 
J.  Steel enclosure gates are required as a minimum standard. 
K.  When visible from public rights-of-way, redwood slatted cyclone fencing may be acceptable, but depending on the design of the main buildings, wood, concrete, or stucco is encouraged. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.44.120 - Professional offices and buildings. 
A.  Professional office buildings shall have the highest quality architecture and be oriented toward streets. 
B.  For office buildings, a combination of hardscape such as textured paving, water fountains, and landscaping shall be used to provide strong emphasis to focal points and entrances to the buildings. 
C.  In multi-building complexes, buildings and offices shall be most visible from a public right-of-way. 
D.  When there are two or more buildings located on site, buildings shall be oriented toward public streets and provide view corridors into the project site. View corridors may be provided by controlling the spacing and angles of buildings on the site and by providing vistas and plazas. 
E.  The site boundaries and main entrances shall be defined by both landscaping and decorative paving. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.44.125 - Fences and walls. 
A.  All fences and fencing materials require a fencing permit approved by the city of Orland planning department prior to installation. Ty-vek or like materials, corrugated materials, tin, aluminum, bamboo, hay, and other like materials deemed by the city to be unacceptable are prohibited. All fencing material and fence construction shall be approved by the city in accordance with the Orland Municipal Code and the California Building Code, prior to construction of the fence. 
B.  Any masonry and stucco walls require a building permit if greater than three feet in height. 
C.  Fences and walls shall be compatible in style and material with the main structures on a site. 
D.  To avoid the monotony of long, solid walls and fences around the perimeter of projects, variation in height, texture and color is recommended with approval by the city. 
E.  Signs, lights, and other street furniture incorporated into the design of fences and walls are encouraged. 
F.  Barbed wire fencing may be used for security purposes only. All chain link fencing requires slats. 
G.  Screening devices shall be made of opaque (solid) materials such as wood or masonry blocks. 
H.  Fences and walls used for noise control shall be made of materials most suited for noise reduction, and which minimize reflective sound. 
I.  Security fencing and gates shall be of an open type to allow for maximum visibility of the secured area. Wrought iron and cast iron fences are recommended for security fences and gates for all uses. 
J.  Fencing shall be a maximum of six feet in height. Fencing over six feet in height, excepting subsection B above, shall require a building permit. All corner lots, including corners on alleys, shall be a maximum of three feet in height within the front and exterior side yard setback areas. 
K.  All fences shall be made of durable and weather-resistant materials as approved by the city. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.44.130 - Setbacks. 
Minimum yards in the C-H district are as follows: 
A.  Front: fifteen (15) feet; 
B.  Rear: none except that where a rear yard abuts a residential zone such rear yard shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet, provided further, that the rear yard of a motel shall be not less than six feet; 
C.  Side: none except that where a side yard abuts a residential zone such side yard shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet, provided further, that the side yard of a hotel or motel shall be not less than six feet; 
D.  Adjacent buildings shall have compatible front setbacks to maintain visual continuity of the streetscape. Setback infill projects in areas with different front setbacks at a distance equal to the average setbacks of buildings on either side not to exceed fifty (50) percent of the minimum setback requirements of the zoning code. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.44.135 - Height. 
Maximum building height in the C-H zone is forty-five (45) feet. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.44.140 - Site plan review. 
Prior to application for a building permit, the applicant shall submit to the city of Orland a complete site plan application with all applicable fees and all other documents necessary for review by the city to ensure compliance with all requirements of the Orland Municipal Code (OMC). A "site plan" application may be approved by the city manager or his/her nominee, without the necessity of public notice, a public hearing or planning commission action if findings required for approval (Section 17.82.050 of this title) can be made. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
Chapter 17.48 - M-L LIMITED INDUSTRIAL ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.48.010 - Purpose and applicability. 
The limited industrial or M-L zone is intended to apply to areas in which light manufacturing and heavy commercial uses of the non-nuisance type and large administrative facilities are the desirable predominant uses. The regulations of this chapter and the provisions of Chapter 17.76 shall apply in all limited industrial or M-L zones. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.48.020 - Principal permitted uses. 
A.  Principal permitted uses in the M-L zone are as follows: 
1.  Administrative, business and professional offices; 
2.  Agricultural product processing; 
3.  Agricultural supplies and equipment sales; 
4.  Alcoholic beverage sales, on-site; 
5.  Automotive repair; 
6.  Automobile service stations; 
7.  Bottling plant; 
8.  Carpentry and cabinet making shops; 
9.  Clothing manufacture; 
10.  Contractor's yards; 
11.  Crop and tree farming; 
12.  Electric component assembly and manufacturing; 
13.  Equipment rental yards; 
14.  Fabrication of wood, metal and fiber products; 
15.  Fire station; 
16.  Government vehicle repair/storage yards; 
17.  Handicraft manufacture; 
18.  Light industrial uses within an enclosed building with no noticeable noise, odors or vibrations at the property line; 
19.  Manufacturing within enclosed buildings of electrical and electronic equipment and of household effects and appliances; metal working shops; 
20.  Motor repair; 
21.  Paint booth; 
22.  Plumbing shops; 
23.  Propane sales; 
24.  Public utility buildings; 
25.  Pump sales and repair; 
26.  Research and development facilities; 
27.  Recycling facility; 
28.  Recreational vehicle storage; 
29.  Restaurants and outdoor eating areas; 
30.  Storage warehouses; 
31.  Towing services; 
32.  Tractor sales equipment yards; 
33.  Truck storage, repair and distribution centers. 
B.  Other uses which the city planner determines by written findings are similar to the above. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.48.025 - Administratively permitted uses. 
A.  Administratively permitted uses in the M-L zone are as follows: 
1.  Catering trucks; 
2.  Food trucks; 
3.  Produce stand(s); 
4.  Fireworks sales. 
B.  Other uses which the city planner determines by written findings are similar to the above pursuant to Section 17.04.030. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1; Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1(Exh. A))  
17.48.030 - Conditional uses requiring use permits. 
A.  Conditional uses requiring use permits in the M-L zone are as follows: 
1.  Airports, heliports and landing strips; 
2.  Animal hospitals and kennels; 
3.  Bowling alley; 
4.  Catering truck(s)/food truck(s); 
5.  Churches; 
6.  Day care; 
7.  Dry cleaning plants; 
8.  Dwellings, motels and mobile home parks; 
9.  Explosives, sale and storage; 
10.  Flea market(s); 
11.  Health club; 
12.  Manufacturing uses not within an enclosed building; 
13.  Mini-storage; 
14.  Printing and lithography. 
B.  Special regulations: all manufacturing and fabricating areas shall be enclosed in buildings, and all equipment and materials storage areas adjacent to R zones shall be screened by walls, fences or adequate plantings to a height of not less than six feet. 
C.  Storage of gasoline and other petroleum products emitting a flammable vapor at less than one hundred (100) degrees Fahrenheit. 
1.  Surplus sales. 
D.  Other uses which the city planner determines by written findings are similar to the above pursuant to Section 17.04.030. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.48.040 - Lot requirements. 
Lot requirements in the M-L district are as follows: 
A.  Minimum lot width: one hundred (100) feet except those parcels existing at the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter with a width less than one hundred (100) feet, shall not be reduced to less than sixty (60) feet. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.48.050 - Design requirements. 
Design requirements for structures in the M-L zone are as follows: 
A.  Compliance with parking and landscaping requirements of Sections 17.76.100 and 17.76.110; 
B.  Maximum building coverage sixty (60) percent and up to one hundred (100) percent coverage by parking/paved areas in the downtown area; 
C.  The required front yard shall be landscaped and not used for parking. The only area not landscaped within the required front yard is the driveway access to the required parking area, which shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in width; 
D.  When the subject site is immediately adjacent to a residential zone district, the following standards shall apply: 
1.  A solid six-foot masonry wall shall be placed on the property line, reduced to three feet within the required adjacent residential zone front setback area. 
2.  All exterior lighting shall be designed to reflect away from the adjacent residential area, or down to the ground within the commercial site. 
E.  All manufacturing and fabricating areas shall be enclosed in buildings, and all equipment and materials storage areas adjacent to residential zones shall be screened by walls, fences or adequate plantings to a height of not less than six feet. 
F.  Required rear and side yards may be used for parking or for outdoor storage when adjacent to a residential zone as long as such storage does not exceed the height of the required six-foot wall. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.48.065 - Site design. 
A.  New projects shall be compatible with their surrounding development in intensity, setbacks, building forms, material, color, and landscaping: 
1.  Site design shall respect existing roadway patterns and driveways. New curb cuts shall be aligned with existing driveways and streets, when applicable. 
2.  Develop transition between projects with different uses and intensities to provide a cohesive visual and functional shift. Create transition by using appropriate setbacks, gradual building height, bulk, and landscaping. 
3.  Integrate perimeter landscaping with the landscaping of adjacent developments. 
4.  Minimize paved areas for curb cuts and parking on the street frontage of projects to maintain a continuous and attractive streetscape. 
5.  Preserve natural site features such as mature trees, views, etc., and incorporate into the site design of the new project. 
6.  Site design of projects shall be compatible with and protect existing nearby heritage structures and trees. 
7.  Link on-site walkways to the public sidewalk system outside the project site for ease of pedestrian access. 
8.  Provide pedestrian links between residential developments and nearby employment and shopping center, schools, and parks to encourage pedestrian activities. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.48.070 - Site organization. 
A.  Locate site components such as structures, parking driveways, walkways, landscaping and open spaces to maximize visual appeal and functional efficiency. Security kiosks and gates shall be located to allow queuing for at least three cars. 
B.  Emphasize the pleasant components of the project such as existing trees and views, and disguise its less desirable scenes such as parking areas, loading and service areas through placement and design of structures and landscaping. 
C.  Siting of noise and odor generating functions on a site shall not create a nuisance for the adjacent properties. 
D.  Orientation of buildings on a site shall relate to each other and to buildings on adjacent sites for aesthetic organization. The front of one building shall not face the back of another. In these instances, an increased setback between buildings may be required to meet the standards of the California Building Code. 
E.  Street frontages shall not be dominated by surface parking to encourage pedestrian orientation and a continuous streetscape. Limit paved areas on street frontages to one double row of parking and locate the rest of the parking elsewhere on the site. 
F.  Where half or more of the parking is located at the rear of a retail/office building, provide main entries in the front and rear of buildings for convenient access. 
G.  Site design of projects shall have external orientation for a positive street experience. Orient buildings toward public streets and provide view corridors into the project site. View corridors may be provided by controlling the spacing and angles of building on the site and by providing open vistas and plazas. 
H.  Building facades shall be lively and include windows and main entries which face public streets for a pedestrian friendly environment. 
I.  Provide convenient and safe pedestrian and automobile access to the site from adjacent streets. 
J.  Define site boundaries by landscaping and bands of decorative paving to announce entry into the site. 
K.  Every project shall have a main entry, defined by landscaping and other decorative features. Main entrances to all buildings shall be well defined. 
L.  Design and locate a project's internal circulation pattern for maximum ease of movement and a minimum of safety hazards. 
M.  Consider energy efficiency in the siting of buildings. Shading of structures and parking areas is recommended. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.48.075 - Open space. 
A.  Design each project site for maximum utility of open space for ventilation, sunlight, recreation, and views for both new and existing buildings. 
B.  In business parks and strip shopping centers, open space areas are recommended. 
C.  Open space areas may include benches, art, landscape, water, and hardscape features, as approved by the city. 
D.  Provide direct access to common useable open space from all buildings. Common open spaces shall be useable for recreational purposes (landscaping strips of less than fifty (50) feet in width between buildings does not constitute useable common open space). 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.48.080 - Scale and character. 
A.  Break up large buildings into groups of smaller segments whenever possible, to appear smaller in mass and bulk. This may require increasing setbacks to comply with the standards of the California Building Code. 
B.  Adjacent buildings shall be compatible in height and scale. 
C.  Buildings and additions shall not shade more than ten (10) percent of the structures or open space areas on adjacent properties for proper solar access. 
D.  Buildings shall maintain similar horizontal and vertical proportions with the adjacent facades to maintain architectural unity. 
E.  Step back upper stories of buildings three stories or taller from public roads and adjacent low scale development to reduce the bulk impact. 
F.  Maintain the dominant existing scale of an area. 
G.  Placement of windows and openings on second story additions shall not create a direct line of sight into the living space or the back yard of adjacent properties to maintain privacy. 
H.  Buildings shall maintain visually interesting activities at the street level by placing active facades with windows and openings on the street side to promote pedestrian activities. 
I.  Interrupt front facades on large structures by various architectural elements such as trellises, balconies, steps, openings, etc., about every thirty (30) feet to appear smaller in scale. 
J.  Choose inset, multi-pane windows over a continuous band of single pane windows, to create a sense of scale. 
K.  Maintain the scale and character of the existing main structure in building additions by retaining similar proportions and rhythm present on the main structures. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.48.085 - Architecture and design. 
A.  Maintain diversity and individuality in style but be compatible with the character of the neighborhood. 
B.  In areas where no prevailing architectural style exists, maintain the general neighborhood character by the use of similar scale, forms and materials providing that it enhances the neighborhood. The scale, forms, and materials shall be approved by the city. 
C.  Develop a comprehensive architectural theme for multi-building complexes. Unify various site components through the use of similar designs, material, and colors. The designs, material, and colors shall be approved by the city. 
D.  "Corporate architecture" and generic designs are not recommended. Design each project specifically with respect to its own surrounding environment. 
E.  Buildings shall have three distinct components: base, middle, and top. Define each component by horizontal and vertical articulation. 
F.  Link buildings and sites together by proper building orientation, landscaping, and similarly designed building and site components. 
G.  Buildings on corner lots shall demonstrate a strong tie to the public streets. Enhance street corners by special design features such as celebrated main entrances, or landscape features. 
H.  Include decorative building elements in the design of all buildings. Add more interest to buildings by incorporating changes in wall plane and height, arcades, porticos, trellises, porches, balconies, dormers, windows, openings, etc. 
I.  Repeat design and decorative building elements in all elevations and the roof as well as the front facade. 
J.  Windows and openings shall be consistent with the architectural style of buildings and maintain similar proportions and rhythm with those on adjacent buildings. 
K.  Provide clear windows on street level on retail buildings to create interest for pedestrians. 
L.  Define building entries by use of human scale architectural elements such as arches, posts, awnings, etc. Orient main entries toward public streets. 
M.  Awnings and canopies shall be compatible with the building design and shall conform to Section 17.78.200 of this title. 
N.  Awnings shall not cover or replace facade articulation by wrapping around buildings in continuous bands. Place awning only on top of doors, windows, and other openings. 
O.  Design fire escapes and exterior stairs, elevator shafts, and balconies as part of the building, not as separate elements. 
P.  Exterior remodeling of older buildings being occupied by new tenants is strongly encouraged. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.48.090 - Accessory utility buildings. 
A.  The style, material, and color of accessory buildings visible from public streets shall be the same as those of the main building. 
B.  Accessory buildings shall be proportional to the main structures in size and bulk. Accessory buildings may not dominate any site areas. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.48.095 - Roof. 
A.  New roofs shall be consistent in form and shape with the dominant roof form in the neighborhood. 
B.  Buildings in, or adjacent to, residential neighborhoods, with predominately gabled roofs, shall have gabled roofs to create a residential scale and character. 
C.  Long horizontal roof lines are not allowed. Interrupt roof line by architectural treatment and features. The maximum allowable unbroken roof line is thirty (30) feet. 
D.  Vary roof levels and forms on a large building to create diversity and to decrease the apparent scale of the building. 
E.  Include roofs on all elevations, not just on the front facades of buildings. Roof forms shall express entrances to buildings. 
F.  Roofs shall be an integral part of building design. False mansard roofs are not allowed. 
G.  Include architectural elements such as projecting cornices in design of flat roofs to define the edge of the roof. 
H.  Parapets and roof screens shall be integrated architecturally into building designs. Placement, material, and color of roof screens shall not impact the building architecture or roof form. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.48.100 - Material and color. 
A.  Develop a comprehensive material and color scheme for each project to tie in the various parts of the project. Choose variety of colors and materials to add interest to buildings. Colors and materials shall be approved by the city. 
B.  Avoid large expanses of smooth surfaces such as concrete or glass. Use materials with a sense of scale and texture. 
C.  Avoid large expanses of highly reflective surfaces and mirror glass exterior walls to prevent heat and glare impacts on the adjacent public streets and properties. 
D.  Choose high quality materials and paint to prevent degradation and for ease of maintenance. 
E.  Use wrought iron, cast iron, or high quality wood for decorative features and trims. Vertical sliding panels (i.e. T-111) are prohibited. 
F.  Coordinate exterior colors of adjacent structures on the same or adjacent sites. 
G.  Strong, bright contrasting colors shall be used for ornaments and accent only. 
H.  Coordinate color and material of building additions with those of the principal structure. 
I.  Wall and ground sign design material and color shall be compatible with the principal building on the site and shall comply with Chapter 17.78, Sign Ordinance, of the Orland Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.48.105 - Service facilities. 
A.  Locate service areas and drives away from public streets and nearby residential uses. Place service facilities in the least visible areas. 
B.  Provide convenient access for all service and emergency vehicles. Separate service drives from other on-site circulation patterns when possible. 
C.  Fully screen all service facilities from the public street and adjoining properties. Doors for service facilities shall be recessed and integrated into the overall design of the building. 
D.  Screening devices shall have a similar design and material to the main structures on the site, and shall be incorporated into the site design of the project. 
E.  Fences, walls, dense landscaping, berming, or any combination of the above, may be used to screen service areas and facilities. 
F.  In multi-building complexes, service areas shall be combined or located next to each other to minimize the visual and noise impact on the surrounding uses. 
G.  Service facilities shall be easily accessible for service vehicles and tenants. Service yards shall be located so as to minimize interaction between service vehicles and automobiles. 
H.  Service facilities shall be separated from pedestrian walkways to increase safety. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.48.110 - Mechanical equipment. 
A.  Mechanical equipment shall not be located in any front setback area between the public street and building. 
B.  Mechanical equipment shall be located far enough from adjacent properties to not cause noise impacts. Noise level at property line may not exceed fifty (50) dBA in or adjacent to residential areas and seventy-five (75) dBA in all commercial and industrial zones. 
C.  Fully screened roof top equipment by parapet walls or a roof well on all four sides. 
D.  Avoid individual screening of a group of equipment on a single roof. Contain all equipment within same roof screen. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.48.115 - Lighting. 
A.  Light fixture design shall be compatible with the design and the use of the principal structure on the site. Light fixtures shall be equipped with appropriate reflectors and shielded to prevent illumination of the adjacent properties. 
B.  Incorporate placement of light fixtures into the landscape scheme of the project. Show location and type of all exterior lights on the landscape plans. 
C.  Height of any light poles shall be appropriate for the project and surrounding environment. Height of the light poles shall not exceed that of the main building. 
D.  Use bollard type luminaries, maximum of eight feet high for pedestrian areas. 
E.  Shield light sources to prevent any glare or direct illumination on public streets, adjacent properties, highways, or Interstate "5." 
F.  All area lights shall be energy efficient type (High Pressure Sodium or equivalent). 
G.  All on-site pedestrian and automobile traffic areas shall be well lit for safety and security. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.48.120 - Trash enclosures. 
A.  All development in this zoning district shall provide for adequate storage of trash and recyclable materials in containers in enclosed areas. 
B.  Trash enclosures shall be conveniently accessible by collection trucks. Access driveways shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) feet in width. 
C.  Enclosures shall not be located in setback, landscaped, or parking areas. 
D.  Adequate turn around areas for collection trucks shall be provided. 
E.  A concrete pad in front of and within enclosures to prevent damage to pavement is required. 
F.  Trash enclosures shall screen trash containers on all four sides. The height of enclosures shall fully screen the containers. 
G.  A roof shall be provided for trash enclosures when visible from any upper story. 
H.  The style, material, and color of enclosures shall be similar to those of the main structure. 
I.  Enclosures shall be made of masonry or wood and match the main building in finish and color. Enclosures may be masonry or wood, painted to match the main building. 
J.  Steel enclosure gates are required as a minimum standard. 
K.  When visible from public rights-of-way, redwood slatted cyclone fencing may be acceptable, but depending on the design of the main buildings, wood, concrete, or stucco is encouraged. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.48.125 - Professional offices and buildings. 
A.  Professional office buildings shall have the highest quality architecture and be oriented toward streets. 
B.  For office buildings, a combination of hardscape such as textured paving, water fountains, and landscaping shall be used to provide strong emphasis to focal points and entrances to the buildings. 
C.  In multi-building complexes, buildings and offices shall be most visible from a public right-of-way. 
D.  When there are two or more buildings located on site, buildings shall be oriented toward public streets and provide view corridors into the project site. View corridors may be provided by controlling the spacing and angles of buildings on the site and by providing vistas and plazas. 
E.  The site boundaries and main entrances shall be defined by both landscaping and decorative paving. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.48.130 - Fences and walls. 
A.  All fences and fencing materials require a fencing permit approved by the city of Orland planning department prior to installation. Ty-vek or like materials, corrugated materials, tin, aluminum, bamboo, hay, and other like materials deemed by the city to be unacceptable are prohibited. All fencing material and fence construction shall be approved by the city in accordance with the Orland Municipal Code and the California Building Code, prior to construction of the fence. 
B.  Any masonry and stucco walls require a building permit if greater than three feet in height. 
C.  Fences and walls shall be compatible in style and material with the main structures on a site. 
D.  To avoid the monotony of long, solid walls and fences around the perimeter of projects, variation in height, texture and color is recommended with approval by the city. 
E.  Signs, lights, and other street furniture incorporated into the design of fences and walls are encouraged. 
F.  Barbed wire fencing may be used for security purposes only. All chain link fencing requires slats. 
G.  Screening devices shall be made of opaque (solid) materials such as wood or masonry blocks. 
H.  Fences and walls used for noise control shall be made of materials most suited for noise reduction, and which minimize reflective sound. 
I.  Security fencing and gates shall be of an open type to allow for maximum visibility of the secured area. Wrought iron and cast iron fences are recommended for security fences and gates for all uses. 
J.  Fencing shall be a maximum of six feet in height. Fencing over six feet in height, excepting subsection B above, shall require a building permit. All corner lots, including corners on alleys, shall be a maximum of three feet in height within the front and exterior side yard setback areas. 
K.  All fences shall be made of durable and weather-resistant materials as approved by the city. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.48.135 - Setbacks. 
Minimum yards in the M-L district are as follows: 
A.  Front: fifteen (15) feet; 
B.  Rear: none except that where a rear yard abuts on residential zone such rear yard shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet, or a distance equal to the height of the building immediately abutting the required yard, whichever is greater; 
C.  Side: none except that where a side yard abuts a residential zone such side yard shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet, or a distance equal to the height of the building immediately abutting the required yard, whichever is greater; 
D.  Adjacent buildings shall have compatible front setbacks to maintain visual continuity of the streetscape. Setback infill projects in areas with different front setbacks at a distance equal to the average setbacks of buildings on either side not to exceed fifty (50) percent of the minimum setback requirements of the zoning code. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.48.140 - Height. 
Maximum building height in the M-L zone is fifty (50) feet. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.48.145 - Site plan review. 
Prior to application for a building permit, the applicant shall submit to the city of Orland a complete site plan application with all applicable fees and all other documents necessary for review by the city to ensure compliance with all requirements of the Orland Municipal Code (OMC). A "site plan" application may be approved by the city manager or his/her nominee, without the necessity of public notice, a public hearing or planning commission action if findings required for approval (Section 17.82.050 of this title) can be made. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
Chapter 17.52 - M-H HEAVY INDUSTRIAL ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.52.010 - Purpose and applicability. 
The heavy industrial or M-H zone is intended to apply to areas devoted to normal operations of industries, subject only to such regulations as are needed to control nuisances and protect surrounding areas. The regulations of this chapter and the provisions of Chapter 17.76 shall apply to all heavy industrial or M-H zones. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.52.020 - Principal permitted uses. 
Principal permitted uses in the M-H zone are as follows: 
A.  All uses permitted as principal permitted uses in limited industrial or M-L zones, except as provided in Section 17.52.030; 
B.  All uses permitted with a use permit in limited industrial or M-L zones, without regard to the securing of any use permit, except as provided in Section 17.52.030. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.52.030 - Administratively permitted uses. 
Administratively permitted uses in the M-H zone are as follows: 
A.  Catering trucks; 
B.  Food trucks; 
C.  Retail uses associated with an approved manufacturing use; 
D.  Temporary uses associated with entertainment, construction or sales for periods of less than thirty (30) days; 
E.  One residential unit to be used solely as a caretaker residence, not exceeding one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet and otherwise meeting all requirements for a single-family residence; 
F.  Produce stand(s); 
G.  Other uses which the city planner determines by written findings are similar to the above. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1)  
17.52.040 - Conditional uses requiring use permits. 
Conditional use permits requiring use permits in the M-H zone are as follows: 
A.  Dwellings associated with permitted or conditional use; 
B.  Animal products processing plants, feed and auction yards; 
C.  Cemeteries and similar uses; 
D.  Amusement parks, commercial amusement operations; 
E.  Flea market(s); 
F.  Junkyards; 
G.  Farm labor camps; 
H.  Bag cleaning and rag works; 
I.  Manufacturing, refining and storage by manufacturers or wholesalers of petroleum or petroleum products, acids, cement, gas, glue, gypsum and flammable fluids or gases; 
J.  Drilling for oil or gas, or commercial excavation of sand, rock, gravel or other natural materials; 
K.  Manufacture of cement, pottery or asphaltic paving products: 
1.  Explosives, sale and storage, 
2.  Communication tower and support facilities, 
3.  Airports, heliports and landing strips, 
4.  Crop and tree farming; 
L.  Adult oriented business; 
M.  Other uses which the city planner determines by written findings are similar to the above pursuant to Section 17.04.030. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § II)  
17.52.050 - Lot requirements. 
Minimum lot width: one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.52.060 - Design requirements. 
Design requirements for structures in the M-H zone are as follows: 
A.  Compliance with parking and landscaping requirements of Sections 17.76.100 and 17.76.110; 
B.  Maximum building coverage not to exceed seventy (70) percent of the lot and up to one hundred (100) percent paved coverage for parking and storage. 
C.  The required front yard shall be landscaped and not used for parking. The only area not landscaped within the required front yard is the driveway access to the required parking area, which shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in width; 
D.  When the subject site is immediately adjacent to a residential zone district, the following standards shall apply: 
1.  A solid six-foot masonry wall shall be placed on the property line, reduced to three feet within the required M-H zone front setback area, 
2.  All exterior lighting shall be designed to reflect away from the adjacent residential area, or down to the ground within the commercial site; 
E.  All manufacturing and fabricating areas shall be enclosed in buildings, and all equipment and materials storage areas adjacent to residential zones shall be screened by walls, fences, or adequate plantings to a height of not less than six feet; 
F.  Required rear and side yards may be used for parking or for outdoor storage when adjacent to a residential zone as long as such storage does not exceed the height of the required six-foot wall. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.52.065 - Site design. 
A.  New projects shall be compatible with their surrounding development in intensity, setbacks, building forms, material, color, and landscaping: 
1.  Site design shall respect existing roadway patterns and driveways. New curb cuts shall be aligned with existing driveways and streets, when applicable. 
2.  Develop transition between projects with different uses and intensities to provide a cohesive visual and functional shift. Create transition by using appropriate setbacks, gradual building height, bulk, and landscaping. 
3.  Integrate perimeter landscaping with the landscaping of adjacent developments. 
4.  Minimize paved areas for curb cuts and parking on the street frontage of projects to maintain a continuous and attractive streetscape. 
5.  Preserve natural site features such as mature trees, views, etc., and incorporate into the site design of the new project. 
6.  Site design of projects shall be compatible with and protect existing nearby heritage structures and trees. 
7.  Link on-site walkways to the public sidewalk system outside the project site for ease of pedestrian access. 
8.  Provide pedestrian links between residential developments and nearby employment and shopping center, schools, and parks to encourage pedestrian activities. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.52.070 - Site organization. 
A.  Locate site components such as structures, parking driveways, walkways, landscaping and open spaces to maximize visual appeal and functional efficiency. Security kiosks and gates shall be located to allow queuing for at least three cars. 
B.  Emphasize the pleasant components of the project such as existing trees and views, and disguise its less desirable scenes such as parking areas, loading and service areas through placement and design of structures and landscaping. 
C.  Siting of noise and odor generating functions on a site shall not create a nuisance for the adjacent properties. 
D.  Orientation of buildings on a site shall relate to each other and to buildings on adjacent sites for aesthetic organization. The front of one building shall not face the back of another. In these instances, an increased setback between buildings may be required to meet the standards of the California Building Code. 
E.  Street frontages shall not be dominated by surface parking to encourage pedestrian orientation and a continuous streetscape. Limit paved areas on street frontages to one double row of parking and locate the rest of the parking elsewhere on the site. 
F.  Where half or more of the parking is located at the rear of a retail/office building, provide main entries in the front and rear of buildings for convenient access. 
G.  Site design of projects shall have external orientation for a positive street experience. Orient buildings toward public streets and provide view corridors into the project site. View corridors may be provided by controlling the spacing and angles of building on the site and by providing open vistas and plazas. 
H.  Building facades shall be lively and include windows and main entries which face public streets for a pedestrian friendly environment. 
I.  Provide convenient and safe pedestrian and automobile access to the site from adjacent streets. 
J.  Define site boundaries by landscaping and bands of decorative paving to announce entry into the site. 
K.  Every project shall have a main entry, defined by landscaping and other decorative features. Main entrances to all buildings shall be well defined. 
L.  Design and locate a project's internal circulation pattern for maximum ease of movement and a minimum of safety hazards. 
M.  Consider energy efficiency in the siting of buildings. Shading of structures and parking areas is recommended. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.52.075 - Open space. 
A.  Design each project site for maximum utility of open space for ventilation, sunlight, recreation, and views for both new and existing buildings. 
B.  In business parks and strip shopping centers, open space areas are recommended. 
C.  Open space areas may include benches, art, landscape, water, and hardscape features, as approved by the city. 
D.  Provide direct access to common useable open space from all buildings. Common open spaces shall be useable for recreational purposes (landscaping strips of less than fifty (50) feet in width between buildings does not constitute useable common open space). 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.52.080 - Scale and character. 
A.  Break up large buildings into groups of smaller segments whenever possible, to appear smaller in mass and bulk. This may require increasing setbacks to comply with the standards of the California Building Code. 
B.  Adjacent buildings shall be compatible in height and scale. 
C.  Buildings and additions shall not shade more than ten (10) percent of the structures or open space areas on adjacent properties for proper solar access. 
D.  Buildings shall maintain similar horizontal and vertical proportions with the adjacent facades to maintain architectural unity. 
E.  Step back upper stories of buildings three stories or taller from public roads and adjacent low scale development to reduce the bulk impact. 
F.  Maintain the dominant existing scale of an area. 
G.  Placement of windows and openings on second story additions shall not create a direct line of sight into the living space or the back yard of adjacent properties to maintain privacy. 
H.  Buildings shall maintain visually interesting activities at the street level by placing active facades with windows and openings on the street side to promote pedestrian activities. 
I.  Interrupt front facades on large structures by various architectural elements such as trellises, balconies, steps, openings, etc., about every thirty (30) feet to appear smaller in scale. 
J.  Choose inset, multi-pane windows over a continuous band of single pane windows, to create a sense of scale. 
K.  Maintain the scale and character of the existing main structure in building additions by retaining similar proportions and rhythm present on the main structures. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.52.085 - Architecture and design. 
A.  Maintain diversity and individuality in style but be compatible with the character of the neighborhood. 
B.  In areas where no prevailing architectural style exists, maintain the general neighborhood character by the use of similar scale, forms and materials providing that it enhances the neighborhood. The scale, forms, and materials shall be approved by the city. 
C.  Develop a comprehensive architectural theme for multi-building complexes. Unify various site components through the use of similar designs, material, and colors. The designs, material, and colors shall be approved by the city. 
D.  "Corporate architecture" and generic designs are not recommended. Design each project specifically with respect to its own surrounding environment. 
E.  Buildings shall have three distinct components: base, middle, and top. Define each component by horizontal and vertical articulation. 
F.  Link buildings and sites together by proper building orientation, landscaping, and similarly designed building and site components. 
G.  Buildings on corner lots shall demonstrate a strong tie to the public streets. Enhance street corners by special design features such as celebrated main entrances, or landscape features. 
H.  Include decorative building elements in the design of all buildings. Add more interest to buildings by incorporating changes in wall plane and height, arcades, porticos, trellises, porches, balconies, dormers, windows, openings, etc. 
I.  Repeat design and decorative building elements in all elevations and the roof as well as the front facade. 
J.  Windows and openings shall be consistent with the architectural style of buildings and maintain similar proportions and rhythm with those on adjacent buildings. 
K.  Provide clear windows on street level on retail buildings to create interest for pedestrians. 
L.  Define building entries by use of human scale architectural elements such as arches, posts, awnings, etc. Orient main entries toward public streets. 
M.  Awnings and canopies shall be compatible with the building design and shall conform to Section 17.78.200 of this title. 
N.  Awnings shall not cover or replace facade articulation by wrapping around buildings in continuous bands. Place awning only on top of doors, windows, and other openings. 
O.  Design fire escapes and exterior stairs, elevator shafts, and balconies as part of the building, not as separate elements. 
P.  Exterior remodeling of older buildings being occupied by new tenants is strongly encouraged. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.52.090 - Accessory utility buildings. 
A.  The style, material, and color of accessory buildings visible from public streets shall be the same as those of the main building. 
B.  Accessory buildings shall be proportional to the main structures in size and bulk. Accessory buildings may not dominate any site areas. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.52.095 - Roof. 
A.  New roofs shall be consistent in form and shape with the dominant roof form in the neighborhood. 
B.  Buildings in, or adjacent to, residential neighborhoods, with predominately gabled roofs, shall have gabled roofs to create a residential scale and character. 
C.  Long horizontal roof lines are not allowed. Interrupt roof line by architectural treatment and features. The maximum allowable unbroken roof line is thirty (30) feet. 
D.  Vary roof levels and forms on a large building to create diversity and to decrease the apparent scale of the building. 
E.  Include roofs on all elevations, not just on the front facades of buildings. Roof forms shall express entrances to buildings. 
F.  Roofs shall be an integral part of building design. False mansard roofs are not allowed. 
G.  Include architectural elements such as projecting cornices in design of flat roofs to define the edge of the roof. 
H.  Parapets and roof screens shall be integrated architecturally into building designs. Placement, material, and color of roof screens shall not impact the building architecture or roof form. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.52.100 - Material and color. 
A.  Develop a comprehensive material and color scheme for each project to tie in the various parts of the project. Choose variety of colors and materials to add interest to buildings. Colors and materials shall be approved by the city. 
B.  Avoid large expanses of smooth surfaces such as concrete or glass. Use materials with a sense of scale and texture. 
C.  Avoid large expanses of highly reflective surfaces and mirror glass exterior walls to prevent heat and glare impacts on the adjacent public streets and properties. 
D.  Choose high quality materials and paint to prevent degradation and for ease of maintenance. 
E.  Use wrought iron, cast iron, or high quality wood for decorative features and trims. Vertical sliding panels (i.e. T-111) are prohibited. 
F.  Coordinate exterior colors of adjacent structures on the same or adjacent sites. 
G.  Strong, bright contrasting colors shall be used for ornaments and accent only. 
H.  Coordinate color and material of building additions with those of the principal structure. 
I.  Wall and ground sign design material and color shall be compatible with the principal building on the site and shall comply with Chapter 17.78, Sign Ordinance, of the Orland Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.52.105 - Service facilities. 
A.  Locate service areas and drives away from public streets and nearby residential uses. Place service facilities in the least visible areas. 
B.  Provide convenient access for all service and emergency vehicles. Separate service drives from other on-site circulation patterns when possible. 
C.  Fully screen all service facilities from the public street and adjoining properties. Doors for service facilities shall be recessed and integrated into the overall design of the building. 
D.  Screening devices shall have a similar design and material to the main structures on the site, and shall be incorporated into the site design of the project. 
E.  Fences, walls, dense landscaping, berming, or any combination of the above, may be used to screen service areas and facilities. 
F.  In multi-building complexes, service areas shall be combined or located next to each other to minimize the visual and noise impact on the surrounding uses. 
G.  Service facilities shall be easily accessible for service vehicles and tenants. Service yards shall be located so as to minimize interaction between service vehicles and automobiles. 
H.  Service facilities shall be separated from pedestrian walkways to increase safety. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.52.110 - Mechanical equipment. 
A.  Mechanical equipment shall not be located in any front setback area between the public street and building. 
B.  Mechanical equipment shall be located far enough from adjacent properties to not cause noise impacts. Noise level at property line may not exceed fifty (50) dBA in or adjacent to residential areas and seventy-five (75) dBA in all commercial and industrial zones. 
C.  Fully screened roof top equipment by parapet walls or a roof well on all four sides. 
D.  Avoid individual screening of a group of equipment on a single roof. Contain all equipment within same roof screen. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.52.115 - Lighting. 
A.  Light fixture design shall be compatible with the design and the use of the principal structure on the site. Light fixtures shall be equipped with appropriate reflectors and shielded to prevent illumination of the adjacent properties. 
B.  Incorporate placement of light fixtures into the landscape scheme of the project. Show location and type of all exterior lights on the landscape plans. 
C.  Height of any light poles shall be appropriate for the project and surrounding environment. Height of the light poles shall not exceed that of the main building. 
D.  Use bollard type luminaries, maximum of eight feet high for pedestrian areas. 
E.  Shield light sources to prevent any glare or direct illumination on public streets, adjacent properties, highways, or Interstate "5." 
F.  All area lights shall be energy efficient type (High Pressure Sodium or equivalent). 
G.  All on-site pedestrian and automobile traffic areas shall be well lit for safety and security. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.52.120 - Trash enclosures. 
A.  All development in this zoning district shall provide for adequate storage of trash and recyclable materials in containers in enclosed areas. 
B.  Trash enclosures shall be conveniently accessible by collection trucks. Access driveways shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) feet in width. 
C.  Enclosures shall not be located in setback, landscaped, or parking areas. 
D.  Adequate turn around areas for collection trucks shall be provided. 
E.  A concrete pad in front of and within enclosures to prevent damage to pavement is required. 
F.  Trash enclosures shall screen trash containers on all four sides. The height of enclosures shall fully screen the containers. 
G.  A roof shall be provided for trash enclosures when visible from any upper story. 
H.  The style, material, and color of enclosures shall be similar to those of the main structure. 
I.  Enclosures shall be made of masonry or wood and match the main building in finish and color. Enclosures may be masonry or wood, painted to match the main building. 
J.  Steel enclosure gates are required as a minimum standard. 
K.  When visible from public rights-of-way, redwood slatted cyclone fencing may be acceptable, but depending on the design of the main buildings, wood, concrete, or stucco is encouraged. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.52.125 - Professional offices and buildings. 
A.  Professional office buildings shall have the highest quality architecture and be oriented toward streets. 
B.  For office buildings, a combination of hardscape such as textured paving, water fountains, and landscaping shall be used to provide strong emphasis to focal points and entrances to the buildings. 
C.  In multi-building complexes, buildings and offices shall be most visible from a public right-of-way. 
D.  When there are two or more buildings located on site, buildings shall be oriented toward public streets and provide view corridors into the project site. View corridors may be provided by controlling the spacing and angles of buildings on the site and by providing vistas and plazas. 
E.  The site boundaries and main entrances shall be defined by both landscaping and decorative paving. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.52.130 - Fences and walls. 
A.  All fences and fencing materials require a fencing permit approved by the city of Orland planning department prior to installation. Ty-vek or like materials, corrugated materials, tin, aluminum, bamboo, hay, and other like materials deemed by the city to be unacceptable are prohibited. All fencing material and fence construction shall be approved by the city in accordance with the Orland Municipal Code and the California Building Code, prior to construction of the fence. 
B.  Any masonry and stucco walls require a building permit if greater than three feet in height. 
C.  Fences and walls shall be compatible in style and material with the main structures on a site. 
D.  To avoid the monotony of long, solid walls and fences around the perimeter of projects, variation in height, texture and color is recommended with approval by the city. 
E.  Signs, lights, and other street furniture incorporated into the design of fences and walls are encouraged. 
F.  Barbed wire fencing may be used for security purposes only. All chain link fencing requires slats. 
G.  Screening devices shall be made of opaque (solid) materials such as wood or masonry blocks. 
H.  Fences and walls used for noise control shall be made of materials most suited for noise reduction, and which minimize reflective sound. 
I.  Security fencing and gates shall be of an open type to allow for maximum visibility of the secured area. Wrought iron and cast iron fences are recommended for security fences and gates for all uses. 
J.  Fencing shall be a maximum of six feet in height. Fencing over six feet in height, excepting subsection B above, shall require a building permit. All corner lots, including corners on alleys, shall be a maximum of three feet in height within the front and exterior side yard setback areas. 
K.  All fences shall be made of durable and weather-resistant materials as approved by the city. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.52.135 - Setbacks. 
Minimum yards in the M-H district are as follows: 
A.  Front: fifteen (15) feet; 
B.  Rear: none except that where a rear yard abuts on an E or R zone such rear yard shall be not less than fifty (50) feet or a distance equal to the height of the building immediately abutting the required yard, whichever is greater; 
C.  Side: none except that where a side yard abuts and E or R zone such side yard shall be not less than fifty (50) feet or a distance equal to the height of the building immediately abutting the required yard, whichever is greater; 
D.  Adjacent buildings shall have compatible front setbacks to maintain visual continuity of the streetscape. Setback infill projects in areas with different front setbacks at a distance equal to the average setbacks of buildings on either side not to exceed fifty (50) percent of the minimum setback requirements of the zoning code. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.52.140 - Height. 
Maximum building height in the M-H zone is seventy-five (75) feet. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.52.145 - Site plan review. 
Prior to application for a building permit, the applicant shall submit to the city of Orland a complete site plan application with all applicable fees and all other documents necessary for review by the city to ensure compliance with all requirements of the Orland Municipal Code (OMC). A "site plan" application may be approved by the city manager or his/her nominee, without the necessity of public notice, a public hearing or planning commission action if findings required for approval (Section 17.82.050 of this title) can be made. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
Chapter 17.56 - O-S OPEN SPACE ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.56.010 - Purpose and applicability. 
This zone classification is intended to be applied to properties which are found most properly to be preserved in a natural state and/or to provide open space buffer areas in which uses are restricted to recreational, conservation or light agricultural types, and including accessory and public service uses. The specific regulations of this chapter and the provisions of Chapter 17.76 shall apply in all O-S zones. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.56.020 - Principal permitted uses. 
Principal permitted uses in the O-S zone are as follows: 
A.  Measures to promote conservation or natural terrain and vegetation, and to reduce fire and erosion hazards; 
B.  Riding and hiking trails, picnic sites; 
C.  Public and private nonprofit riding stables, parks, golf courses, tennis and swimming clubs; 
D.  Crop and tree farming, grazing; 
E.  Uses which the planning commission determines, by written findings, are similar to the above. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.56.030 - Conditional uses requiring use permits. 
Conditional uses requiring use permits in the O-S zone are as follows: 
A.  Farm dwellings on parcels of ten (10) acres or more; 
B.  Living quarters for caretakers or watchmen. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
Chapter 17.60 - P-D PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.60.010 - Purpose and applicability. 
The planned development or P-D zone is intended to apply to parcels of undeveloped land which are suitable for, and of sufficient size to contain, a completely planned development. Planned developments involving the careful application of design are encouraged to achieve a more functional, aesthetically pleasing and harmonious living and working environment within the city which might not be otherwise possible by strict adherence to the regulations of this title. A planned development may include a combination of different dwelling types and/or a variety of land uses which are made to complement each other and harmonize with existing and proposed land uses in the vicinity, by design. The following regulations shall apply in all planned development or P-D zones. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.60.020 - Establishment—Master plan and use permit approval required. 
A.  A planned development is approved through the following process: 
1.  Submittal of a planned development master plan to the planning commission following the hearing and notification requirements for use permits. 
2.  The detail provided shall be sufficient to show the intended use, density, intensity and plan concepts proposed within the project. 
3.  Within one year of approval of the planned development master plan, an application shall be submitted to rezone the site (or a portion thereof) of to P-D. The P-D zone change request is submitted with a use permit application for the phase(s) of the project included in the requested P-D zone change area. If the site has been previously zoned P-D, a rezone application is not necessary. 
4.  Where lots/parcels are to be sold as part of the planned development, a tentative subdivision or parcel map application shall also accompany the use permit and zone change request. 
5.  If the project is small and the master plan is sufficiently detailed, the use permit approving the master plan may be all that is necessary to authorize project implementation along with a P-D zone change and tentative map application, if applicable. 
If the project is larger and/or the master plan is general in nature, implementation will require a detailed use permit application along with the P-D zone change request and tentative map if necessary. As noted in subsection (A)(4) above, implementation of the planned development occurs through the submittal and approval only of the detailed use permit and a tentative subdivision map if lots/parcels are to be sold. 
B.  The planning commission shall provide a recommendation on the planned development applications to the city council, by forwarding their recommendation to the city clerk within ten (10) days of their action. The city council shall follow the notification, hearing and action requirements for use permits, zone changes, and tentative maps as provided in this title. 
C.  Approval of the planned development shall only occur when such plan is consistent with the general plan, and any deviation from normal zoning standards is found to not have any negative affect on the neighborhood and will benefit the future residents and users of the project site. 
D.  To qualify for a planned development, the minimum size of the project shall be two acres. 
E.  The average population density per net acre shall not exceed the maximum population density prescribed by the general plan for the area, unless the applicant can demonstrate, by the design proposal and such additional evidence as may be submitted, that the objectives of this title will be achieved. However, an increase in density may be authorized by the city council upon receipt of a recommendation from the planning commission, of up to, but not exceeding, twenty-five (25) percent of the amount prescribed by the general plan. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.60.030 - Use permit application—Plan of detailed development. 
Application for use permits for the development of land in existing or proposed planned development zones shall be accomplished by a plan of detailed development. Such plan shall include a map or maps and such written material as may be required to show: 
A.  Topography of land and contour intervals; 
B.  Proposed access, traffic and pedestrian ways; 
C.  Lot design and easements; 
D.  Areas proposed to be dedicated or reserved for parks, parkways, playgrounds, school sites, public or quasi-public buildings and other such uses; 
E.  Areas proposed for commercial or industrial uses, off-street parking, multiple and single-family dwellings, and all other uses proposed to be established within the zone; 
F.  Proposed location of buildings on the land, including all dimensions necessary to indicate size of structure, setback and yard areas; 
G.  Proposed landscaping, fencing and screening; 
H.  Such other detailed elevations, plans and other information as may be required by the planning commission to enable it to evaluate adequately the proposed development. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.60.040 - Deviation from regulations allowed when. 
A.  All uses shall conform to the height, area, width, depth, ground coverage and yard regulations normally required for such uses except where the overall development will be improved by a deviation from such regulations. In all cases each structure shall conform to the precise development plan, which shall be made a part of the approved use permit. 
B.  The standards (setbacks, building height, design requirements, etc.) to be applied to a project shall be clearly delineated within the application and included in the project development plan. Where specific deviations from required standards have not been approved, and if project standards are not clear within the approved project, the zoning standards most applicable to the project shall be applied. 
C.  Minor modifications to the approved plan, not exceeding ten (10) percent of the most applicable standard, may be approved by the planning director when it can be determined that such modification is consistent with the intent of the approved plan and will have no detrimental affect on adjacent uses and property. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.60.050 - Delineation on zoning map—Supplemental regulations. 
Planned development zones shall be delineated on the zoning map by the P-D designation followed by consecutive numbers to indicate the consecutive order of establishment of each such zone, and the approved plans and use permits shall constitute supplemental regulations for such zones. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.60.060 - Use permits—Additional information. 
Use permits may specify development completion dates and provide authorization for city initiation of reversion to prior zoning classification should the project not proceed within a timely manner, or otherwise be inconsistent with the conditions of use permit approval. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.60.070 - Administratively permitted uses. 
A.  Administratively permitted uses in the M-L zone are as follows: 
1.  Catering trucks; 
2.  Food trucks; 
3.  Produce stand(s); 
4.  Fireworks sales. 
B.  Other uses which the city planner determines by written findings are similar to the above pursuant to Section 17.04.030. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1(Exh. A))  
Chapter 17.64 - P-F PUBLIC FACILITIES ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.64.010 - Purpose and applicability. 
This zone classification is intended to be applied to properties which are properly used for, or are property to be used for public purposes or for specified public utility purposes. The specific regulations of this chapter and provisions of Chapter 17.76 shall apply in all P-F zones. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.64.020 - Principal permitted uses. 
Principal permitted uses in the P-F zone are as follows: 
A.  Public schools, parks and recreation areas, fairgrounds, civic centers and similar sites and uses, public highways, reservoir areas, historical sites and monuments; 
B.  Public utility facilities for local service; 
C.  Sites and uses which the city planner determines by written findings are similar to the above; pursuant to Section 17.04.030; 
D.  Uses and structures which are incidental or accessory to permitted uses. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.64.030 - Administratively permitted uses. 
Administratively permitted uses in the P-F zone are as follows: 
A.  Public and quasi-public uses; 
B.  One residential unit to be used solely as a caretaker residence, not exceeding one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet and otherwise meeting all requirements for a single-family residence. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.64.040 - Conditional uses requiring use permits. 
Conditional uses requiring use permits in the P-F zone are as follows: 
A.  Public cemeteries and similar uses; 
B.  Airport, sewage disposal sites, corporation yards; 
C.  Wastewater treatment plants. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.64.050 - Permitted public utility uses. 
When the letter symbol "-U" is added to the "P-F" symbol to create public facility-utility zones, the following uses shall be permitted in such zones: 
A.  Public utility warehouse and storage yards, pole yards, gas holders, substations, electric generating plants and transmission and distribution lines, provided that the route of any transmission line must be discussed in detail with the planning commission prior to acquisition of rights-of-way therefor; 
B.  Public utility uses which the planning commission determines by written findings to be similar to the foregoing. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.64.060 - Design requirements. 
A.  Maximum building coverage: forty (40) percent and up to one hundred (100) percent paved coverage with pavement. 
B.  Unless otherwise excepted by state law, the construction of a new permitted use, or any expansion of a permitted use, shall only occur after the review and approval of the new or expanded project by the planning commission. 
C.  The planning commission shall consider the following during their project review, and may attach conditions as deemed necessary to mitigate potential problems or concerns: 
1.  The impact the project may have on adjacent uses due to such impacts as increased traffic, noise, odors and dust; 
2.  The effects of building height and location; 
3.  Safety and other characteristics which may have a negative effect on the existing neighborhood. 
D.  The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council following the procedure for appeals of use permits in Chapter 17.92. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.64.070 - Site plan review. 
Prior to application for a building permit, the applicant shall submit to the city of Orland a complete site plan application with all applicable fees and all other documents necessary for review by the city to ensure compliance with all requirements of the Orland Municipal Code (OMC). A "site plan" application may be approved by the city manager or his/her nominee, without the necessity of public notice, a public hearing or planning commission action if findings required for approval (Section 17.82.050 of this title) can be made. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
Chapter 17.68 - F-W FLOODWAY CONSERVATION ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.68.010 - Purpose and applicability. 
The floodway conservation or F-W zone is intended to be applied to lands which lie within stream or drainage channels and to adjacent areas which are periodically inundated, or which will be inundated by a design flood. The design flood shall be specifically defined for each particular F-W zone on the zone map. The regulations set forth in this chapter are intended to provide for the reasonably unrestricted passage of a design flood, and to provide reasonable measures for the protection of life and property in floodway areas. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.68.020 - Principal permitted uses. 
Principal permitted uses in the F-W zone are as follows: 
A.  General agriculture, but not including buildings or structures; 
B.  Recreational uses on open land, including public and private parks and golf courses. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.68.030 - Conditional uses requiring use permits. 
Conditional uses requiring use permits in the F-W zone are as follows: 
A.  Water, sewer, roadway, bridge and other such facilities necessary for public health and safety; 
B.  Minor or temporary structures incidental to agricultural or recreational uses which will not impede flood flow and are of floodproof design; 
C.  Excavation of natural materials or construction of earthworks or water flow control devices. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.68.040 - Lot requirements and yards. 
As specified in use permit conditions, and otherwise as follows: 
A.  Minimum lot area in F-W floodway conservation zone: one acre; 
B.  Minimum lot width: one hundred (100) feet; 
C.  Minimum yards: 
1.  Front and rear: twenty (20) feet; 
2.  Side: ten (10) feet. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
Chapter 17.70 - AFFORDABLE HOUSING INCENTIVES/RESIDENTIAL DENSITY BONUSES 
 
17.70.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of providing a housing density bonus or incentives is to contribute to the economic feasibility of low income and moderate income housing in housing developments proposed within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § II)  
17.70.020 - Applicability. 
When a developer enters into an agreement pursuant to Government Code Section 65915 consisting of at least one of the following: 
A.  Five percent of units restricted to very low-income households: or 
B.  Ten (10) percent of the total units of a housing development restricted to low-income households; or 
C.  Ten (10) percent of the total for-sale of a common interest housing development restricted to moderate-income households; or 
D.  The project donates at least one acre of land with the appropriate general plan, zoning, permitting, and approvals and access to public facilities needed for such housing to the city for very low-income units; or 
E.  The project is restricted to seniors. 
The developer shall be eligible for housing density bonuses and incentives as listed in Government Code Section 65915 and for eligible senior housing projects Section 17.70.060. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § II)  
17.70.030 - Application and approval. 
Any person requesting a housing density bonus, incentives, or concessions shall apply for a development agreement. A housing density bonus. incentives, or concessions shall be granted by approval of the development agreement which shall specify the density bonus and/or incentives, and any conditions attached to the approval of such bonus, incentive and/or concession. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § II)  
17.70.040 - Planning commission recommendation. 
Prior to council action on a development agreement providing a housing density bonus or incentives, the commission shall consider the development agreement and make a recommendation to the council. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § II)  
17.70.050 - Determination of housing density bonus or incentives. 
The project developer may specify the housing density bonus or incentives requested; however, the city may agree to provide a housing density bonus or incentives other than those requested, so long as such housing density bonus or incentives meet the requirement set forth in the California Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § II)  
17.70.060 - Senior citizen housing development. 
A.  Any person requesting a housing density bonus, incentives and/or concessions in regards to a senior citizen housing development shall apply for a development agreement. 
B.  The following definitions will be used in reference to this chapter: 
1.  Senior Citizen Housing Development. A residential development developed, substantially rehabilitated, or substantially renovated for, senior citizens that has at least eight dwelling units. 
2.  Senior Citizen. A person fifty-five (55) years of age or older in a senior citizen housing development. 
C.  The density bonus for senior citizen housing developments shall be twenty-five (25) percent of the number of senior housing units. For developments or projects that provide housing for more than just senior citizens, the density bonus is only for the eligible senior citizen housing development portion of the project. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § II)  
Chapter 17.76 - GENERAL USE AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 
 
17.76.010 - Applicability. 
In addition to the regulations specified in this title for each of the principal zones, the general regulations set forth in this chapter shall be applicable to each and every such zone. In the event of conflict between the particular regulations set forth in this chapter, the more restrictive regulations shall apply. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.76.020 - Accessory uses. 
Accessory uses, as defined in this title, shall be permitted as appurtenant to any permitted use unless otherwise provided in this title, provided that no accessory use shall be conducted on any property in any R zone unless and until the main building is erected and occupied, or until a use permit is secured. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.76.030 - Assemblages of persons and vehicles. 
No circus, carnival, open-air or drive-in theater, automobile racetrack, religious revival tent, outdoor concerts or similar assemblage of people and automobiles shall be permitted in any zone unless an administrative use permit is first secured in each case. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.76.040 - Convalescence of immediate family members. 
A.  The use of a temporary dwelling to support the convalescence of immediate family members as permitted in this title is subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Such usage contemplates and will permit only short-term use of a mobile home or recreational vehicles as temporary dwellings; 
2.  Size of the temporary dwelling not to exceed forty (40) feet in length; 
3.  The convalescent person must be a member of the immediate family of the application, or the convalescent person is the applicant and the temporary dwelling will be occupied by an immediate family member to assist the convalescent person; 
4.  Applicant must validate the application with a certificate from the physician as to the health condition of the applicant's immediate family member; 
5.  Applicant must certify as to inadequate housing arrangement in the main structure; 
6.  Each permit shall only be for one year, there shall be no extensions granted, however, re-issuance is possible; 
7.  The temporary dwelling must be removed within thirty (30) days after the convalescing person no longer needs aid; 
8.  The director of public works and/or the building inspector must approve the water and sewer hookups; 
9.  The applicant is responsible for and must seek approval of the county health department as to the living quarters; 
10.  Each conditional use application must be concurrently with an agreement to pay additional current base rate sewer and water charges; 
11.  All electrical and telephone wiring and plumbing must be a type allowed by the California Building Code for outside wiring, plumbing and must be approved by the building official subject to limitations by any local utility company requirements. Such services must be approved and permits obtained from the building department prior to occupancy. 
B.  Any variations of the above requirements can only be altered by processing and receiving approval of a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.76.050 - Height limitations and modifications. 
A.  Height of buildings and structures shall be measured vertically from the average ground level of the ground covered by the building to the highest point of the roof, but chimneys, stacks, vents, flagpoles, conventional television reception antennas, elevator, ventilating and air-conditioning equipment and similar architectural and mechanical appurtenances shall be excluded in making such measurements. Height limitations provided in this title shall not apply to electric transmission lines and towers, except as provided in Section 17.76.150. 
B.  Exceptions to height restrictions required within this title may be granted by processing a use permit. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.76.060 - Home occupations. 
A.  A "home occupation use permit" which allows the operation of a business in a home located in a residential zone, may be issued by the city administrator or his/her nominee, without the necessity of public notice, a public hearing, or planning commission action, upon a finding that the following conditions exist: 
1.  The proposed business activity involves only the use of telephone, internet and mail at the subject premises; 
2.  The business does not involve shipping, receiving, repacking, or the storage of any materials on the subject premises; 
3.  The business will not employ any persons at the subject premises who do not occupy the same as their residence; 
4.  One unlit sign of one foot by one foot, attached to the building; 
5.  No customers, clients, patients, salespersons, or other persons will be visiting the subject premises in connection with the business; 
6.  There will be no other indications of business activity visible to neighbors or to the public, at the subject site, resulting from the use; 
7.  There will not be any other significant negative impact upon the environment, public safety, or public welfare; and 
8.  Require issuance of a business license. 
B.  Any person who is denied a home occupation use permit by the city administrator pursuant to subsection A above may apply to the planning commission for the same. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.76.070 - Large family day care homes. 
A.  Large family day care homes authorized by this title are subject to the following requirements as stated in H&S Code Section 1597.46: 
1.  The operator of the large family day care home shall reside in the residence being used for the day care home. 
2.  No large family day care home shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of another approved large family day care home. 
3.  In addition to the required parking for the residence, an additional off-street parking space shall be provided for each employee on the maximum shift. Tandem parking may be used to meet these requirements. 
4.  At least two on-street parking spaces shall be available directly in front of the subject property to be used for loading and unloading children. 
5.  The operator shall provide evidence of receipt of a license from the State Department of Social Services. 
6.  A solid fence or wall six feet in height shall be located between any outdoor play or activity area and adjacent single-family residential use. Said outdoor play or activity areas shall not be located in the required front yard. 
B.  A large family day care home may provide care for more than twelve (12) children, but not more than fourteen (14) provided the requirements of Section 1597.46 of the California Health and Safety Code are satisfied. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.76.080 - Mining and removal of natural materials. 
Mining and removal of minerals and natural materials, including materials to be used for commercial purposes, may be allowed in any zone, with the exception of any residential zoning district, with a use permit and compliance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975. A use permit shall not be required for on-site excavation and removal of materials for normal construction or underground facilities, or where such removal is primarily for building site grading and land leveling. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.76.090 - Manufactured home park standards. 
All manufactured home parks shall be subject to the following requirements, plus other requirements that may be made conditions of use permit approval: 
A.  Minimum lot area: five acres; 
B.  Minimum recreation space: ten (10) percent of the total project site. The minimum size of any single outdoor recreation space shall be two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet; 
C.  Minimum yards around the perimeter of the park: 
1.  Front, (abutting any street): twenty (20) feet (landscaped), 
2.  Side and rear: ten (10) feet, suitably landscaped to provide effective screening. Fences or wall may be required as condition of approval of use permit as a means to achieve neighborhood compatibility; 
D.  All areas not used for access, parking circulation, recreation or services shall be completely and permanently landscaped, and the entire site shall be maintained in a neat, clean and sanitary condition; 
E.  All circulation roads shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet from curb to curb and shall be increased in width by ten (10) feet for curb parking space on each side of the street on which such curb parking is permitted. All roads and parking spaces shall be permanently paved. Two parking spaces or the equivalent thereof shall be provided for each mobile home site, plus one guest parking space for each ten (10) mobile home sites. The mobile home spaces may be provided as tandem parking; 
F.  Each mobile home site shall have a minimum area of three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet. In no instance shall the density of the site exceed the density permitted in the base zone district; 
G.  The minimum distance between any mobile homes is ten (10) feet. The minimum distance between an accessory structure on one site and a mobile home on an adjacent site shall be ten (10) feet; 
H.  The planning commission may modify the above requirements for an existing substandard park proposed to be enlarged or extended; provided, that the modifications are limited to the extent that the overall improvements in the design or standards of such existing park will result. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.76.100 - Parking and loading facilities. 
Project site shall be conveniently accessible to both pedestrians and automobiles. Sufficient off-street parking shall be provided for every project. On-site circulation patterns shall be designed to adequately accommodate traffic. Potential negative impacts of parking areas on adjacent uses shall be minimized and mitigated. 
A.  Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in conformity with the following: 
1.  In all zones, each standard parking space shall not be less than ten (10) feet wide, twenty (20) feet long, and seven feet high, and each loading space shall not be less than ten (10) feet wide, twenty-five (25) feet long and fourteen (14) feet high. Designated private employee and city employee vehicle parking spaces can be reduced to nine by eighteen (18) feet. A compact car space shall have a minimum size of eight and one-half feet in width and sixteen (16) feet in length. When ten (10) or more spaces are required by this chapter, ten (10) percent of the required space may be compact car spaces (See Appendix 1, Parking Lot Design Standards). 
2.  All parking spaces and access thereto shall be improved with Portland cement or asphalt concrete. 
3.  Loading areas shall be separated from pedestrian and automobile traffic. 
4.  Loading areas shall not be immediately adjacent to residential uses or visible from public rights-of-way. Loading docks shall be screened from residential uses by a minimum six-foot high masonry wall with ten (10) foot wide landscaped strip. 
5.  Loading door design shall be integrated into the design of the building. High quality material and non-bright colors shall be used for loading doors. 
6.  In multi-building complexes, loading docks shall either be internalized or located in the rear of the complex in a service area. 
7.  All outdoor storage areas (where allowed by the zoning district) and loading areas shall be located in the rear of sites and screened from view by solid walls or chain link fencing with slats and landscaping. 
B.  Parking spaces shall be provided in all zones as follows: 
1.  Day care centers: one space for each employee; 
2.  Hotels/motels: one space per guest room; 
3.  Hospitals: one space per bed, and one additional space per each three staff members on the largest shift; 
4.  Public assembly, including churches and theaters: one space per each six seats or two hundred (200) square feet of floor area, or whichever is greater; 
5.  Medical and dental offices: two spaces for each exam room; 
6.  Offices, professional and business: one space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area; 
7.  Retail establishments: one space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area; 
8.  Restaurants and licensed premises: one space for each four seats or one space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor space, whichever yields the greatest number of spaces; 
9.  Rest homes, nursing homes, convalescent homes, sanitariums, homes for aged: one space for each employee plus one space for each four beds; 
10.  Wholesale, industrial and public utility buildings: one for each two employees, taking the largest number of employees on duty at any one time; 
11.  Commercial uses occupying more than five thousand (5,000) square feet of floor area in any building shall provide one loading space and one additional loading space for every twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor area in excess of five thousand (5,000) square feet. Such facilities shall conform to the following: 
a.  Each loading space shall not be less than ten (10) feet wide, twenty-five (25) feet long and fourteen (14) feet high clearance, 
b.  Sufficient room for the turning and maneuvering of vehicles shall be provided on site, 
c.  The loading area, access drives and aisles shall be paved so as to provide a durable and dustless surface, and shall be graded to drain as to dispose of surface water, with the design and specifications for such work being subject to the approval of the city engineer, 
d.  If the loading area is illuminated, lighting shall be deflected away from abutting properties so as to not cause annoying glare to such properties; 
e.  A loading area shall not be located in a required front yard, but may be located in a required side yard or rear yard; 
12.  If an existing structure is unable to comply with the number of required off-street parking spaces because of lot size restrictions; the planning director or his/her authorized designee, on a case by case basis, without an appeal to the planning commission, may waive parking size and/or number of spaces that would be required for new construction. 
C.  For uses not specified in this section or elsewhere in this title, the same number of spaces shall be provided as required for the most similar use as determined by the planning director. 
D.  For the purposes of measuring floor area as used in this section, it means the gross floor area of the building, including all area enclosed by walls regardless of how such space may be used. 
E.  Whenever there is a change in use, parking shall be provided to meet the requirement of the new use. If only a portion of a building is altered to a new use, and such change creates a need for an increase in the number of parking spaces, such increase shall be provided for the area occupied by the new use only. 
F.  Whenever there is an addition or enlargement of an existing building which may not be conforming to the parking standards provided herein, and such addition or enlargement creates a need for an increase in the number of existing parking spaces by ten (10) percent or more, parking shall be provided based on the current standards for the entire building. In the event it creates a need for two or less additional spaces, no additional parking spaces shall be required. 
G.  In instances where mixed uses are provided, the total requirements for parking shall be the sum of the requirements for the various uses computed separately. Off-street parking provided for one use shall not be considered as providing required parking for any other use except as herein specified for joint use. 
H.  The planning commission may, upon written application by the owner of any property, authorize the joint use of parking facilities under the conditions specified herein; 
1.  One hundred (100) percent of the parking facilities required for a use considered to be primarily a daytime use may be provided by parking facilities of a use considered to be primarily a nighttime use. Or, one hundred (100) percent of the parking facilities required for a use considered to be primarily a nighttime use may be provided by parking facilities of a use considered to be primarily a daytime use. 
2.  The following uses are typical daytime uses: banks, business offices, personal service shops, clothing or shoe shops, or service shops, manufacturing or wholesale buildings and similar uses. The following uses are typical nighttime uses: dance halls, theaters, auditoriums other than that incidental to public or private schools or churches. This is not the complete list, and the planning commission may find other similar uses and circumstances where such sharing may be appropriate. 
3.  The following are conditions required for joint use: 
a.  The building or use for which the application is being made shall be located within six hundred (600) feet of the proposed joint use parking facility. 
b.  The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the building or uses for which the joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed. 
c.  If the building, structure or improvement requiring parking space is in one ownership and the required parking space in another ownership, partially or wholly, there shall be a recording in the office of the county recorder of a covenant by such owners for the benefit of the city in a form approved by the city, that such owner or owners shall continue to maintain such parking space so long as the building, structure or improvement is maintained by the owner. The covenant herein required shall stipulate that the title to and right to use space is to be provided will be subservient to the title to the premises upon which the building is to be erected and that the parcel or parcels are not and will not be made subject to any other covenant or contract for use without prior written consent of the city. 
I.  Common parking facilities may be provided in lieu of the individual requirement contained herein, but such facilities shall be approved by the planning commission as to size, shape and relationship to the sites being served. The total of such off-street parking spaces, when used together, shall not be less than the sum required for the various uses computed separately. 
J.  Other design standards for parking facilities: 
1.  All parking areas shall have adequate ingress and egress to and from a street or alley. Sufficient room for turning and maneuvering vehicles shall be provided on the site. Bumper rails or other barriers shall be provided where deemed necessary by the city to protect property. 
2.  Entrances and exits to parking lots and other parking facilities shall be provided at locations approved by the city engineer and planning director. 
3.  If the parking area is illuminated, lighting shall be deflected away from abutting residential areas. 
4.  No commercial repair work or servicing shall be conducted in a parking area. 
5.  The parking area, aisles, and access drives shall be constructed with a minimum of six-inch base and a double chip and seal so as to provide a durable, dustless surface, and shall be graded and drained as to dispose of surface water, with the design and specification so such work is subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
6.  Minimize the use of surface parking in large office complexes to preserve open space and reduce visual effects. 
7.  When surface parking is unavoidable, cluster parking spaces into small parking areas, dispersed around the site, to avoid large paved expanses. 
8.  Limit curb cut entries into project sites to maintain sidewalk and streetscape continuity. Shared driveway access on adjacent nonsingle-family properties is encouraged. 
9.  Design internal driveways for safety and convenience. For dimensional standards and requirements on driveways and parking spaces please refer to this section and Section 17.76.110 of the Orland Municipal Code. 
10.  All parking lots shall include appropriately striped spaces for standard and compact cars as well as handicapped spaces. 
11.  Avoid parking in required setback areas to maintain landscape strips along project boundaries. 
12.  Separate pedestrian and automobile traffic paths, and minimize conflict areas for safety. 
13.  Provide walkways to connect parking lots to building entrances. Define walkways by landscaping, lighting and paving. 
14.  Completely enclosed areas for outdoor permanent storage areas shall be required. 
15.  All parking spaces shall be striped in a manner clearly showing the layout of the individual parking spaces for standard and handicapped spaces. Such striping shall be permanently maintained in a clear, visible and orderly manner. 
K.  Garage conversion: 
1.  Any off-street parking spaces lost through conversion of a garage to a non-garage use in a residential zone shall be replaced with enclosed space meeting the standards for the use as required by the applicable zone district. 
L.  Carports: 
1.  If a new carport is being provided in an existing parking area where none existed previously, and the existing parking area is not paved, no further paving under the carport or access thereto is required. This would only apply in those instances where enclosed spaces are not required. 
2.  Canvas, plastic and light metal parking structures: This type of parking cover shall not be located within a front yard or required setbacks of block emergency escape or egress routes which do not satisfy the requirements for covered parking. Placement review requires the submittal of a site plan and review fee established by the city council. 
3.  Carport design, materials and colors shall be the same as main buildings. Enclose side elevations of carports to screen support columns on both ends. 
4.  Where carports back up to the public streets or public view, provide rear carport walls to screen cars. 
5.  Include facias in carport roof design to screen support beams and trusses. 
6.  Carport roofs shall be the same as the roof design of the main building(s). 
7.  Support columns shall be proportional to the structure in carports (match stick columns are not allowed). 
8.  Carport sales and displays require a conditional use permit. Carport sales are not allowed in any residential zoning district. 
M.  Parking Structures. 
1.  Heavy metal parking structures and structures that are required to be installed on footings must meet the California Building Code requirements. 
2.  Large commercial parking structures are not allowed in, or adjacent to, any residential zoning district. 
3.  Elevation designs shall maintain similar proportions and rhythm of architectural elements with those on adjacent buildings for architectural harmony. 
4.  Use the street level of parking structures for retail uses, or screen by dense landscaping and berming for visual relief. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.76.110 - Parking lot landscaping. 
Landscaping shall be used to enhance sites and buildings, parking areas, control climate and noise, create transition between adjacent uses, unify various site components, and define and separate functions and activities. 
A.  Landscaping shall be provided in new parking lots whenever ten (10) or more spaces are required. If the parking is required as an addition to an existing use, landscaping as required herein shall only be required for the new parking spaces. 
B.  Prior to the issuance of a building permit and when ten (10) or more spaces are required, the applicant shall submit to the planning director a site plan setting forth the landscaping proposed to be developed in or adjacent to the parking area. Such site plan shall include any proposed landscaping strip, planter areas, trees, shrubs, vine or ground cover plantings. The plan shall be drawn to scale and plants clearly located and labeled as to the size, type and botanical or common name. 
C.  The following landscaping standards apply to new development and required parking areas: 
1.  Within the perimeter of a parking area, five percent of the parking area shall be planted with trees, shrubs and ground covers. 
2.  Fully screen parking lots adjacent to public streets by landscaping and berming, as approved by the city of Orland. Screening shall be at least three feet high at the street level and shall be at least fifteen (15) feet wide. 
3.  Fully screen below grade parking from public view at street level by landscaping and berming. 
4.  Driveway entrances shall receive special landscape treatment to break up paving expanses and to define the site entrance. 
5.  There shall be a minimum of one fifteen (15) gallon-sized tree of two and a half inch diameter at breast height (dbh) planted for each ten (10) parking spaces. The trees shall be planted in approved tree well designed to minimize root damage to the pavement. The trees shall be spaced to provide shade for the parking lot. 
6.  Shrubs and ground covers shall be provided in a quantity and size to provide seventy-five (75) percent coverage of the required landscape area in three (3) years. Bark and decorative rock may be used in the interim to cover the ground until plants mature. Lawn may also be used to satisfy the five percent requirement when each lawn area contains at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet. 
7.  Reserved. 
8.  Utilize landscaping around the perimeter of new buildings to enhance buildings, not to cover an unacceptable design. Ivy on blank walls is prohibited. 
9.  Landscape design shall demonstrate a concept and link various site components. Placement and type of plant materials shall relate to the site and buildings. When selecting landscape material for parking lots, trees with deep roots shall be selected to avoid damaging the pavement. 
10.  Preserve and incorporate existing natural features, particularly trees, on a site into the landscape design(s) of projects. 
11.  Use of a Certified Arborist or landscape architect to protect existing heritage trees during construction is encouraged. 
12.  Properly landscape all areas not covered by structures and driveways. 
13.  Landscaping shall always consist of live plant material. Use of colored rock, wood bark, and gravel in place of landscaping is not allowed, unless privately maintained. 
14.  Choose a variety of plant material with different textures and colors. 
15.  Landscaping shall be required to always combine trees and shrubs with living ground cover. 
16.  Use of appropriate native vegetation is encouraged. Use water conserving plant materials in twenty-five (25) percent of all landscaped areas, where feasible. 
17.  Where landscaping is provided, adequate irrigation and maintenance thereof shall be provided, including replacement of dead trees, shrubs, vines or other ground cover required pursuant to this section. 
18.  Install street trees along street side of projects according to the department of public works. 
a.  Trees recommended for planting in the city of Orland: 
(i)  Small Trees: 
Golden Rain Tree (Koelreuteria paniculata)—Deciduous, from twenty (20) to thirty (30) feet tall. Flowers are yellow panicles and fruit is a red-brown papery capsules. Fall color is not effective. They will take the sun, cold, salts, drought, wind and heavy clay soils if drained. 
Autumn Gold (Ginkgo Biloba)—Deciduous, thirty (35) to fifty (50) feet tall, deep rooted, disease-free. Leaves turn gold in the fall. Specimens just west of Orland in Library Park. Plant only male trees since female trees produce messy fruit. 
Flowering Plum (Krauter Vesuvius)—Deciduous, reaching twenty (20) feet tall. Dark purple leaves with fewer fruit than other varieties. 
Bradford Pear (Pyrus Calleryana)—Deciduous, fifteen (15) to twenty-five (25) feet tall. White flowers with red foliage in the fall. 
Washington Hawthorn (Crataegus Phaenopyrum)—Deciduous, reaching twenty-five (25) feet tall, and twenty (20) feet wide. Orange red foliage in the fall, bright Chinese red berries. 
(ii)  Larger Trees: 
Chinese Pistache (Pistacia Chinensis)—Deciduous, sixty (60) feet tall and fifty (50) feet wide. Stake and prune young trees above head height. Spectacular fall foliage. 
Chinese Tallow (Sapium Sebiferum)—Deciduous, grows to thirty (30) feet tall, good fall color. Will take sun, acid soil. Good lawn tree but may sucker. Prune young tree for structure. 
Holly Oak (Quercus Ilex)—Grows forty (40) to seventy (70) feet tall; growth rate is moderate depending on the soil and water conditions. Will take sun, wide drought, heavy pruning and makes a good lawn tree. Evergreen. Flowers are catkins. 
Mayten Tree (Maytenus Boris)—Weeping evergreen, neater than weeping Willow. Slow growth to fifty (50) feet. Stake and prune when young. 
Tulip Tree (Liriodendron Tulipifera)—Deciduous, erect growth to forty-five (45) feet or more. Tulip shaped lime/orange colored flowers. Takes the sun, cold. Susceptible to scale, aphids. Good lawn tree. 
Village Green (Zelkova Serrata)—Deciduous, moderately fast growth to sixty (60) feet tall and equally wide. Stake and prune when young. Yellow/red fall foliage. 
European Hackberry (Celtis Australis)—Deciduous, fifty (50) to seventy (70) feet tall, forty (40) to fifty (50) feet wide. Fast growth, has small purple berries, takes the sun and most soils. 
Scarlet Oak (Quercus Coccinea)—Deciduous, sixty (60) to eighty (80) feet tall. Fast growth, scarlet fall foliage. Takes the sun and some drought conditions. Best oak for fall color. Fairly pest free. 
19.  Incorporate design and location of walls and fences into the landscape design of projects. 
20.  Highly visible areas of the site shall receive special landscape treatment. 
21.  Incorporate all site furniture including planters, tree grates, newspaper racks, and light fixtures into the landscape design of projects. Bicycle lockers and/or racks shall be located near building entrances only and shall be clearly defined. 
22.  Site furniture and light fixtures shall follow the same design concept as the major structures on the site. 
23.  Always enhance automobile and pedestrian traffic paths by landscaping. 
24.  Unless otherwise established and excepting required yards having a setback of less than five feet, provide a minimum of a five-foot wide landscape strip along all public street sides of development. Landscape strips of more than five feet are encouraged to enhance the public streetscape. Landscaping within this area shall include one, fifteen (15) gallon-sized tree for each one hundred (100) feet of frontage, and at least one gallon-sized shrub for each five feet of frontage. Such landscaped area may also be planted with lawn or ground cover plants. Other decorative non-plant ground covers may be used as long as they do not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of this landscaped area as approved by the city planner. None of this setback area landscaping shall qualify for the five percent requirement in subsection (C)(1) above. Landscaping shall not infringe on or conflict with any city public right-of-way. Caltrans may require landscaping for any development within its rights-of-way. 
25.  Provide a minimum of a four-foot wide landscape strip along the sides and rear of all projects. 
26.  Parking lot light poles shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet in height. 
27.  New sidewalks shall be integrated into the existing frontage landscaping to maintain street continuity. Where new sidewalks are required, mature trees and landscaping shall be preserved as much as possible by meandering sidewalks around them. 
28.  Natural features on a site such as mature trees, creeks, views, etc., shall be preserved and incorporated into the site design of the project. 
29.  Landscape buffers shall always be provided between parking lots and public streets, and parking areas and buildings. 
30.  Whenever security gates are provided, sufficient parking shall be provided outside of the gate area for visitors as approved by city staff. 
31.  Parking lots shall have adequate directional signs for visitors, delivery vehicles and employees in accordance with Chapter 17.78, Sign Ordinance, of the Orland Municipal Code. 
32.  Future phases of a project site already cleared and graded shall be adequately treated (e.g., hydro mulch) to prevent erosion and reduce aesthetic impacts. 
33.  Sites adjacent to creeks and canals shall give special attention to the landscape, fence, and wall design in order to enhance natural features or minimize development impacts. 
34.  Landscaping shall be adequately distributed throughout the parking lots to reduce the effects of heat and glare from pavement. 
35.  When parking lots are adjacent to public rights-of-way, parking shall be screened by combining berms, shrubs and trees. 
36.  When tree wells are provided, the wells shall be a minimum of five feet square. Interlocking pavement is recommended around tree wells. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1(Exh. A))  
17.76.120 - Pre-manufactured structures. 
Pre-manufactured structures, including mobilehomes, may be located on individual lots for residential or office use only under the following regulations as stated by Government Code Section 65852.3: 
A.  Structures. Only structures certified by the Department of Housing and Urban Development as meeting the requirements of the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, or meeting all requirements of the California Building Code, will be allowed. 
B.  Permanent Residential Use. 
1.  Pre-manufactured structures for residential use may be located only in residential zones. Such structures shall be installed on a solid concrete or masonry foundation, extending a minimum of twelve (12) inches below grade, and the structure, foundation and anchorage system shall conform to the requirements of the California Building Code. 
2.  The under-floor area of the structure shall be enclosed with permanent materials conforming to California Building Code requirements for contact with, or separation from, the soil. 
3.  Roofing and exterior siding materials shall be of types customarily used on conventional dwellings. The planning commission shall adopt, and revise as appropriate, a list of materials which are approved. 
4.  Manufactured single-family residential structures shall be of an integral unit design. Two or more structures, each of which is designed for use separately, shall not be installed on a single lot. 
5.  The finished floor elevation of the pre-manufactured home shall be equal to or less than the immediately adjacent neighboring homes on either side of the pre-manufactured home fronting on the same street. 
6.  A building permit shall be obtained for installation of a pre-manufactured residential structure. The application for a building permit shall include a site plan showing structure placement, sufficient foundation drawings and details to verify compliance with the foundation requirements of this section, and descriptive information and certification of the structure. 
C.  Temporary Office Use. 
1.  A pre-manufactured structure may be used as a temporary office, in commercial or industrial zones, for a period not exceeding six months, during reconstruction of a damaged structure, or alteration of an existing structure. The planning commission may extend the temporary use foran additional six-month period, provided substantial progress has been made in the permanent construction. 
2.  Temporary installations may be made with temporary masonry or steel foundations. Adequate anchorage shall be constructed to conform to the California Building Code. 
3.  A building permit shall be obtained for temporary installation of a pre-manufactured structure. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.76.130 - Accessory dwelling units. 
A.  Applications for accessory dwelling units (ADU) in single-family or multifamily residential zones are an allowed use in all single-family and multifamily zoning districts in the city and shall not be subject to a use permit or other discretionary action pursuant to Government Code Section 65852.2 with the following additional requirements: 
1.  The increased floor area of an attached second unit shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the existing living area, with a maximum increase in floor area of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. 
2.  The dwelling unit is not intended for sale but may be rented for a period greater than thirty (30) days. Short-term rental thirty (30) days or less) of these units is not allowed. 
3.  The lot contains an existing single-family dwelling. 
4.  The lot is zoned for single or multifamily use. 
5.  Either the main dwelling or the ADU shall be occupied by the owner of the property. This covenant shall be recorded on the property deed for future sale purposes. 
6.  The accessory dwelling unit is either attached to the existing dwelling and located within the living area of the existing dwelling or detached from the existing dwelling and located on the same lot as the existing dwelling. 
7.  No setback shall be required for an existing garage that is converted to an accessory dwelling unit, and a setback of no more than five feet from the side and rear lot lines shall be required for an accessory dwelling unit that is constructed above a garage. 
8.  With the acceptation of setback requirements discussed in subsection 7 above, requirements relating to height, setback, lot coverage, architectural review, site plan review, fees, charges, and other zoning requirements are generally applicable to residential construction in the zone in which the property is located. 
9.  Parking requirements for accessory dwelling units shall not exceed one parking space per unit or per bedroom. These spaces may be provided as tandem parking on an existing driveway. However, no parking requirements shall be mandatory for those accessory dwelling units in any of the following instances: 
a.  The accessory dwelling unit is located within one-half mile of public transit. 
b.  The accessory dwelling unit is located within an architecturally and historically significant historic district. 
c.  The accessory dwelling unit is part of the existing primary residence or an existing accessory structure. 
d.  When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the accessory dwelling unit. 
e.  When there is a car share vehicle located within one block of the accessory dwelling unit. 
10.  Offstreet parking shall be permitted in setback areas in locations determined by the local agency or through tandem parking, unless specific findings are made that parking in setback areas or tandem parking is not feasible based upon specific site or regional topographical or fire and life safety conditions, or that it is not permitted anywhere else in the jurisdiction. 
11.  Accessory dwelling units shall not be required to provide fire sprinklers if they are not required for the primary residence. 
12.  For those accessory dwelling units contained within the existing space of a single-family residence or accessory structure, which have an independent exterior access from the existing residence, and the side and rear setbacks are sufficient for fire safety shall not require a new or separate utility connection directly between the accessory dwelling unit and the utility. No related connection fee or capacity charge shall be imposed for this structure. 
13.  For an accessory dwelling unit that is not described in subsection 12, a new or separate utility connection directly between the accessory dwelling unit and the utility shall be required. The connection is subject to a connection fee or capacity charge which shall be proportionate to the burden of the proposed accessory dwelling unit, based upon either its size or the number of its plumbing fixtures, upon the water or sewer system. This fee or charge shall not exceed the reasonable cost of providing this service. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03 , (Exh. A)) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-03, Exh. A, adopted Aug. 20, 2018, repealed the former § 17.76.130, and enacted a new § 17.76.130 as set out herein. The former § 17.76.130 pertained to second dwellings and derived from Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3 (part); and Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1 (Exh. A).  
17.76.140 - Tract offices. 
A.  When authorized herein by this title, tract offices shall satisfy the following requirements; 
1.  Tract offices shall be removed within thirty (30) days of the sale of the last lot or home in the subdivision. If the office is located in a converted garage, the garage shall be converted back to garage usage within this thirty (30) day period. 
2.  The tract office shall not be used for general real estate sales of properties located outside of the subdivision; 
3.  The tract office shall meet all main building setback requirements for the zone in which it is located. 
4.  A pre-manufactured structure may be used for the tract office subject to the provisions of Section 17.76.130, except that it shall only satisfy the length of stay and removal requirements of this section. 
5.  In projects over twenty-five (25) lots or homes, off-street parking shall be provided for at least two vehicles, unless the city engineer determines there is adequate on-street parking available. 
6.  Temporary exterior signage shall be limited to one sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet. Additional signage may be permitted by approval of a use permit. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.76.150 - Transmission and distribution lines. 
Transmission and distribution lines both overhead and underground, shall be permitted in all districts without limitation as to height, without the necessity of obtaining a use permit; provided, however, that the routes of all proposed gas, telephone, television cable and electric transmission lines shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and approval prior to the acquisition of rights-of-way or application to the public utility commission. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.76.160 - Yard sales. 
Yard sales, as permitted in residential zones or as pursuant to this code, shall be subject to the regulations of this section. 
A.  "Yard sales" means any event other than a sale actually operated in conjunction with a regularly licensed commercial or retail operation which is advertised by any means whatsoever as a place or location to which members of the public, at any time, may purchase identifiable or tangible personal property, for sale by an individual or group of individuals, which is conducted at a private residence as an occasional sale and not on a regular basis. Also included in this definition are garage sales, patio sales, estate sales, rummage sales or any similar sales. 
B.  The term "yard sale," as used in this title, shall not include a rummage sale, conducted by a bona fide, nonprofit organization conducted at any public building, church or building in a commercial zone. Nothing contained in this title is intended, nor shall it prevent or prohibit various types of sales held by such charitable or social organizations. 
C.  It shall be lawful for any person or persons to conduct a yard sale at a place of residence, provided that no such person or persons shall conduct more than three such yard sales per year, and such sale shall not take place over a longer period than two consecutive days. It shall be lawful for two or more persons having adjacent places of residence to join together in such a sale and each person joining in such sale shall not again participate in a yard sale for a period of at least one year. Goods sold at a yard shall be personal property owned by the seller or sellers, and shall not in any case include merchandise or personal property purchased elsewhere for resale at a yard sale. In any case where the state requires a resale permit for the sale of merchandise, the person or persons conducting the sale shall have first obtained such resale permit. 
D.  All sales as defined in this title shall be conducted between the hours of eight a.m. and sunset. Goods shall not be displayed in the public right-of-way. 
E.  It is unlawful for any person or persons to advertise a yard sale by attaching notices or posters to structures, signs or sign supports, utility poles or other supports, excepting upon the premises where the sale is being conducted, without first having obtained consent of the owner of such support to post such notice or poster. One sign not exceeding two feet by two feet in size may be posted on the property where the sale is being held during the sale only. 
F.  All merchandise offered for sale shall be arranged so that fire, police, health and other officials may have access for inspection at all times during the sale. 
G.  Any person or persons violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction shall be punished as provided by law. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.76.170 - Storage containers. 
A.  Use in Residential Zones. The permanent use of prefabricated exterior storage containers such as cargo containers or truck trailers is not permitted in residential zones. Temporary use of storage containers in residential zones may be approved subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Any temporary use of storage containers will require an administrative use permit (AUP). 
2.  Temporary uses are limited to a time period of thirty (30) days; extensions to this time period may be granted by the city. 
3.  In the case of unforeseeable property damage or natural disaster, temporary use of storage containers will not require permit fees. 
B.  Use in Commercial Zones. The use of storage containers in commercial zones as an accessory use to the primary permitted use on the same site is subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Required conditional use permit (CUP) and site plan review. 
2.  Subject to design review criteria and setback requirements defined for accessory structures in commercial zones. 
3.  The planning commission shall determine appropriate siting, time limits, and other conditions as may be necessary to assure minimal impact to adjacent properties. 
C.  Use in Industrial Zones. Storage containers are permitted in industrial zones as an accessory use to the primary permitted use on the same site, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Use in Heavy Industrial (HI) zones is permitted with an administrative use permit (AUP). 
2.  Use in Light Industrial (LI) zones is subject to site plan review. 
D.  General Requirements. The use of storage containers in any zone within the city limits must adhere to the following conditions: 
1.  Storage containers may only be used for the storage of merchandise, inventory, shelving displays, or other incidental items related to the operation of the business. 
2.  Business or sale of merchandise shall not be conducted from the storage container, nor shall the storage container be used a habitable space, office, or meeting area, and shall be kept closed and secured at all times other than when items are being moved to or from the storage container. 
3.  Storage containers must be oriented to minimize the view from the public right-of-way. In no case shall storage containers be placed so as to cover, block, or otherwise impact required parking, or impact circulation and emergency access. 
4.  Storage containers shall be painted in a color matching or similar to the field color of the primary structure and/or properly screened with screening walls and/or landscaping. Graffiti shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours from any storage container or screening. 
5.  The placement of any signs, advertising copy, banners, or similar item is prohibited on storage containers. 
6.  No more than two storage containers with a combined floor area of no more than six hundred forty (640) square feet shall be allowed. Storage containers shall not exceed a height of ten (10) feet. 
7.  Storage container location: Setbacks shall be the same as those for the underlying zone. 
E.  Additional permitted temporary uses of storage containers include the following: 
1.  Seasonal fireworks booths for sale and storage of fireworks. 
2.  Construction sites. 
F.  This section shall not apply to a location with a permitted business actively engaged in transporting cargo containers or truck trailers provided which container or trailer is only on the property temporarily and not utilized for outside storage purposes. 
( Ord. No. 2016-03 , § 3(Att. A))  
17.76.180 - Exterior color palette: Commercial zones. 
A.  Color Selection. 
1.  Exterior facade colors of structures developed within Commercial zones shall be low reflectance, subtle, neutral or earth tone colors. The use of high-intensity or fluorescent colors is prohibited. The standard approved color palette is maintained at the planning department. 
2.  Trim and accent areas up to a maximum of ten percent of the building facade may feature brighter, more intense colors, including primary colors. 
3.  The transition between base and accent colors shall relate to changes in building materials or the change of building surface planes. Colors should not meet or change without some physical change or definition to the surface plane. 
B.  Permit Required Where Color Not Included on the Standard Palette. No person shall paint or cause to be painted the exterior of any commercially zoned building owned by him or her or under his or her control within the city, without having first obtained an appropriate permit therefor from the planning department, if the intended paint color(s) is (are) not included on the standard palette. 
C.  Application. An application for an exterior paint permit, required if the intended paint color(s) is (are) not included in the standard palette, shall provide the following information: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
2.  The address of the subject property. 
3.  Samples of color(s) that are to be used, with designation of the manufacturer, the name of the color(s) and serial number. 
D.  Permit Fee. There shall be a twenty-dollar fee required for the exterior paint permit. 
E.  Appeal. The decision of the planning director or his designee may be appealed to the planning commission by the applicant pursuant to Chapter 17.92 of this Title 17. 
F.  Compliance. The provisions of this section shall apply to all new construction and repainting proposed after the adopted ordinance [from which this section derives]. 
( Ord. No. 2017-03 , § 2)  
Chapter 17.78 - SIGN ORDINANCE 
Sections: 
 
17.78.010 - Authority. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority vested in the city of Orland and the state of California, including but not limited to: the State Constitution Article XI, Section 5, California Government Code Sections 65000 et seq., 38774, 38775, 65850(b), California Business and Professions Code Section 5230, and Penal Code 556. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08 )  
17.78.020 - Findings and purpose. 
The city council finds that unregulated and uncontrolled construction, erection, and lack of maintenance of signage in the city will result in excessive and inappropriate signage that has an adverse impact on the overall visual appearance of the city, which will adversely affect economic values. Unregulated and inappropriate signage can also increase risks to traffic and pedestrians by creating hazards and unreasonable distractions. It is, therefore, necessary to enact sign regulations to safeguard and preserve the health, property and public welfare of Orland residents through control of the design, construction, location and maintenance of signs as an information system, which preserves and enhances the aesthetic character and environmental values of the city of Orland, its residential neighborhoods and commercial/industrial districts consistent with the goals, policies, and strategies of the general plan while providing an effective means for members of the public to express themselves through the display of signs. Regulations within this chapter will minimize visual clutter, enhance safety through design and placement of signs, and preserve the aesthetics and character of the community. By adopting this chapter, the city council intends to balance the needs of the city's residents, businesses, institutions, and visitors for adequate identification, communication, and advertising with the objectives of protecting public safety and welfare and preserving and enhancing the aesthetic character and environmental values of the community, by: 
A.  Encouraging communications that aid orientation and promote economic vitality while preventing visual clutter that will detract from the aesthetic character of the city; 
B.  Applying basic principles of good design and sensitivity to community appearance to signage to avoid the creation of nuisances and privacy violations that will degrade the value of surrounding properties; 
C.  Enhancing safety by ensuring that signs are designed, constructed, installed, and maintained in compliance with minimum standards necessary to provide adequate visibility and to avoid the creation of hazards or unreasonable distractions for pedestrians or drivers; and 
D.  Ensuring that the constitutionally-guaranteed right of free speech is protected. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08 )  
17.78.030 - Applicability and scope. 
This chapter regulates signs, as defined herein, that are located or mounted on private property within the corporate limits of the city of Orland, as well as signs located or mounted on public property that is owned or controlled by public entities other than the city of Orland, and over which the city has land use or zoning authority. The provisions set forth in this chapter shall apply in all zoning districts of the city, except where expressly stated otherwise. No sign within the regulatory scope of this chapter shall be erected or maintained anywhere in the city except in conformity with this chapter. This chapter applies prospectively only. For the regulatory purposes of this chapter, the following are not within the definition of "sign": 
A.  Architectural features: Decorative or architectural features of buildings (not including lettering, trademarks or moving parts); 
B.  Symbols embedded in architecture: Symbols of noncommercial organizations or concepts including, but not limited to, religious or political symbols, when such are permanently integrated into the structure of a permanent building that is otherwise legal; also includes foundation stones, corner stones and similar devices; 
C.  Manufacturers' marks: Marks on tangible products, that identify the marker, seller, provider or product, and that customarily remain attached to the product even after sale; 
D.  Certain insignia on vehicles and vessels: on street legal vehicles and properly licensed watercraft: license plates, license plate frames, registration insignia, noncommercial messages, messages relating to the business of which the vehicle or vessel is an instrument or tool (not including general advertising) and messages relating to the proposed sale, lease or exchange of the vehicle or vessel; 
E.  Newsracks and newsstands; 
F.  Door mats, floor mats, welcoming mats and similar devices; 
G.  Legally placed vending machines displaying only onsite commercial or noncommercial graphics, and drive-up or walk up service facilities such as gas pumps and automated teller machines. 
H.  Shopping carts identifying the establishment to which they belong. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08 )  
17.78.040 - Definitions. 
Generally. As used in this title, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this chapter. Explanatory diagrams of some of the sign definitions set forth herein are provided at the end of this chapter. 
"Advertising surface (facing)" means the entire surface on which any type of letter, figure, emblem, trademark, logo, picture, or other advertising materials is placed, or may be placed unless otherwise described. For portable signs, the "advertising surface" area of the sign shall be calculated as the full exterior dimensions of the physical sign. 
"Appurtenant sign" means a sign pertaining to the business or activity carried on at the premises upon which the sign is located, constructed or erected. 
"Awning or canopy" includes any structure made of cloth, metal or other suitable material with a metal frame attached to a building and projecting over a public or private pedestrian walk and supported by the ground or building sidewall. 
"Awning/canopy sign" means any advertising of any nature, which is painted, printed, sewed or otherwise attached to an awning or canopy. 
"Building" means any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and designed for the shelter and housing of any person, animal or chattel, including any underground shelter, swimming pool, or any commercial or industrial structure designed for the sale, storage, or manufacture of anything of value. 
"Bulletin board" means a place where people can leave public messages, for example, to advertise things to buy or sell, announce events, or provide information. 
"Community event signs" means any temporary signs which are displayed for the purpose of identifying an upcoming community and/or non-profit event, such as a benefit dinner, a home and garden show, a sporting event, or a school theater performance. 
"Corner lot" means a lot located and being at the junction to two or more intersecting streets with a boundary line thereof bordering on each of such streets and where such streets intersect at an interior angle of not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. If the intersection angle is more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees the lot is considered an interior lot. The shortest such street frontage shall constitute the front of a rectangular lot for purposes of determining front, side and rear yards. Where the front of a lot differs by the reason of the prevailing custom of the other buildings on the block, the planning director may determine the front lot line consistent with the orientation of other structures in the area. 
"Curb line" means the line at the face of the curb nearest to the street or roadway. In the absence of a curb, the curb line shall be established by the director of public works. 
"Digital display sign" means signs which use technologies such as LCD, LED and projection to display content such as digital images, video, streaming media, and information. 
"Electrical Code" means the electrical code of the city of Orland. 
"Electrical sign" means any sign which is wired to provide current employed in illuminating or animating any part of the sign, except flood lighting. 
"Embellishments" means that portion of any sign structure or sign which contains no moving parts, is not animated, nor illuminated, and which contains no advertising copy, nor conveys any portion or all of any advertising message, and is generally located above the message portion of any sign and is constructed for aesthetic purposes as part of the decorative trim of the design of the overall sign structure. 
"Erect" means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix to or upon any surface. 
"Face of building" means the general outer surface of a structure or wall of a building facing a street. 
"Facing or surface" means the surface of the sign upon, against, or through which the copy or message is displayed or illustrated on the sign. 
"Flag signs" means any cloth, bunting, plastic, paper, or similar non-rigid material used for advertising purposes attached to any structure, staff, pole, line, framing, or vehicle. 
"Frontage" means the full length of a plot of land or a building measured alongside the road on to which the plot or building fronts. 
"Hanging sign" means a sign that is hanging from a permanent building canopy or marquee existing over a pedestrian walkway and is sized and located in a manner to service pedestrians using the walkway, advising them of the adjacent use. 
"Marquee" means a permanent roofed structure, attached to and supported wholly by the building and projecting over a pedestrian walkway. 
"Monument sign" is a freestanding ground mounted sign not exceeding eight feet above ground level. 
"Multiple tenant sign" means a sign that includes as copy, only the names of two or more businesses, places, organizations, buildings or persons it identifies. 
"Multi-user digital display pole/pylon sign" means a pole or pylon sign that allows for the digital display of multiple businesses on a single sign. These signs are only allowed in the Highway Business Area pursuant to Section 17.78.410. 
"Noncommercial sign" means any sign not advertising or promoting a business entity, commercial activity or product for sale and sets forth the ideas or beliefs of the owner or occupant of the property upon which such sign is placed regarding political, sociological, religious, or economic subjects of public interest or general concern. 
"Off-site sign" means a sign identifying a use, facility, service, event or product that is not located, sold, held, offered or manufactured on the same premises as the sign. Off-site signs shall not be permitted, except for temporary community event signs per Section 17.78.440. 
"On-site sign" means a sign identifying a use, facility, service, or product that is located, sold, and/or manufactured on the same premises as the sign. 
"Pole sign" or "post sign" means any advertising of any nature which is wholly supported by one or more pole or posts set in or attached to the ground. 
"Portable sign" means any sign which is designed to be portable or readily moveable by a person to identify the location of a business, the sales of merchandise or to advertise an event and which is generally to be located on the ground or on a legal and permanent fixture attached to the ground. Sandwich signs; T-, H-, and A-frame signs; signs with wheels, banner signs, flag signs and similar types of signage are all considered to be portable signs. 
"Projecting sign" means any sign other than a wall sign, which is suspended from or supported by any building, pole, post, or structure, which projects outward therefrom. 
"Real estate sign" means any sign advertising for sale or lease of the lot or parcel of land upon which it is erected or maintained. 
"Roof sign" means any sign of any nature, together with all its parts and supports, which is erected, constructed, or maintained on or above the roof or parapet of any building including wall signs which extend above the roof or parapet of any building. Roof signs are prohibited within the Orland city limits. 
"Seasonal signs" means any signs which are displayed in conjunction with an approved use permit for a seasonal event, such as pumpkin patches, Christmas tree lots, and firework displays. Seasonal signs must adhere the conditions of the use permit and to Section 17.78.700 - Prohibited signs, but are otherwise exempt. 
"Sign" means any medium including its structure and component parts, which is erected out of doors and which is used or intended to be used to attract public attention of the subject matter therein, including window signs as defined herein. 
"Sign business" means the business of selling, offering for sale, leasing or renting, electric and non-electric signs and includes the business of painting, construction, erection, maintenance or repair of signs upon buildings, fences, windows, posts, structures and surfaces. 
"Sniping" means advertising by the pasting, posting, sticking, tacking, hanging, affixing or placing of cloth, paper or cardboard bills, cards or posters, or metal signs, to or upon fences, posts, trees, buildings, structures or surfaces other than outdoor advertising structures. This definition does not include any sign or notice issued by any court or public office or posted by any public officer in performance of a public duty or by a private person in giving a legal notice, or any cloth, paper or cardboard sign advertising for sale or lease the property upon which it stands or any type of sign permitted elsewhere in this title. 
"Special event signs" means any temporary signs which are displayed for the purpose of identifying a business, use, service or a special business-related event. Such signs shall not be used for the purpose of advertising specific products. Examples of special events are grand openings, special sales, and moving sales. 
"Street" means a public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property, including an avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfare except an alley as defined herein. 
"Structure" means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground or underground. 
"Structural trim" means the molding, battens, cappings, nailing strips, latticing, platforms and letters, figures, characters or representations in cut out or irregular form which are attached to the sign structure. 
"Temporary sign" means any sign constructed of durable weather-resistant material, such as cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wall board, or other light materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed on a temporary basis. Regulation of temporary signs is provided in section 17.78.440. 
"Use permits or conditional use permits" are conditional use permits as provided in Chapter 17.80 of Title 17 of the zoning ordinance, and shall comply with all procedures and requirements as provided therein. 
"Wall" means any exterior surface of a building or any part thereof excluding the roof. 
"Wall sign" means any sign of any nature which is attached to or supported by a wall of a building, or painted directly on the wall and shall include all parts and supports of such sign. Signs hanging from a porch or canopy and parallel to the face of the building shall be considered wall signs. 
"Window sign" shall mean a sign that is applied or attached to a window or located within two and a half feet of the inside of a window and intended for view by the pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2013-04, § 17.78.035; Ord. No. 2013-05, §§ 17.78.012, 17.78.017.5, 17.78.025.5, 17.78.032, 17.78.038.5, 17.78.041.5; Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1(Exh. A); Ord. No. 2016-08 ; Ord. No. 2018-05 , Exh. A; Ord. No. 2018-06 , Exh. A) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-08 , adopted Oct. 17, 2016, renumbered former § 17.78.010 as § 17.78.040.  
17.78.050 - General standards. 
A.  Total Advertising Surface Limitations. The maximum, total exterior advertising surface permitted is as follows: 
Single Use Parcel: One hundred (100) square feet maximum of total sign area for parcels with street frontage less than one hundred (100) linear feet measured from the longest single street frontage. For parcels equal to or greater than one hundred (100) linear feet of street frontage measured from the longest single street frontage: one additional square foot for every ten (10) linear feet of the longest single street frontage of one parcel subject to the other requirements of Chapter 17.78, with the exception of an allowed increase of fifty (50) percent of permitted individual sign area described in Sections 17.78.100 through 17.78.400. This exception does not allow for the increase of accumulated sign area beyond those discussed previously. No combining of multiple parcel street frontages is allowed. Total sign area is not to exceed one hundred and fifty (150) square feet. 
Multiple Use Parcel: Two hundred and fifty (250) square feet maximum for lots with street frontage less than one hundred (100) linear feet measured from the longest single street frontage. For lots equal to or greater than one hundred (100) linear feet of street frontage measured from the longest single street frontage: one additional square foot of area for every five (5) linear feet of a street frontage of one parcel subject to the other requirements of Chapter 17.78, with the exception of an allowed increase of fifty (50) percent of permitted individual sign area described in Sections 17.78.100 through 17.78.400. This exception does not allow for the increase of accumulated sign area beyond those discussed previously. No combining of multiple parcel street frontages is allowed. Total sign area is not to exceed three hundred and fifty (350) square feet. 
A use permit may be granted by the planning commission to exceed the maximum sign area as provided in Chapter 17.80. 
B.  Advertising Surface Calculation. The "advertising surface (facing)" of a sign shall be either the area of the entire sign face, or where individual sign letters and/or other components are mounted individually on a building surface, the area calculated by enclosing the extreme limits of all writing, logo, representation, emblem, or other display within no more than three parallelograms or triangles. 
C.  Sphere Calculations. In the case of a sphere of any type, only one-half thereof shall be considered the "advertising surface (facing)" unless the sphere may be observed on all sides by the public, in which event the entire surface area of said sphere shall be considered the "advertising surface (facing)." 
D.  Sign Height. No sign shall exceed the building height limits as set forth in each zone district as specified in Title 17 unless the proposed sign qualifies for an exception by use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.80. 
E.  Sign Height Above Public Property. Signs projecting over public property, if permitted, shall comply with the minimum standard set forth in the latest edition of the California Building Code and the California Electrical Code. In no event shall the clearance be less than eight feet unless a use permit is obtained. 
F.  Illumination of Signs. Illumination of signs shall be permitted; provided, however, when reflectors, flood lights, or spotlights are used, they shall be installed, focused and maintained as to concentrate their illumination upon the sign face or outdoor advertising structure face and shall not cause glare upon the street or adjacent private property or cause sky reflected glare. An administrative permit shall be required for all illumination signs to ensure compliance with city of Orland Municipal Code. 
G.  Electric Signs and Outline Lighting. All electric signs and outline lighting shall comply with Article 600 of the current edition of the California Building Code. A building permit and approval by the building official is required prior to the installation of any such electrical sign or outline lighting. 
H.  Quasi-Public Uses Identification. In addition to any other allowed signing, churches, schools, hospitals and other uses of a quasi-public nature, as determined by the planning director, shall be allowed one monument sign and one wall sign. However, the sign permit and the review and approval process shall be required. Said monument sign shall not exceed eight feet in height and the advertising surface shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet per side; the wall sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area. Both types of signs may be internally or externally illuminated. 
I.  Visibility Triangles. Signs shall maintain a minimum seventy-five (75) foot visibility triangle at street intersections, a minimum thirty-three (33) foot visibility triangle at driveways, shall not be located less than ten (10) feet behind the edge of pavement and shall not be located so as to create a traffic hazard as determined by city staff. 
J.  Engineering Plans Required. The following signs shall require engineered plans, and the building permit application shall include complete plans and calculations sealed by an engineer or architect registered in the state of California. 
1.  Canopy and marquee signs, when the area of the face of one sign or the aggregate area of all signs exceeds twenty-five (25) square feet. 
2.  Wall signs exceeding fifty (50) square feet in area, except: 
a.  Wall signs constructed of cut-out letters and insignia attached directly to the building and for which no individual letter exceeds fifty (50) square feet in area. 
b.  Any signs painted directly upon the wall of a building. 
3.  Ground or pole signs when the area of the face of one sign or the aggregate area of all signs on the sign structure exceeds thirty-five (35) square feet and the structure exceeds six feet in height. 
4.  As otherwise required by the city building official. 
K.  Building Code Compliance. All signs shall be required to meet all stipulations of the Building Code. 
L.  Sign Permits. All signs, except those exempted by Section 17.78.750, will require an administrative use permit, to be processed by the city planner, with appeal to the city manager, on forms as approved by the city of Orland. 
M.  Permit Fees. A sign permit fee, to be established by resolution, shall be paid by the applicant upon application for a sign permit. 
N.  Flashing Signs. All electrical signs intended to attract attention by any flashing on and off, or simulating any motion through a series of rapid light changes are only allowed in the "C-2" (Community Commercial), "C-H" (Highway Service Commercial), or "P-D" (Planned Development) Zoning Districts and shall require an approved administrative use permit. These signs shall be appropriate to the surrounding environment and shall not cause potential safety issues. 
O.  Moving Signs. Signs with movement or moving parts which is generated by electronic means shall be allowed with an approved administrative use permit and engineered plans shall be required. Moving signs shall be evaluated prior to approval to ensure that they will not create a safety hazard. 
P.  Marquee Signs. Marquee signs shall be prohibited except for theaters, religious facilities, schools, gasoline pricing signs, restaurants, and hotels/motels. These signs shall be allowed with an approved administrative use permit and shall not be larger than twenty-five (25) square feet. However, these signs may be a maximum of one hundred (100) square feet within six hundred (600) feet of Interstate 5. 
Q.  Message Neutrality. It is the city's policy to regulate signs in a constitutional manner that does not favor commercial speech over noncommercial speech and is content neutral as to noncommercial messages which are within the protections of the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and the corollary provisions of the California Constitution. 
R.  Regulatory Interpretations. All regulatory interpretations of this chapter are to be exercised in light of the city's message neutrality policy. Where a particular type of sign is proposed in a permit application, and the type is neither expressly allowed nor prohibited by this chapter, or whenever a sign does not qualify as a "structure" as defined in the building code, then the city shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application based on the most similar sign type that is expressly regulated by this chapter. 
S.  Substitution of Messages. Subject to the property owner's consent, a protected noncommercial message of any type may be substituted for any duly permitted or allowed commercial message or any duly permitted or allowed noncommercial message, provided that the sign structure or mounting device is legal without consideration of message content. Such substitution of message may be made without any additional approval or permitting. This provision prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary within this chapter. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over protected noncommercial speech, or favoring of any particular noncommercial message over any other noncommercial message. This provision does not create a right to increase the total amount of signage on a parcel, lot or land use; does not affect the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device be properly permitted; does not allow a change in the physical structure of a sign or its mounting device; does not allow the substitution of an off-site commercial message in place of an on-site commercial message. 
T.  Property Owner's Consent. No sign may be displayed without the consent of the legal owner(s) of the property on which the sign is mounted or displayed. For purposes of this policy, "owner" means the holder of the legal title to the property and all parties and persons holding a present right to possession, control or use of the property. 
U.  Legal Nature of Signage Rights and Duties. As to all signs attached to property, real or personal, the signage rights, duties and obligations arising from this chapter attach to and travel with the land or other property on which a sign is mounted or displayed. This provision does not modify or affect the law of fixtures, sign-related provisions in private leases regarding signs (so long as they are not in conflict with this chapter), or the ownership of sign structures. 
V.  Severance. If any section, sentence, clause, phrase, word, portion or provision of this chapter is held invalid or, unconstitutional, or unenforceable, by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect, impair, or invalidate any other section, sentence, clause, phrase, word, portion, or provision of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid portion. In adopting this chapter, the city council affirmatively declares that it would have approved and adopted the chapter even without any portion, which may be held invalid or unenforceable. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1(Exh. A); Ord. No. 2016-08 )  
17.78.100 - Hanging signs. 
A.  Permitting. Permits for a hanging sign shall be considered as part of the administrative use permit process defined in Chapter 17.80. 
B.  Standards. A hanging sign is a sign hanging over a covered pedestrian walkway. It shall be at least eight feet above the walkway. Such sign shall not be internally lighted and shall not exceed eight square feet in area per face. No more than one such sign shall be allowed per use per frontage. Such sign shall only identify the name and/or logo of the adjacent use. 
  
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.78.150 - Projecting signs. 
A.  Permitting. Permits for a projecting sign shall be considered as part of the administrative permit process defined in Chapter 17.80. 
B.  General Standards. 
1.  Projecting signs shall be permitted as secondary identification signs (in addition to wall signs) for sites with a high degree of pedestrian traffic and where the view of the primary sign by pedestrians is limited. 
2.  Projecting signs may be used as primary signs for buildings that do not possess adequate areas with proper visibility for the location of other types of identification signs. 
3.  Projecting signs shall be placed perpendicular to the building frontage and shall not extend above the level of the building eave of a sloped roof or highest point on a flat roof. 
C.  Area Limitations. Projecting signs shall not exceed six square feet each side. Only one such sign shall be allowed per each street frontage. 
D.  Projection over Public Property. Signs projecting over public property shall comply with the minimum standard set forth in the latest edition of the California Building Code and the California Electrical Code. In no event shall the clearance be less than eight feet unless a use permit is obtained. 
E.  Extension from Pole, Wall or Buildings. No projecting sign shall be erected with the nearest portion of the sign face extending a greater distance than eighteen inches from the pole or wall or building to which it is attached. 
F.  Wind Pressure Requirements. All projecting signs shall be constructed in accordance with wind pressure requirements set forth by the Building Code. 
  
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.78.200 - Awning and canopy signs. 
A.  Permitting. Permits for an awning or canopy sign shall be considered as partof the administrative permit process. Engineering plans may be required in accordance with Section 17.78.060. 
B.  Awning Signs. Awning signs shall be placed upon the hanging border of an awning. The advertising surface of an awning sign shall not extend above or below the hanging border of the awning. The allowable area of the awning sign shall be limited to ten (10) percent of the awning surface or twenty-five (25) square feet, whichever is less. In no case shall an awning project beyond the back edge of a curb. 
C.  Canopy Signs. The advertising surface of a canopy sign shall not extend above or below the canopy border. The area of the canopy sign shall be limited to ten (10) percent of the canopy surface or twenty-five (25) square feet, whichever is less. 
  
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.78.250 - Pole signs. 
A.  Permitting. Permits for a pole sign shall be considered as part of the administrative permit process defined in Chapter 17.80, if the land is to be developed simultaneously with the pole sign, or is already developed. A conditional use permit, as defined in Chapter 17.80, shall be required for all pole signs that are to be located on land with no development. 
B.  Design and Construction. 
1.  Maximum total sign area for pole or post signs shall be one hundred (100) square feet for a single (one use) sign and two hundred fifty (250) square feet for a multi-use sign. 
2.  Maximum height of the pole or post for the sign shall not exceed seventy (70) feet above the finished grade, not including the sign. The sign area shall be limited to one hundred (100) square feet for a single use and two hundred fifty (250) square feet for multi-use. 
  
3.  Pole signs shall only be allowed within six hundred (600) feet of Interstate "5" in the "C-2" (Community Commercial), "C-H" (Highway Service Commercial) or "PD" (Planned Development) Zoning Districts, only if the proposed use has been permitted by the city, subject to administrative review (subsection A of this section). 
4.  Pole sign(s) shall be spaced a minimum of three hundred thirty (330) feet from an existing pole when possible. Where it is not possible to achieve a three hundred thirty (330) foot separation, the new pole sign shall be located as far from an existing pole sign(s) as practicable on the parcel and to the extent practicable shall not otherwise obstruct or block an existing sign. 
5.  No pole or post sign shall project over any public right-of-way or sidewalk. Pole signs erected over a private vehicular drive shall be erected so as to provide not less than fifteen (15) feet vertical clearance. 
6.  All such signs shall be required to provide an architecturally enhanced treatment for the sign base, pole and supports compatible with the individual business or the complex/center. Pole covers and sign base shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the full sign width. 
7.  Engineering plans shall be required in accordance with Section 17.78.050(J) for all pole signs. 
8.  The ground area surrounding the pole base shall be clear of all brush, vegetation, weeds and debris within a fifteen (15) foot perimeter at all times. 
a.  Multiple tenant signs may be added to and are allowed on existing pole signs as part of the administrative use permit process. The maximum allowable advertising surface per side for a multiple tenant pole sign is three hundred and fifty (350) square feet. Any additional signage added to an existing pole sign may not exceed the maximum allowable sign area. All requirements of the Orland Municipal Code shall apply. 
9.  Pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.78.450, exceptions, a conditional use permit may be granted by the planning commission to exceed the allowable advertising surface for pole signs, to construct a pole sign within three hundred and thirty (330) feet of an existing pole sign or to exceed the maximum permitted pole sign height. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1(Exh. A); Ord. No. 2019-01 )  
17.78.300 - Monument signs. 
A.  Permitting. Permits for a monument sign shall be considered as part of the administrative permit process defined in Chapter 17.80. 
B.  Standards. 
1.  Monument signs shall not exceed a height of eight feet, including the base. The advertising surface of any sign face shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet per side. When practical, landscaping shall be provided around the base of the sign. Only one such sign is permitted for each street frontage. Provided that parcels with frontage exceeding two hundred (200) feet may have a maximum of two monument signs. The distance between monument signs on any one parcel shall not be less than fifty (50) feet. 
2.  All such signs shall have monument-type bases of masonry construction. A comparable alternate basic material may be used upon approval by the city. 
  
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.78.350 - Multiple tenant signs. 
A.  Permitting. Permits for commercial center signs pursuant to this chapter shall be considered as part of the administrative use permit process defined in Chapter 17.80. 
B.  Multiple Tenant Identification Signs. 
1.  A multi-tenant identification sign, which may include tenant directional signs, are permitted upon obtaining an administrative use permit (as defined in Chapter 17.80) pursuant to the following standards: 
a.  Multi-tenant signs shall not be more than twelve (12) square feet in total area. 
b.  Multi-tenant signs shall not exceed six feet in height above the finished grade. 
c.  Exception: Pole or post signs in compliance with Section 17.78.250 and this title. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.78.400 - Wall signs. 
A.  Permitting. Permits for a wall sign shall be considered as part of the administrative use permit process, as defined in Chapter 17.80. 
B.  Location and Height. A wall sign shall not project more than fifteen (15) inches from the surface of the building to which it is attached. The face of any wall sign which extends over public property must be eight feet or more above the surface of the adjoining ground, sidewalk or pavement. Wall signs shall not extend above the roof line. 
C.  Area Limit. The advertising surface of a wall sign or a combination of wall signs shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet. Signs painted directly on the wall shall be included in the calculation of the one hundred (100) square foot maximum area. This includes any existing signs painted on the wall. In no event shall the area of the sign exceed twenty (20) percent of the area of the building wall upon which the sign is to be placed. 
  
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.78.405 - Digital display signs. 
A.  Permitting. Permits for digital display signs shall be considered as part of the administrative use permit process, as defined in Chapter 17.80. 
B.  Digital display signs are allowed as monument signs in the C-2, C-H and M-L zoning districts and a P-D district developed for commercial uses. 
C.  Digital display signs are allowed as pole signs within the C-2 and C-H zoning districts and a P-D district developed for commercial uses. 
D.  Digital display signs are allowed as wall signs within the C-2 and C-H zoning districts and a P-D district developed for commercial uses. 
General Standards. 
A.  Design and Construction. 
1.  Digital display monument signs shall not exceed a height of eight feet, including the base. The advertising surface of any sign face shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet per side. When practical, landscaping shall be provided around the base of the sign. Only one such sign is permitted for each street frontage. Provided that parcels with frontage exceeding two hundred (200) feet may have a maximum of two monument signs. The distance between monument signs on any one parcel shall not be less than fifty (50) feet. 
2.  Digital display monument signs shall have monument-type bases of masonry construction. A comparable alternate basic material may be used upon approval by the city. 
3.  Digital display pole signs maximum total sign area shall be one hundred (100) square feet for a single (one use) sign and seven hundred fifty (750) square feet for a multi-use sign and a maximum height of the sign shall not exceed thirty (30) feet above the finished grade, including the sign with the exception of poles signs within six hundred (600) feet of Interstate 5. Digital display signs in this area are allowed a maximum height of seventy (70) feet above the finished grade, not including the sign. 
4.  Digital display pole signs shall have architectural pole enclosures for the length of the pole(s) to add to the aesthetics of the design. 
5.  No digital display pole sign(s) shall be allowed to be constructed within three hundred thirty (330) feet of any existing digital display pole sign unless otherwise permitted by the planning commission pursuant to the provisions of this section and Section 17.78.450, exceptions. 
6.  Digital display wall signs shall not project more than fifteen (15) inches from the surface of the building to which it is attached. The face of any wall sign which extends over public property must be eight feet or more above the surface of the adjoining ground, sidewalk or pavement. Wall signs shall not extend above the roof line. 
7.  The total surface area of a digital display wall sign or a combination of wall signs shall not exceed seven hundred fifty (750) square feet. 
8.  Any digital displays shall display unanimated images and/or copy. For the purposes of this section, unanimated images and/or copy shall be defined as those which are changed no more than once per eight seconds. 
9.  Digital displays shall not be brighter than the illumination limit recommended by the International Sign Association (ISA) for electronic message center signs, or 0.3 footcandles above ambient light when measured at the recommended distance as set forth by the ISA. Digital display signs shall be equipped with a photocell, timer, or other similar device which automatically dims the display during nighttime hours to prevent glare impacts to motorists. 
10.  Pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.78.450, exceptions, a conditional use permit may be granted by the planning commission to exceed the allowable height and advertising surface for digital display sign(s). 
(Ord. No. 2018-05 , Exh. A)  
17.78.410 - Off-premises multi-user signs. 
A.  Permitting. Permits for off-premises multi-user signs shall be considered as part of the administrative use permit process, as defined in Chapter 17.80. 
B.  Off-premises multi-user signs are only allowed in the Highway Business Area as defined by Figures 1A and 1B. 
C.  Only one off-premises multi-user sign per Highway Business Area shown on Figures 1A and 1B is allowed. 
D.  Off-premises signs for properties within the Highway Business Area are allowed to be displayed on the multi-user sign with approval by the city planner. 
E.  The property owner on the parcel that the off-premises multi-user sign is located, is considered to be the sign owner by the city. The sign owner is responsible for all upkeep and maintenance of the sign. 
General Standards 
A.  Design and Construction. 
1.  Sign can be either fully digital or fully non-digital. No mix of digital and non-digital signs are permitted with the exception that the digital sign may have a non-digital "banner" sign such has "City of Orland" or "Orland Mall" or other appropriate use. 
2.  Maximum total sign area for pole or pylon off-premises multi-user sign(s) shall be seven hundred fifty (750) square feet. 
3.  Maximum height of the pole or pylon for the sign shall not exceed seventy (70) feet above the finished grade, not including the sign. 
4.  Multi-user pole signs shall only be allowed within three hundred (300) feet of Interstate "5" in the Highway Business Area. 
5.  No off-premises multi-user sign(s) shall be allowed to be constructed within three hundred thirty (330) feet of any existing off-premises multi-user sign(s) unless otherwise permitted by the planning commission pursuant to the provisions of this section and Section 17.78.450, exceptions. 
6.  The area of off-premises signs shall count towards the maximum allowed sign area for the multi-user digital display sign. 
7.  Any digital displays shall display unanimated images and/or copy. For the purposes of this section, unanimated images and/or copy shall be defined as those which are changed no more than once per eight seconds. 
8.  Digital displays shall not be brighter than the illumination limit recommended by the International Sign Association (ISA) for electronic message center signs, or 0.3 footcandles above ambient light when measured at the recommended distance as set forth by the ISA. Multi-user digital display pole signs shall be equipped with a photocell, timer, or other similar device which automatically dims the display during nighttime hours to prevent glare impacts to motorists. 
9.  No off-premises multi-user sign(s) shall project over any public right-of-way or sidewalk. Pole signs erected over a private vehicular drive shall be erected so as to provide not less than fifteen (15) feet vertical clearance. 
10.  All such signs shall be required to provide an architecturally enhanced treatment for the sign base, pole and supports. Pole covers and sign base shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the full sign width. 
11.  Engineering plans shall be required in accordance with Section 17.78.050(J) for all pole/pylon signs. 
12.  The ground area surrounding the pole/pylon base shall be clear of all brush, vegetation, weeds and debris within a fifteen (15) foot perimeter at all times. 
13.  Pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.78.450, exceptions, a conditional use permit may be granted by the planning commission to exceed the allowable advertising surface for off-premises multi-user sign(s), to construct an off-premises multi-user sign(s) within three hundred thirty (330) feet of an existing off-premises multi-user sign(s) or to exceed the maximum permitted pole/pylon sign height. 
Figure 1A: Highway Business Area - Off-Premises Multi-User Signs
  
Figure 1B: Highway Business Area - Off-Premises Multi-User Signs
  
(Ord. No. 2018-06 , Exh. A)  
17.78.420 - Portable signs. 
General Standards. 
A.  A portable sign shall not exceed a maximum size of twelve (12) square feet in total area and shall not have any dimension greater than four feet. Only one side of a portable sign will be counted for the purposes of determining sign advertising area. The vertical dimension of the sign (height) including any support structures, handles or hinges may be no greater than forty-eight (48) inches. 
B.  Portable signs may not be located in any residential zoning district and shall only be permitted within the mixed use designated commercial downtown area; on commercial zoned properties immediately adjacent to Walker Street, Newville Road, Sixth Street, and South Street; and on industrially zoned properties. 
C.  Portable signs shall be prohibited in the public right-of-way, except in the mixed use designated commercial downtown area and as further defined in subsection (B). 
Portable Sign Limitations. Portable signs, when permitted, shall meet the following standards and requirements: 
A.  Portable signs shall be allowed to be displayed only during the business hours of the business for which the sign has been established; 
B.  A maximum of one portable sign may be permitted per occupied tenant space or individual business; 
C.  Portable signs shall not be placed within a street site visibility triangle area measuring (thirty (30) feet by thirty (30) feet) or in an area where they would in any way block the view of drivers of vehicles or pedestrians when at or approaching intersections or driveways; 
D.  Portable signs shall not use, incorporate or affix materials or items to include streamers, balloons, wind socks, reflectors, etc., to increase visibility; 
E.  Portable signs shall be weighted down or secured as to minimize sign-related hazards; 
F.  Portable signs shall not be attached permanently or temporarily to any object, structure, or the ground (for example: utility poles, fences, trees, or traffic signs); 
G.  In case the portable sign is removed from the public right-of-way due to safety concerns, contact information shall be identified on the sign; 
H.  Portable signs shall only be placed immediately in front of the business to which the sign is advertising and shall be located so that it does not interfere with pedestrian movement or in a manner that presents a safety hazard to pedestrians or vehicles. 
Enforcement. The city shall enforce the provisions of this section of the code with enforcement to include the physical removal of signs not legally placed pursuant to this section. In the event that the sign is removed from the public right-of-way due to safety hazard concerns, signs shall be stored by the city for a period of not less than sixty (60) days after which the time the sign may be disposed. Signs that are placed illegally but that are not determined to be safety hazards shall be subject to normal enforcement through the code enforcement process. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04, §§ 17.78.421—17.78.423) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-04, adopted Nov. 4, 2013, adopted provisions designated as ch. 17.78.420, §§ 17.78.421—17.78.423. In order to conform to the style of the code, and at the editor's discretion, said provisions have been redesignated as § 17.78.420.  
17.78.430 - Flag and banner signs. 
General Standards. 
A.  Each flag or banner sign shall not exceed a maximum size of twenty-five (25) square feet in sign advertising area. Only one side of a flag or banner sign will be counted for the purposes of determining sign advertising area. 
B.  The maximum single dimension of the sign (height) including any support structures, poles or hinges may be no greater than ten (10) feet. 
C.  Flag or banner signs may not be located in a residential zoning district and shall only be permitted within the mixed use designated commercial downtown area; on commercial zoned properties; and on industrially zoned properties. 
D.  Flag and banner signs shall be prohibited in the public right-of-way, except in the mixed use designated commercial downtown area and as further permitted in subsection (B). 
Flag and Banner Sign Limitations. Flag and banner signs, when permitted, shall meet the following standards and requirements: 
A.  Flag and banner signs shall be allowed to be displayed only during the business hours of the business for which the flag or banner sign has been established; 
B.  One flag sign is permitted per fifty (50) linear feet of street frontage per occupied tenant space or individual business with no maximum amount of flag signs. All occupied tenant spaces or individual businesses are allowed at least one flag sign; 
C.  One banner sign is permitted per fifty (50) linear feet of street frontage per occupied tenant space or individual business with the maximum of three banner signs. All occupied tenant spaces or individual businesses are allowed at least one banner sign; 
D.  Flag or banner signs shall not be placed within a street site visibility triangle area measuring (thirty (30) feet by thirty (30) feet) or in an area where they would in any way block the view of drivers of vehicles or pedestrians when at or approaching intersections or driveways; 
E.  Flag or banner signs shall not use, incorporate or affix materials accessory attachments not a part of the flag or banner itself (streamers, balloons, wind socks, reflectors, etc.) to increase visibility; 
F.  Flag and banner signs shall not be attached to utility poles, light fixtures, traffic control devices or similar objects; 
G.  Flag and banner signs shall only be placed immediately in front of the business to which the sign is advertising and shall be located so that it does not interfere with pedestrian movement or in a manner that presents a safety hazard to pedestrians or vehicles. 
Enforcement. The city shall enforce the provisions of this section of the code with enforcement to include the physical removal of signs not legally placed pursuant to this section. In the event that the sign is removed from the public right-of-way due to safety hazard concerns, signs shall be stored by the city for a period of not less than sixty (60) days after which the time the sign may be disposed. Signs that are placed illegally but that are not determined to be safety hazards shall be subject to normal enforcement through the code enforcement process. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05, §§ 17.78.431—17.78.433) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-05, adopted Nov. 11, 2013, adopted provisions designated as ch. 17.78.430, §§ 17.78.431—17.78.433. In order to conform to the style of the code, and at the editor's discretion, said provisions have been redesignated as § 17.78.430.  
17.78.440 - Temporary signs. 
General Standards. Temporary signs may be displayed subject to the requirements of this section. 
A.  Material. Temporary exterior signs shall be made of a durable weather-resistant material. 
B.  Duration. Unless otherwise specified by these regulations, temporary signs may be displayed for a maximum of forty-five (45) consecutive days. The total number of days during which all temporary signage may be displayed shall not exceed ninety (90) days per year. 
C.  Illumination. Temporary signs shall not be illuminated. 
D.  Standards for Specific Temporary Sign Types. 
1.  Real Estate Signs. One real estate sign, which advertises the sale, rental or lease of the premises is permitted on each parcel frontage as follows: 
a.  Single-family residential zoned parcels, six square foot maximum area per sign. 
b.  Multi-family residential zoned parcels, twelve (12) square foot maximum area per sign. 
c.  Nonresidential zoned parcels, eight square foot maximum area per sign. 
d.  The residential signs shall not exceed six feet in height above the ground, and the nonresidential signs eight feet above the ground. [Note: this is taken from [Section] 17.78.750.B.1.a.] 
2.  Directional Signs for Open Houses. Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, up to three off-site signs directing the public to "open house" events for the viewing of lots, premises, dwellings or structures that are for sale, lease, or rent, are permitted subject to the approval of the property owner provided they comply with the following standards: 
a.  No sign or signs shall exceed four square feet in area, or three feet in height from finished grade. 
b.  The sign or signs may not be placed more than twelve (12) hours before the start or remain more than twelve (12) hours after the conclusion of the open house event. 
3.  Subdivision Signs. In all zones, a maximum of three unlighted double-faced temporary subdivision signs, not exceeding forty (40) square feet in area per display face and fifteen (15) feet in overall height, may be erected and maintained with a subdivision during sale of the lots. Such signs shall be located within the subdivision and shall be a minimum distance of three hundred (300) feet apart from each other. All signs shall be removed at the close of escrow of the model complex houses. 
4.  Protected Non-Commercial Political and Free Speech Signs. Non-illuminated temporary signs displaying protected non-commercial messages, maximum four feet in height, totaling no more than six square feet in area may be displayed upon any single property/parcel, with the permission of the property/parcel owner within the city at any time. However, during the period of time beginning sixty (60) days before a general, special, primary or runoff election, and ending fifteen (15) days after such election, the amount of display area may be doubled. Flags do not count toward the signage allowed under this provision. This display area allowance is in addition to that allowed under the message substitution policy. 
5.  Special Event Signs. 
a.  Special event signs may be displayed for a maximum of thirty (30) days within a ninety-day period. 
b.  Special event signs shall be prohibited in the public right-of-way, except as permitted in Sections 17.78.420 and 17.78.430. 
c.  Special event signs shall not use, incorporate, or affix materials or accessory attachments not a part of the sign itself (streamers, balloons, wind socks, reflectors, etc.) to increase visibility. 
d.  Special event signs shall not be attached to utility poles, light fixtures, traffic control devices or similar objects. 
e.  Special event signs shall not be placed within a street site visibility triangle area measuring (thirty (30) feet by thirty (30) feet) or in an area where they would in any way block the view of drivers of vehicles or pedestrians when at or approaching intersections or driveways. 
f.  Special event signs shall be located so that they do not interfere with pedestrian movement or in a manner that presents a safety hazard to pedestrians or vehicles. 
g.  Special event signs are prohibited in residentially zoned property. 
h.  Special event sign standards: 
(1)  No more than one such sign is allowed for each street frontage. 
(2)  Maximum sign area not to exceed fifty (50) square feet. The area of an inflatable device shall be measured like a sphere as described in Section 17.78.050 and shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet with an aggregate maximum of two hundred (200) square feet. 
(3)  If temporary signs are placed in windows, they shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet or twenty (20) percent of the total window and glass door area, whichever is the most restrictive requirement. 
6.  Community Event Signs: 
a.  Community event signs may be displayed for a maximum of thirty (30) days before the event and must be removed within three days upon event completion. 
b.  Except in the mixed use designated commercial downtown area, no community event sign shall be placed on public property or within any public right-of-way. 
c.  No community event sign shall be placed on private property without the permission of the property owner. 
d.  Community event signs shall not use, incorporate, or affix materials or accessory attachments not a part of the sign itself (streamers, balloons, wind socks, reflectors, etc.) to increase visibility. 
e.  Community event signs shall not be attached to utility poles, light fixtures, traffic control devices or similar objects. 
f.  Community event signs shall not be placed within a street site visibility triangle area measuring (thirty (30) feet by thirty (30) feet) or in an area where they would in any way block the view of drivers of vehicles or pedestrians when at or approaching intersections or driveways. 
g.  Community event signs shall be located so that it does not interfere with pedestrian movement or in a manner that presents a safety hazard to pedestrians or vehicles. 
E.  Enforcement. In addition to all remedies provided in this code, enforcement of this section of the code includes the physical removal of temporary signs by the city that do not comply with the time, place or manner provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05, §§ 17.78.441—17.78.443; Ord. No. 2016-08 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-05, adopted Nov. 11, 2013, adopted provisions designated as ch. 17.78.440, §§ 17.78.441—17.78.443. In order to conform to the style of the code, and at the editor's discretion, said provisions have been redesignated as § 17.78.440. 
 Subsequently, Ord. No. 2016-08 , adopted Oct. 17, 2016, changed the title of § 17.48.440 from "Special and community event signs" to read as herein set out.  
17.78.450 - Exceptions. 
A.  Signs Urgently Needed. Any sign deemed by the city manager to be urgently needed due to undue economic hardship upon the applicant may be allowed temporarily by the city manager, upon submittal of an administrative use permit application for the sign, until such time as the appropriate approving authority approves or denies the application. In the event such application is ultimately denied, any such sign erected pursuant to this subsection shall be removed within fifteen (15) days from the date of such denial. 
B.  Additional Signing Allowed by Conditional Use Permit. 
1.  The planning commission, by way of a conditional use permit, may allow additional sign types, number of signs, size of signs, spacing of signs and number of locations. The applicant must submit a statement with the application supporting the request for the additional signing. Criteria for additional signing may include large parcel size, unusual configuration of location, size of buildings, multiple street frontages, number of independent businesses, location of the building on the parcel or unique qualities of the use of the parcel, any of which must relate to the finding which shall be required of the planning commission that the additional signing will not be contrary to the intent of this chapter or the public interest, safety, health and welfare. 
2.  Under such conditional use permit sign request, the planning commission may increase each allowed sign area by up to fifteen (15) percent for any such sign. 
C.  Height and Size Exceptions—Conditions for Granting. 
i.  The planning commission, through a conditional use permit, may grant exceptions upon the verified application of any property owner as to the maximum overall height of any sign above natural ground level or as to the maximum square feet of advertising surface, whenever one or more of the conditions hereinafter set forth exist. 
a.  The proposed sign location is located within freeway interchange properties designated by resolution of the city council and is a dining, lodging, vehicle fueling, vehicle service business, or unique tourist attraction whose primary clientele are the motoring public on Interstate 5. 
b.  The proposed sign identifies a retail shopping center or industrial park or similar complex, involving a total of at least one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area, or an individual business with a gross floor area exceeding fifty thousand (50,000) square feet. 
c.  The grade of the nearest adjacent street or highway, excluding the interstate freeway, to the proposed sign location is of an elevation ten (10) feet or more above the natural ground level of the sign site. 
2.  In the exercise of the power herein delegated, the planning commission shall impose such conditions upon exceptions so granted as in its judgment may be necessary to assure compliance with the spirit and purpose of this title. 
3.  As to the existence of any of the herein above set forth conditions and the necessity for exception from the provisions of this title, the burden of proof shall be upon the applicant. 
D.  Public Service or Directional Signs. 
1.  Permits for public services or directional signs shall be considered as part of the administrative use permit process defined in Chapter 17.80. Any such sign will provide only directional information as to the location of services or goods and shall contain no advertising content identifying a particular brand name or product or a particular business. 
2.  Public service or traffic signs erected by the city are exempt from the provisions of this title. 
3.  Exempt parking and directional signs are set forth in Section 17.78.650. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1(Exh. A))  
17.78.500 - Federal and state law provisions. 
A.  Federal Law. Nothing in this title, either by inclusion or omission, shall be deemed to be in conflict with Public Law 89-285, 89th Congress, S. 2084, October 22, 1965, known as the Highway Beautification Act of 1965, 79 Stat. 1028, or the State Scenic Highway Act of 1963, as such laws apply or may apply to the portions of the interstate system and the primary system of the federal and state highways now within or which may come within the limits of the city. 
B.  State Law. Nothing in this title, either by inclusion or omission, shall be deemed to be in conflict with any of the laws of the state of California, as such laws apply or may apply to the portions of the interstate system and the primary system of federal and state highways now within or which may come within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.78.550 - Noncommercial signs. 
Noncommercial signs shall be allowed under the same conditions in which a commercial sign is allowed pursuant to this title. The city shall have the right to review, approve or disapprove the contents or copy of any such signs. The permit procedures shall otherwise be the same as for commercial signs. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.78.600 - Sign maintenance and materials. 
A.  Sign Materials. All signs shall be comprised of materials that are not considered hazardous to public safety, as approved by the planning department. 
B.  Prohibited Sign Materials. Signs of the following materials shall be prohibited within the city of Orland: 
1.  Cardboard; 
2.  Roof tin; 
3.  Spray paint. 
C.  Sign Maintenance. 
1.  All signage within the city of Orland shall be maintained by the owner or person in possession of the property on which the sign is located. Maintenance shall be such that the signage continues to conform to all conditions stated in this section. 
2.  Any damaged sign or sign base shall be repaired within thirty (30) days of notice to repair, issued by the building department. 
3.  Any metal pole covers and sign cabinets shall be kept free of rust and rust stains. 
4.  Any internally-illuminated sign cabinets or sign panels which have been damaged shall remain un-illuminated until repaired. 
5.  All signs erected within the city limits shall be kept weed free. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.78.650 - Comprehensive sign plan. 
A.  Purpose. A comprehensive sign plan shall be provided for groups of businesses or for the whole of a shopping center development. Such a plan shall regulate the location, size, height, color, orientation, lighting, and types of signs included in the area. 
B.  Contents. The comprehensive sign plan: 
1.  Shall propose signage which in height and area is no more than twenty (20) percent greater than is permitted in the zoning district in which the use is located; 
2.  Shall not propose signage of a type that is otherwise prohibited by this code; 
3.  Shall be limited to those projects which individually or collectively exceed ten (10) gross acres in size for nonresidential and one hundred (100) gross acres in size for residential, and/or are located immediately adjacent to, or within two hundred fifty (250) feet, of Interstate 5. 
C.  Submittal. The applicant shall submit all of the documents, information, data, and other requirements for comprehensive sign plan approval to the city at the time of application. The applicant shall be responsible for furnishing any additional information and materials relevant to the application that the city may require. 
D.  Review. 
1.  Application for the review and approval of a comprehensive sign plan shall be submitted and reviewed concurrently with a site plan or preliminary subdivision plat and shall be acted upon by the city council following review and recommendation by the planning commission. 
2.  Applications submitted for existing developments shall be submitted to and reviewed by the city and acted upon by the city council following review and recommendation by the planning commission. The city council may approve the comprehensive sign plan subject to any modifications, conditions, requirements, or standards that may be appropriate. 
3.  Fees for the submittal and review of comprehensive sign plans shall be as set forth by the city council. 
E.  Evaluation Criteria. 
1.  Size and Height. All proposed signage shall be no larger than allowed in that zoning district. Factors to be considered in determining appropriate size and height include topography, traffic volumes, traffic speeds, visibility ranges, impact on adjacent properties, and copy size. 
2.  Location and Orientation. All proposed signage shall respect both the developed and undeveloped surrounding environment. Signs shall be located and oriented appropriately to allow sufficient visibility and legibility. Factors that may be considered in reviewing the appropriateness of the sign location and orientation may include: location relative to the surrounding streets, traffic volumes and access points, visibility angles and topographic features. 
3.  Color, Materials and Types of Illumination. Signs proposed under the comprehensive sign plan shall be compatible with the architecture and theme of the specific development in which the signs are located. Compatibility with the specific development shall include color, materials and architectural style. Signage shall compliment and enhance the character of the project. 
F.  Amendments. All amendments to an approved comprehensive sign plan shall be processed in accordance with the following procedures. Fees for the submittal and review of comprehensive sign plan amendments shall be as set forth by the city council. 
1.  Minor Amendments. Minor amendments shall include any change which does not increase the number of signs nor increase the size or height of any sign beyond what was approved under the original comprehensive sign plan approval. All changes processed under the minor amendment procedures shall comply with all provisions of this section and shall not deviate from the information provided in the original approval. Minor amendments shall be approved administratively by staff. 
2.  Major Amendments. Major amendments shall be defined as those amendments not meeting the criteria set forth above to qualify as a minor comprehensive sign plan amendment. Major amendments shall be processed and approved in the same manner as the initial comprehensive sign plan submittal. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.78.700 - Prohibited signs. 
A.  Nonconforming Signs. 
1.  Any existing sign which was in compliance with all signage requirements when erected, but no longer complies with the provisions of this title shall not be substantially altered or reconstructed unless the sign, when so reconstructed or altered, complies with the applicable requirements of this title. 
2.  Reasonable repairs and alterations may be made to nonconforming signs. However, in the event any such sign is hereafter damaged exceeding fifty (50) percent of the reproduction cost, according to appraisal thereof by competent appraisers, or is removed by any means whatsoever, including an act of God, such sign may be restored, reconstructed, altered, or repaired only to conform with the provisions set forth in this section. 
3.  Whenever the business conducted on premises changes, the subsequent sign-modifications to reflect that change, whether it is in copy, size, or shape of signage, must bring the sign into conformance with regulations set forth in this section. 
4.  Any nonconforming sign cannot be expanded or enlarged. 
B.  Signs Which May Confuse Traffic. 
1.  No sign shall be erected, constructed or maintained if which sign displays or makes use of the words "stop," "danger," or any other word, phrase, symbol or character, in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. 
2.  Signs having red, green or amber lights that could be confused with traffic signals shall not be permitted if designed or located to be seen primarily by vehicular traffic. Such colors are not prohibited where, by the design of the sign or lights used, it is extremely unlikely that such lights could be confused with traffic signals by the driving public. 
C.  Roof Signs. Roof signs are prohibited. 
D.  Reserved. 
E.  Obscene Signs. Obscene signs containing statements, words, pictures, or other representations, which are obscene as defined in Penal Code Section 311 are prohibited. 
F.  Parking of Advertising Vehicles Prohibited. No person shall park any vehicle or trailer in a public right-of-way, or on private property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way, which has attached thereto or located thereon any sign or advertising device for the basic purpose of providing advertisement of products or directing people to a business. This section is not intended to apply to standard advertising or identification practices where such signs or advertising devices are painted on or permanently attached to a business or commercial vehicle and are used in conjunction with the business that it identifies or advertises including vehicles utilized for the delivery of business products. 
G.  Unsafe Signs. The owner of any sign as defined and regulated by this title, including supporting structures, shall keep the same in a safe condition at all times. If the building official finds that any sign regulated herein is unsafe or insecure, or is a menace to the public, he or she may give written notice to the sign owner and to the property owner. If such sign owner fails to remove or alter the sign so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within thirty (30) days after such notice, the building official may cause such sign to be removed or altered to comply at the expense of the sign owner or owner of the property upon which it is located. 
The building official may cause any sign, which is an immediate danger to persons or property to be removed summarily and without notice. 
H.  Clearance from Electric Power and Communication Lines. No sign shall be constructed, installed or erected, which has less horizontal or vertical clearance from energized electric power lines and communication lines than prescribed by the California Penal Code, Section 385, the regulations of the California Public Utilities Commission, and the orders of the Division of Industrial Safety, state of California. 
I.  Obstruction of Fire Escapes, Stairways, or Exterior Doors. 
1.  No portion of any sign, or the supports thereof, shall be placed so as to obstruct any fire escape, stairway, exterior door or standpipe, nor shall any such outdoor advertising structure or sign or any of the supports thereof, be attached to or supported by any fire escape. 
2.  No portion of any sign or the supports thereof shall be placed so as to interfere with human exit through any window of any room. 
J.  Removal of Certain Advertising. Any advertising copy or message now or hereafter existing which advertises a business no longer in operation under the same name, a product or service which is no longer available, a public or private event which has already occurred, or a candidate for public office, the election for which has already taken place, shall be removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building, or structure or premises upon which such copy or message may be found, within thirty (30) days after written notice from planning director. Upon failure to comply with such notice within the time specified in such order, the planning director is authorized to cause the removal of the advertising copy or message, and the expense incident to such removal shall be the obligation of the owner of the building, or structure or premises on which the advertising copy or message is displayed. 
K.  Obstruction to Traffic Signs. No sign shall be erected at any location where, by reason of its position, it will obstruct or interfere with the view of any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. 
L.  Liability for Damages. The provision of this title shall not be construed as relieving, or limiting in any way, the responsibility or liability of any person erecting or owning any sign from person injury or property damage resulting from the placing of such sign, or resulting from the negligence or willful acts of such person, his agents, employees or workmen, in the construction, maintenance, repair or removal of any sign erected in accordance with a permit issued hereunder. Nor shall this title be construed as imposing upon the city, or its officers or employees, any responsibility or liability by reason of the approval of any signs, materials, or devices under the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2013-04)  
17.78.750 - Exempt signs. 
A.  General Compliance Requirements. All signs not expressly exempted by a provision of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of this code and shall comply with all applicable provisions thereof. 
B.  Exempt Signs. 
1.  The provisions and regulations of this title shall not apply to the following signs: 
a.  Window signs, the combined total of which do not exceed twenty (20) percent of the window area; 
b.  Bulletin boards not over twelve (12) square feet in area for public, charitable or religious institutions when the same are located on the premises of such institutions, as part of an approved monument sign; 
c.  Signs denoting the architect, engineer contractor, or financing institution when placed upon work under construction, and not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area; 
d.  Signs placed flat against the facade of a building that identifies the history and name of a building or historic events not exceeding three square feet in area and constructed of bronze, brass, or other like incombustible material; 
e.  Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices or railroad crossing signs; 
f.  Signs of public service companies indicating danger, and aids to service or safety; 
g.  Signs placed on the interior of a property and not seen from the public right-of-way; 
h.  Gasoline price signs not exceeding twenty (20) square feet per side; with no more than two separate signs per parcel; 
i.  California, United States and other flags not used as general advertising for hire; 
j.  Signs placed in parking lots to direct traffic and inform users of parking requirements; 
k.  Warning signs to indicate danger or to serve as an aid to public safety or to show the location of public utilities' underground facilities; 
l.  Farmers' market signs. City approved farmers' markets are allowed two on-site signs with a maximum area of thirty-two (32) square feet each and two off-site signs with a maximum area of twelve (12) square feet with permission from the property owner. Each vendor may display one temporary sign with a maximum area of twenty (20) square feet. No sign shall be located in the public right-of-way. 
2.  Ordinary maintenance and repair of an existing conforming advertising structure provided there is no structural modification including repainting with the same colors. 
3.  Informational window signs shall be exempt as follows: 
a.  Small non-illuminated informational signs related to the operation of the business located on the windows or glass doors are exempt from these provisions and are not included in the total allowed sign area. Examples of such signs are "open/closed" signs, credit card signs, rating or professional signs, and signs of a similar nature. Only one of each type of sign is allowed, not to exceed one square foot in area per sign with no more than four in number at any individual business. 
b.  One neon or other "open" sign is permitted in the window per each street frontage as a sign exempt from the provisions of this title and shall not exceed four square feet in area. The area of the open sign is not included in the total allowed window sign area. 
C.  Fee Exempt Signs. All temporary signs and signs erected by nonprofit or volunteer organizations are exempt from the requirement of paying application and sign permit fees. An application and sign permit for any such sign is required in the same manner as otherwise provided in this title. These signs shall not be displayed for more than ninety (90) days. An extension may be granted upon authorization by the city of Orland planning department. 
D.  Exempt Parking and Directional Signs. 
1.  Parking directional signs not exceeding eight square feet per side located in close proximity to driveway entrances are exempt. 
2.  Directional signs located within a nonresidentially zoned parcel for the purpose of directing vehicular traffic or pedestrians to specific entrances or services at the business facility shall be exempt provided that the face of any such sign shall not exceed eight square feet. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2013-05, § 17.78.752; Ord. No. 2016-08 )  
Chapter 17.79 - ORIGINAL ARTWORK MURALS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 
 
17.79.010 - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
"Original artwork mural" means a painting or artwork temporarily or permanently affixed to a building wall, freestanding wall, or fence, distinguished from signage in that it does not advertise a business, commercial endeavor, or product sold or offered on the site or off-site. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 2)  
17.79.020 - Location of original artwork murals. 
Installation of original artwork murals shall be limited to nonresidential buildings located as follows: Walker Street, all of 6th Street, and Mill and Colusa Streets from 3rd to 8th Streets. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 2)  
17.79.030 - Purpose. 
A.  This chapter is intended to permit and encourage original artwork murals on content neutral basis that are (1) sufficiently durable and will be properly maintained; (2) are located on appropriate places on buildings and constitute a particular scale of the building facade; (3) do not include any unsafe features or would not pose any unsafe conditions to vehicular or pedestrian traffic; (4) provide avenues for artistic expression, and (5) are assets to the community. 
B.  The regulations and permit requirements set forth in this chapter are also intended to promote public safety and welfare by establishing the following: 
1.  That the design, construction, installation, repair, and maintenance of the displays will not interfere with traffic safety or otherwise endanger public safety. 
2.  That regulation will provide reasonable protection by controlling the size, height, spacing, and locations of such displays. 
3.  That the public will enjoy the aesthetic benefits of viewing such displays in numbers and sizes that are reasonably and objectively regulated. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 2)  
17.79.040 - Mural permit application. 
A.  No person, firm, corporation or other entity may authorize, erect, construct, maintain, move, alter, change, place, suspend, or attach any original artwork mural within the city prior to obtaining a permit as set forth herein. Such permit shall be known as a mural permit. 
B.  An application for a mural permit shall be filed with the planning department by way of a form prepared by the planning department and shall include the following: 
1.  Name of the artist. 
2.  Examples of previous work done by the artist, with references. 
3.  Description of the materials to comprise the proposed mural and manner of application. 
4.  Statement regarding durability of the materials considering the location and positioning of the proposed mural. 
5.  Plans and specifications for the proposed mural including an exact picture graphic or other description. 
6.  Statement that the proposed mural will remain in place for at least five years. 
7.  Statement that no compensation will be given or received for the display of the mural or the right to place the mural on the property. 
8.  Application fee as established by resolution of the city council. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 2)  
17.79.050 - Mural permit application review. 
A.  The mural permit application shall be submitted to the planning department for review as set forth herein. The review shall be completed within thirty (30) days; provided, however, that the planning department is authorized to utilize additional time, with notice to the applicant and the basis therefore. 
B.  Review Criteria. The planning department shall review the mural application using the following criteria. 
1.  The mural shall be durable, permanent and easily protected from vandalism and weathering; consideration shall be given to the structural and surface integrity and stability of the building facade the permanence and durability of the mural and the mural resistance against weathering theft and vandalism. 
2.  The mural shall not have any unsafe features or conditions that may affect public safety. 
3.  The mural shall not disrupt traffic nor create any unsafe conditions or distractions to motorists or pedestrians. 
4.  The mural surface shall be prepared with an outdoor primer to ensure good adhesion for the artwork. 
5.  Clear, anti-graffiti coating shall be applied over the completed artwork. 
6.  The mural shall not extend more than six inches from the plane of the wall to which it is attached. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 2)  
17.79.060 - Prohibited murals. 
The following are prohibited in the city: 
A.  A mural that is placed on single or multiple family residential buildings. 
B.  A mural that contains obscene matters as defined in Section 311 of the California Penal Code or images that would incite immediate violence so as to constitute fighting words. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 2)  
17.79.070 - Permit expiration and extension. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection B. below, if installation of the permitted original artwork mural has not taken place within twelve (12) months of the date of issuance of the mural permit, the permit is void and no further work on the mural may be done at the site until a new permit has be approved and new fee paid. 
B.  An approved mural permit may be extended by the planning department for an additional period of no more than twelve (12) months upon the planning department finding that the applicant was unable to begin or continue the installation of the approved mural for reasons beyond his or her control. A request for permit extension must be in writing and must be received by the planning department before the original permit expiration date. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 2)  
17.79.080 - Maintenance. 
A.  The property owner is responsible for ensuring that a permitted original artwork mural is maintained in good condition and fully repaired in the case of vandalism or accidental destruction. 
B.  Failure to maintain the original artwork mural as provided herein is declared to be a public nuisance and may be summarily abated or repaired by the city. The city may pursue additional remedies to obtain compliance with the provisions of this section as appropriate. 
C.  In addition to other remedies provided by law in the event the property owner fails to maintain the mural upon reasonable notice, the city may perform all necessary repairs or maintenance to the mural or secure insurance and all costs incurred by the city shall become a lien against the property. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 2)  
17.79.090 - Mural alterations. 
Alterations to an original artwork mural shall only occur pursuant to a new mural permit approved and issued by the procedures described herein. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 2)  
Chapter 17.80 - USE PERMITS 
Sections: 
 
17.80.010 - Planning commission authority. 
A request for a use permit may be granted, granted subject to conditions, or denied by the planning commission for any use for which a use permit is permitted or required by these regulations, or for any use which, while not specifically enumerated in these regulations, is, in the opinion of the planning commission, similar to and compatible with the uses permitted in the zone in which the subject property is situated. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.80.020 - Application. 
Application for a use permit shall be filed at the office of the city clerk upon a form provided, and shall be accompanied by such information as may be required to describe fully the proposed use for which the permit is sought, and shall be accompanied by a filing fee established by the city council. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.80.030 - Public hearing. 
A.  Upon receipt of such application, the city clerk shall set the matter for public hearing as directed by the planning commission within forty-five (45) days of filing of the application. 
B.  Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten (10) calendar days before the hearing to owners of property within three hundred (300) feet of the petitioner's property, using addresses from the last assessment roll, and by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
C.  The notice shall include the date, time and place of the public hearing, identify the hearing body and give a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.80.040 - Planning commission action. 
A.  Within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the hearing, the planning commission shall act on the matter unless this time period is waived by the applicant. 
B.  Approval of an application for a use permit shall be based upon a written finding that: 
1.  Establishment, maintenance, or operation of the use of building applied for will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be materially detrimental to the health, safety, peace, morals, comfort and general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of such proposed use or be materially detrimental to property or improvements in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the city. 
C.  The granting of any use permit may be made subject to terms and conditions as deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the intent and purposes of this title. 
D.  Failure of the planning commission to act within the time set out in this section shall be deemed to be denial of the application on that date. The action of the planning commission shall become final ten (10) days from the date thereof, unless an appeal has been filed during the ten (10) day period in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.92.010. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.80.050 - Revocation. 
In any case where the terms and conditions to the granting the use permit are not being complied with, the planning commission shall give notice to the holder of the use permit of its intention to revoke the use permit. Proceedings for the revocation of the use permit shall be conducted in the same manner as the required proceedings for a new application. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.80.060 - Expiration and revision (conditional use permit). 
A.  Construction of the conditional use shall be commenced within one year from the date the approved conditional use permit is approved by the planning commission or city council or the conditional use permit shall expire and become void, unless a written request for extension is received by the city manager or his/her designee at least thirty (30) days prior to such expiration or abandonment. Upon receipt of written request for extension with application and fee set by city council, the city manager or designee shall set the matter for public hearing before the planning commission for determination. 
B.  Any changes to an approved conditional use permit shall be subject to review by the planning commission with application and fee set by city council. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.80.070 - Issuance of administrative permits. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the planning director, upon the filing of an application for a permit, to investigate same, and if it appears that the proposed use is in compliance with all the requirements of this title, and of the zoning regulations of the city and not in violation of any of the other provisions of this code, an administrative permit shall be issued. 
B.  In the event an application is denied, written notice of the denial of the request for an administrative permit shall be mailed to the applicant within five working days after the decision is rendered. 
C.  If the applicant disagrees with any action taken in regards to the administrative permit, they may appeal to the city manager stipulating the purpose of the appeal and their desired remedy. Any action taken by the city manager may be appealed to the planning commission within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the review authority's action. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.80.080 - Expiration and revision (administrative use permit). 
A.  Operation and/or construction of the administrative use shall be commenced within one year from the date the approved administrative use permit is approved by the city manager or his/her designee or the administrative use permit shall expire and become void, unless a written request for extension is received by the city manager or his/her designee at least thirty (30) days prior to such expiration or abandonment. 
B.  Any changes to an approved administrative use permit shall be subject to review by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
Chapter 17.82 - SITE PLAN REVIEW 
Sections: 
 
17.82.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of site plan review is to ensure that proposed development in the city is in conformity with the intent and provisions of this title and to guide city departments in the issuance of permits. In addition, it is the purpose of this chapter to ensure that proposed development is compatible with surrounding development in terms of scale, style and construction materials; that on and on-off site circulation is adequate to support the project; that city services are adequate and available; that projects are of the highest quality of land planning and design, and that projects reflect the design themes of the community and are consistent with the city's general plan and land use and planning, all in an effort to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community and to enhance the development, use, occupancy, health, safety and welfare of surrounding areas for commercial or industrial uses or purposes. Further, adherence to the standards herein will benefit the occupancy of existing property, enhance the stability and value of both improved and unimproved real property, and encourage appropriate development. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.82.020 - Generally. 
No person shall construct any building or structure or make structural and physical improvements, additions, extensions and/or exterior alterations, and no permit shall be issued for such construction until the site plan has been submitted to, reviewed by, and approved in accordance with this chapter. The property may only be developed, used and maintained in accordance with the approved site plan. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.82.030 - Site plan review application. 
Site plan review applications, revocable and conditional, may be issued for any of the uses or purposes for which said permits are required or permitted by the terms of this title. The city may impose such conditions as it deems necessary to secure the purposes of this title, code, or other city standards, and may require tangible guarantees or evidence that such conditions are being, or will be, complied with. 
Site plan review shall include, but not be limited to, a review of the following: traffic and circulation, building arrangement, historic character, setbacks, walls and fences, noise emissions and control measures, off-street parking, grading, drainage, landscaping, lighting, signs, public services and utilities, development and performance standards and the interrelationships of these elements as well as compatibility with adjacent buildings. 
The site plan review application is a ministerial permit with a fee as set by resolution of the city council. 
A "site plan" application may be approved by the city manager or his/her nominee, without the necessity of public notice, a public hearing, or planning commission action if findings required for approval (Section 17.82.060) can be made. 
The site plan review application shall be accompanied by any applicable fee in an amount to be set by the city council, and plans showing the details of the proposed use to be made of the land or building, and any other pertinent information required by the planning authority staff as provided within this title. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.82.040 - Applicability. 
A.  A site plan review application shall be required as follows: 
1.  Any use, structure, or sign requiring a site plan review as specifically provided in the applicable zoning district regulations of this title. All signs shall comply with the adopted city of Orland Sign Ordinance (Chapter 17.78). 
2.  Any use requiring a site plan as specifically required by the city as a condition of approval of any application. 
B.  The city shall waive the submission of or the requirement for a site plan review application if the city finds that: 
1.  All the purposes of development review have been fulfilled by the approval of any other permit required by this title; or 
2.  The project involves only interior alterations not materially changing the character of the use of the property; or 
3.  The project involves only minor exterior alterations not materially changing the character of the use of the property; or 
4.  The use is proposed in an existing building and is listed as a permitted use in the zoning district in which it is located; or 
5.  The use is a single-family residence as the principal or primary use as listed as a permitted use in the zoning district in which it is located. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.82.050 - Public hearing, notices, citizen and agency involvement. 
A.  No public hearing is required. However, public comment may be accepted and reviewed by the city. The city manager or his/her designee shall mail notice of the proposal to all adjacent property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the property requesting the administrative use permit. The notice shall summarize the standards and facts related to the decision, invite persons to submit information relevant to the standards and facts that are pertinent to the proposal within five days of notification giving reasons why the application should or should not be approved. The notice shall also advise the person of his/her right to request a hearing. 
B.  If the city manager or his/her designee contemplates that persons can be expected to question the relevant zone requirements, site standard requirements of the applicable zoning district and need for the proposed action, or if any property owner entitled to notice under subsection A above requests a public hearing in writing, the city manager or his/her designee shall initiate a public hearing on the application. The city manager or his/her designee shall set a date for the public hearing and mail notice to those same persons receiving the original notice. The city manager or his/her designee may at their discretion, choose to initiate a public hearing and provide notice of such, as required herein, without making a preliminary determination and mailing notice of such as provided under subsection A above. At the public hearing, the applicant and interested parties may present information and arguments relevant to the proposal including reasons why the application should be approved or denied or proposing modifications that the persons believe necessary for approval. 
C.  The city manager or his/her designee shall review the application, written comments and testimony, if any and make a finding for each pointing dispute and make a decision on the application by approving, conditionally approving or denying the application within ten (10) days of the closing of the period for comments. The decision of the city manager or his/her designee shall be according to quantifiable requirements of the Orland Municipal Code. The decision of the city manager or his/her designee shall be in writing and in the event of disapproval, shall set forth the findings for the disapproval. The written decision shall be mailed to the applicant and to any person who has appealed within five working days of the city's decision. 
D.  To assure advisory public involvement in the planning process, every application may be submitted to the citizens of the city for their review and comment. 
E.  To assure affected agencies involvement in the planning process, every application may be referred to appropriate federal, state and local agencies for their review and comment. 
F.  The approving authority for site plan review applications is the city manager or his/her designated representative. 
G.  The city may cause notice to be given on any application as provided in Section 65091 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.82.060 - Findings required for approval. 
A.  The city manager or designated representative shall only approve or conditionally approve a site plan review application if all of the following findings are made: 
1.  That the proposed use is an allowed use in the district where located. 
2.  That the site for the project is adequate in size, shape, location, and physical characteristics to accommodate the type of use and level of development proposed. 
3.  That there are adequate services (water, sewer, storm drainage) available. 
4.  That the project is in conformance with the applicable provisions and policies of this title, the Orland Municipal Code and any approved zoning or land use study or plan. 
5.  That the infrastructure is adequate to safely accommodate the specific proposed use. 
6.  That no violation of the Orland Municipal Code currently exists on the property, unless the purpose of the application is to correct the violation. 
7.  That the project will not negatively affect the public health, safety or general welfare. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.82.070 - Expiration and revision. 
A.  Following the completion of the review process, written notification of approval and any conditions thereof shall be made to the applicant. Construction of the improvements set forth in the approved site plan shall be commenced within one year from the date the approved site plan is signed by the city manager or his/her designee. Thereafter, if construction has not commenced, if construction activity has been abandoned for ninety (90) or more days, or if construction is not complete by the time set forth in any condition of approval, the site plan approval shall expire and become void, unless a written request for extension is received by the city at least thirty (30) days prior to such expiration or abandonment. Upon receipt of written request for extension, the city planner may grant an extension of site plan approval for a period not to exceed one year from the original date of expiration, or may refer such request to the planning commission for determination. 
B.  Any changes or revisions to an approved site plan shall be subject to review and approval by the city. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.82.080 - Application issuance and appeal period. 
A.  Upon completion of review of a site plan review application the city manager or designated representative, shall either: 
1.  Make such findings as are required by Section 17.82.050 and approve the application; or 
2.  Notify the applicant of those changes and modifications required for approval of the application; or 
3.  Deny the application if the city manager or designated representative finds that: 
a.  The application cannot be conditioned by adequate requirements to insure compliance with applicable regulations, or 
b.  The application cannot reasonably be modified to conform to the applicable regulations. 
B.  Site plan review applications shall be effective upon issuance, unless within ten (10) calendar days of a decision by the city manager or designated representative, the decision is appealed as provided for in Chapter 17.92. 
Any decisions by the city manager or his designee may be appealed to the planning commission. 
Any decision by the planning commission may be appealed to the city council. 
The fee for each appeal is three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) as set by ordinance by the city council (Section 17.92.020(A)(3) of the Orland Municipal Code). 
In case an appeal is filed, the site plan review application shall not have any force or effect until a decision is made by the approving authority on such appeal. 
C.  Site plan review applications shall not have any force or effect until the permittee acknowledges receipt thereof and has agreed in writing to each and every term and condition thereof. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
Chapter 17.84 - VARIANCES 
Sections: 
 
17.84.010 - Planning commission authority. 
A request for a variance from the strict application of the terms of this title, other than regulations directly pertaining to the use of land and buildings which are not existing nonconforming uses, may be granted, granted subject to conditions, or denied by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.84.020 - Limitations and conditions. 
A.  No variance may be granted unless the planning commission makes a written finding entered in its minutes, and reflected in any resolution of approval, that: 
1.  The variance is in conformance with the city of Orland general plan; 
2.  There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property involved which do not apply generally to other property in the same vicinity and zone; 
3.  A variance is necessary for the applicant to preserve and enjoy a substantial property right equal to that right possessed by other property owners under like conditions in the same vicinity and zone. The granting of the requested major variance will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, convenience and welfare or injurious to the property improvements in the same vicinity and zone in which the property affected is located and will not be contrary to the intent of the city of Orland general plan. 
B.  A variance shall not be granted which authorizes a use or activity. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.84.030 - Application. 
Application for a variance shall be filed in the office of the city clerk upon a form provided, and shall be accompanied by a filing fee as established by resolution of the city council, and by such other information as may be required to describe fully the proposed variance. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.84.040 - Public hearing—Notice. 
A.  Upon receipt of such application, the city clerk shall set the matter for public hearing as directed by the planning commission. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten (10) calendar days before the hearing by prepaid U.S. mail notices to owners of property within three hundred (300) feet of the petitioner's property, using addresses for the last assessment roll, or and by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and posting such notice in conspicuous places on or close to the property affected. 
B.  The notice shall include the date, time, and place of the public hearing, identify the hearing body and give a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.84.050 - Planning commission action. 
A.  Any such hearing may be continued from time to time, except that the commission shall act on the matter within sixty (60) days of the original hearing date. Failure to act within such period shall constitute disapproval of the request. 
B.  The decision of the planning commission shall become final ten (10) days after the date thereof unless an appeal has been filed during the ten (10) day period in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.92.020. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.84.060 - Revocation. 
In any case where the terms and conditions to the granting of the variance are not being complied with, the planning commission may give notice to the holder of the use permit of its intention to revoke the variance. Proceedings for the revocation of the variance shall be conducted in the same manner as the required proceedings for a new application. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.84.070 - Termination of variance. 
When a variance is approved, such approval shall become void one year from the date of such approval if substantial progress, such as substantial excavation or substantial construction toward the specified variance has not been made. The holder of such a variance may apply for an extension of such approval as may be granted by the planning director. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.84.080 - Minor alterations in land use limitations. 
In the public interest and when agreed to by the applicant, the planning director, without public hearing and without publishing or mailing of notices, may consider and render decisions on minor alterations in land use limitations involving a reduction or expansion of not more than fifteen (15) percent of any quantifiable provision of Section 17.04.040. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.84.090 - Required findings for minor alterations in land use limitations. 
A.  The planning director shall analyze each of the criteria listed below applicable to the applicant's property and incorporate such analysis into his/her decision: 
1.  The minor alteration in land use does not jeopardize the historical and architectural integrity; 
2.  The minor alteration in land use will not jeopardize mature trees; 
3.  The minor alteration in land use will not be detrimental to the public health and safety; 
4.  The minor alteration in land use will be an expansion of appropriate use for the city of Orland general plan. 
B.  The planning director shall render his/her decision and analysis in writing. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.84.100 - Appeal. 
The decision of the planning director shall be final unless the applicant is dissatisfied, in which case the applicant may appeal by following the procedure in Section 17.92.020. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
Chapter 17.85 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS (WIRELESS ANTENNA) FACILITIES 
Sections: 
 
17.85.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose and intent of this section is to provide a uniform and comprehensive set of standards for the orderly development, operation, and maintenance of wireless communications facilities. The regulations contained herein are designed to protect and promote public health, safety, and welfare and the aesthetic quality of the city of Orland as set forth in the policies of the general plan. It is also the intent to provide the community with benefits of this technology and not unduly restrict service providers from providing these benefits to the city and its citizens. The establishment of wireless communications facilities as a land use shall be subject to the regulations set forth by the applicable zoning district. In all locations which permit the development and use of wireless communications facilities, the following shall apply. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.85.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Antenna" means a device or system of wires, poles, rods, dishes, discs or similar devices used for the transmission and/or receipt of electromagnetic waves. 
B.  "Co-location" means a telecommunications facility comprising a single structure used to support multiple antennae operated by different carriers. 
C.  "Facade mounted antenna" means an antenna that is directly attached or affixed to any facade or wall of a building. 
D.  "Freestanding facility" means an antenna with its support structure placed directly on the ground. 
E.  "Lattice tower" means an open steel frame structure used to support equipment that is part of a wireless communications facility. 
F.  "Monopole" means a structure composed of a single spire used to support equipment that is part of a wireless communications facility. 
G.  "Public safety radio transmissions" means radio transmissions generated by county sheriff, county fire department, city police and fire departments and all public entities for the purpose of public safety or information. 
H.  "Shared-location" means more than one telecommunications facility comprising multiple structures used to support antennae operated by one or more carriers where such structures are within proximity to each other. 
I.  "Stealth facility" means any communications facility that is designed to blend into the surrounding environment, and is visibly unobtrusive. Examples of stealth facilities may include architecturally screened roof mounted antennas, facade-mounted antennas painted and treated as architectural elements to blend with existing building, facilities camouflaged as trees or appropriate structure. Also known as concealed telecommunications facilities. 
J.  "Roof-mounted" means an antenna directly attached or affixed to the roof of an existing building, water tank, tower or structure other than a lattice tower or monopole. 
K.  "Wireless communications facility" means a facility that transmits and/or receives electromagnetic signals. It includes antennae, microwave dishes, and other types of equipment for the transmission of such signals, telecommunication towers or similar structures supporting said equipment, equipment buildings, parking areas and other accessory development. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.85.030 - General requirements. 
General requirements for materials to accompany an application. Applications for a conditional use permit, as specified under Chapter 17.80 et seq., for wireless communications facilities shall be accompanied by the materials listed below. The planning director may waive the requirement for submittal of any information described herein, which the planning director reasonably determines to be unrelated to the application. Public notice of conditional use permit is subject to the provisions set forth in Government Code Sections 65090 and 65091. 
A.  A written description of the type of technology and consumer services the carrier will provide its customers; 
B.  Technical information, including but not limited to, visual analysis, alternative site analysis, landscape and post-construction reclamation plans, and lighting plans; 
C.  A copy of the land use easement or restriction which encumbers the proposed facility site. Financial arrangements need not be revealed; 
D.  Technical information to show whether future service providers may co-locate on the proposed facility and the capacity the structure will support. 
1.  For facilities not proposed to be co-located the carried shall provide written information clearly substantiating the technical impracticality of co-locating. The information contained in the written information shall include statements showing that all possible avenues of co-location have been exhausted. The city of Orland may, at the expense of the applicant, require independent peer review of the analysis as part of the review process. 
2.  Carrier leases may be required to provide opportunities for future co-locations of other carrier's antennae and related equipment. Leases which convey exclusive (single-user) rights for wireless communications facilities to the extent that such leases may preclude development of suitable co-location facilities are discouraged and may be prohibited as deemed appropriate by the planning commission. 
3.  The design of wireless communications facilities should promote shared use among different carriers. To the extent feasible, lease areas, antennae support, and equipment structures shall be designed to provide for the consolidation of future facilities to eliminate or minimize the visual clutter resulting from multiple telecommunications structures. 
4.  Existing facilities should make available unutilized space for co-location of other antennas and equipment, including space for competing service carriers. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.85.040 - Standard requirements. 
Applicants for wireless communications facilities shall be required to comply with the following standard conditions: 
A.  The carrier and/or successor in interest shall properly maintain and ultimately remove, if required, the approved wireless communications facilities according to the provisions of this chapter and any conditions of permit approval. The carrier shall post a financial security, such as a bond or certification of deposit, acceptable to the city of Orland to ensure that the approved facilities are properly maintained and to guarantee that the facility is dismantled and removed from the premises and the site reclaimed if it has been inoperative for a one year period, or upon expiration of the permit. Financial assurance shall be an amount determined by a California licensed engineer, and approved by the planning commission, and shall cover the costs associated with the demolition, removal and reclamation of the facility site in the event the carrier abandons operations. 
B.  The carrier shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city of Orland and any of its boards, commissions, officers, and employees to attack, set aside, void, or annul the approval of permit applications when such claim or action is brought within the period provided for any applicable state and/or local statutes or from facility operations. The city of Orland shall promptly notify the carrier of any such claim, action, or proceeding. 
C.  The applicant shall provide a copy of a title report or other legal instrument demonstrating legal access to the project site. 
D.  Co-located facilities are permitted without the requirement for a use permit when facilities are proposed to be added to existing facilities, little or no physical expansion beyond the area of existing facility site disturbance is necessary, and the proposed facilities will not have detrimental effects to surrounding properties, the environment, or human health. The planning director shall retain the right to determine whether proposed co-located facilities meet this criteria. 
E.  Co-location shall be required when feasible and when it minimizes adverse effects related to land use compatibility, visual resources, public safety, and other environmental factors. Co-location is not required when the provider submits proof as part of the submitted application acceptable to the planning commission that reasonable efforts to co-locate have been unsuccessful due to: 
1.  The absence of existing installations in the area requiring service; 
2.  An inability to use existing sites in a technologically feasible manner consistent with the personal wireless provider's system requirements; 
3.  Structural or other engineering limitations, such as frequency incompatibilities. 
F.  Location of Wireless Communications Facilities. Facilities shall be sited to avoid or minimize land use conflicts. None shall be sited in a location where it will unreasonably interfere with the operation of any county airport and public safety radio transmissions. 
G.  Lighting. Applications for wireless communications facilities shall include a lighting plan including the location and type of all exterior lighting fixtures. Facilities shall be unlit, except as follows: 
1.  Manually operated or motion-sensing, low wattage, hooded or downward-directed exterior lighting shall be permitted for safety purposes only and shall not be lit except when maintenance or safety personnel are present; 
2.  As required under Federal Aviation Administration regulations. 
H.  Access and Roadways. Wireless communications facilities shall be served by the minimum roads and on-site parking necessary, as follows: 
1.  Whenever feasible, existing roads and parking areas shall be used to access and service new facilities. Roads shall be maintained to standards required upon the establishment of the use. 
2.  Any new roads or parking areas constructed shall be shared with subsequent telecommunications facilities and/or other permitted uses to the extent feasible. 
3.  New access roads or parking areas shall have the minimum width and surfacing necessary to meet fire safety and access needs. 
4.  Disturbed surfaces shall be designed to avoid drainage and erosion problems. 
I.  Vegetation. Wireless communications facilities shall be installed in a way that maintains and enhances existing vegetation to the extent feasible. Where appropriate, additional landscaping may be required to screen the proposed facility visually. Vegetation protection and facility screening shall be accomplished through the following measures: 
1.  Applications for facilities shall include a landscape plan that shows the size, type, and location of existing vegetation, and any vegetation proposed for removal or trimming. Emphasis of the landscape plan should be to screen the proposed facility visually and stabilize the soils on sloping sites. Introduced vegetation shall be native, drought tolerate species compatible with the predominant natural setting of the project area. 
2.  Existing trees and other screening vegetation near the proposed facility and associated access roads shall be protected from damage during and after construction. 
3.  All vegetation disturbed during project construction shall be replanted with compatible vegetation. Soils disturbed by development shall be reseeded to prevent soil erosion. 
4.  No vegetation shall be removed after project completion except to comply with local and state fire safety regulations or to prevent safety hazards to people and damage to property or operational impairment. 
5.  Lease area shall be sufficiently sized to include vegetative screening and must include provisions for the protection and maintenance of such screening. 
J.  Noise and Traffic. Wireless communications facilities shall be constructed and operated in a way that minimizes noise and traffic impacts on nearby residents and the public. Noise and traffic reduction shall be accomplished through the following measures: 
1.  Facilities shall operate in compliance with the noise exposure standards contained in the city's noise element. Backup generators shall comply with the same noise standards and shall only be operated in emergencies or for routine testing and maintenance. 
2.  Normal maintenance and testing activities shall occur between the hours of seven a.m. and six p.m., excluding emergencies. 
3.  Traffic resulting from the installation, operation, and maintenance of a wireless communications facility must be kept to a minimum. 
4.  Applicants may be required to submit a development schedule if nearby property owners may be inconvenienced during construction. 
K.  Visual Compatibility and Facility Site Design. Wireless communications facility structures and equipment shall be sited, designed, and screened to blend with the surrounding natural or built environment to reduce negative visual effects. Visual compatibility shall be accomplished in the following manner: 
1.  Freestanding facilities, including towers, lattice towers, and monopoles shall be discouraged unless no reasonable alternative is possible. If necessary this type of facility shall be designed to the minimum functional height and width required to support the proposed wireless facility. 
2.  Proposed freestanding facilities shall be of a stealth design only. They shall be designed, painted and textured to blend with the surrounding landscape. Landscaping shall be provided pursuant to subsection (K)(4) below. 
3.  Applications for new facilities shall include a visual analysis of the proposed facility at design capacity, including but not necessarily limited to, a photo montage or photo simulation or other similar display. The visual analysis shall address views from public vantage points and private residences if deemed appropriate by the planning director. The visual analysis may be expanded to include alternative locations within the proposed service area. 
4.  Where visible from adjacent residences or public vantage points, base stations, equipment cabinets, backup generators, and other equipment shall be screened, fenced, landscaped, or otherwise treated architecturally to minimize its appearance from off-site locations and to blend with the surrounding natural and built environments visually. Exterior building materials of a color to match the surrounding natural or built environment shall be used for all facilities. 
5.  Facility sites should be avoided where identified historic, cultural, or archaeological resources exists. 
6.  No advertising signage or identifying logos shall be placed on any facility, except small identification plates used for emergency notification. 
7.  If a facility becomes obsolete or is otherwise no longer needed, service providers shall provide the county a copy of the notice to the Federal Communications Commission of intent to cease operations. All related facilities shall be removed within one year of cessation of operation at the owner's expense, as described in subsection A above. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.85.050 - Exemptions. 
Antennas covered by Federal Communications Memorandum Opinion and Order—FCC-85-506 (PRB-1), are exempt from this regulation. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.85.060 - Applicability. 
The city of Orland shall not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services nor shall it prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of wireless communications services. 
A.  The city of Orland shall act on any request for authorization to place, construct or modify wireless communications facilities within a reasonable period of time after the request is duly filed taking into account the nature and scope of the request. 
B.  Any decision by the city of Orland denying a request to place, construct, or modify wireless communications facilities shall, in writing, be supported by substantial evidence (findings). 
C.  Any person adversely affected by any action or failure to act by the city of Orland that is inconsistent with this section may, within thirty (30) days after such action or failure to act, commence an action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
Chapter 17.86 - ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
 
17.86.010 - Purpose and applicability. 
This chapter provides standards for the location, establishment, development, and operation applicable to adult oriented businesses which are conditionally permitted land uses set forth in Section 17.52.040(L). In all locations which permit adult oriented businesses, the following shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § III)  
17.86.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Adult arcade" means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more motion picture projectors, slide projectors, digital storage devices or any form of video device are used to display video or photographic reproduction characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
B.  "Adult book/video store" means an establishment which has as a substantial or significant portion (twenty-five (25) percent or more of gross floor area) of its stock-in-trade and offers for sale or for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
1.  Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, digital images, digital storage devices, slides, or any other form of visual representations characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
2.  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
C.  "Adult cabaret" means a nightclub, restaurant, bar or similar establishment in which is scheduled and/or featured: 
1.  Live performances characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities, including striptease, defined as the or the removal of clothing, or the wearing of transparent or diaphanous clothing, including models appearing in lingerie, to the point where specified anatomical areas are exposed; or 
2.  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, digital storage devices, video images, or other any other form of video or photographic reproductions characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
D.  "Adult motion picture theater" means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, digital images or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and in which a substantial portion (twenty-five (25) percent or more) of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material which is characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
E.  "Adult oriented business" means any business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Adult oriented business includes [subsections] (A)—(H). 
F.  "Adult theater" means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar establishment which, for any form of consideration, in which is scheduled and/or featured live performances characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
G.  "Sexual encounter establishment" means an establishment offering public accommodations, which, for any form of consideration, provides a place where two or more persons may associate, congregate, or consort in connection with specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas. This definition does not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychiatrist, psychologist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in sexual therapy. 
H.  "Specified anatomical areas" includes any of the following: less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic regions, anal regions, buttocks, breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
I.  "Specified sexual activities" include any of the following: 
1.  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or breasts; 
2.  All sex acts, actual or simulated; 
3.  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
4.  Excretory functions alone or as part of or in connection with any of the activities described in items 1. through 3. above. 
J.  "Establishment of an adult oriented business" includes any of the following: 
1.  The opening or commencement of any adult oriented business as a new business; 
2.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult oriented business, to any of the adult oriented businesses defined herein; 
3.  The addition of any of the adult oriented businesses defined herein to any other existing business; or 
4.  The relocation of any adult oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § III)  
17.86.030 - Standard requirements. 
Adult oriented businesses shall be located, established, developed and operated in compliance with all of the following standards and in addition to all applicable provisions of the Orland Municipal Code, California state and federal law. 
A.  Employees Required. It shall be the duty of the owners to ensure that at least two employees are on duty at all times that any patron is present inside the premises of any adult oriented business. 
B.  Hours of Operation. No adult oriented business shall operate or be open between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
C.  Lighting. The entire exterior ground, including the parking lot, of any adult oriented business shall be provided with lighting which is energy efficient, stationary and directed away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. 
D.  Live Entertainment. All of the following standards shall pertain to any adult oriented business that provides live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities: 
1.  No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of an adult oriented business except upon a stage at least eighteen (18) inches above the level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least six feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons, and no patron shall be allowed within six feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by an entertainer. 
2.  The adult oriented business shall provide separate dressing room facilities and entrances/exits to the premises which are exclusively dedicated to the entertainers' use. 
3.  The adult oriented business shall provide permanent access for entertainers between the stage and the dressing room facilities which is completely separated from the patrons. If the separate access is not physically feasible, the adult oriented business shall provide a minimum three-foot-wide walk aisle for entertainers between the dressing room facilities and the stage, with a permanent railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers to prevent any physical contact between patrons and entertainers. Fixed rail(s) at least thirty (30) inches in height shall be installed and permanently maintained establishing the required separations between the entertainers and patrons. 
4.  The serving and consuming of alcohol within or upon a portion of the premises of the adult oriented business, indoor and outdoor, shall not be permitted during live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities. 
5.  Complete nudity is prohibited. 
E.  Permanent Barriers. Permanent barriers shall be installed and maintained to screen the interior of any adult oriented business premises from public view for each door used as an entrance/exit to the adult oriented business. 
F.  Separation/Measurement. It is unlawful to cause or allow the establishment of an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult oriented business, adult theater, or sexual encounter establishment within: 
1.  One thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of another adult oriented business; 
2.  One thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of any public or private school, park, playground, public building, church, any noncommercial establishment operated by a bona fide religious organization, or any establishment likely to be used by minors; or, 
3.  Two hundred fifty (250) feet of any residential dwelling unit. 
The distance between any two adult oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of each business. The distance between any adult oriented business and any residential dwelling unit, religious facility or institution, school, or public park shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest property line of the adult oriented business to the closest property line or physical structure (residential dwelling) of the property. 
G.  Viewing Area. 
1.  It is unlawful to maintain, operate, or manage or allow to be maintained, operated, or managed any adult arcade in which the viewing areas are not visible from a continuous main aisle or are obscured by a curtain, door, wall, or other enclosure. For purposes of this section, "viewing area" means the area where a patron or customer would ordinarily be positioned while watching the film, performance, picture, or show. 
2.  It is unlawful for more than one person at a time to occupy any individually partitioned viewing area or booth. 
3.  It is unlawful to create, maintain, or allow to be maintained any holes or other openings between any two booths or individual viewing areas for the purpose of providing viewing or physical access between the booth or individual viewing area. 
H.  Personnel Registers of Live Entertainers. The operator of an adult oriented business providing live entertainment shall maintain a personnel register of all entertainers. The personnel register shall provide contact information, including full name, residence address, telephone number(s) and e-mail address. The personnel register shall be available for inspection by the Orland Chief of Police at all times during regular business hours. 
I.  Employment of Minors. It shall be unlawful for the operator or any other person in charge of an adult oriented establishment to employ or retain any person who is under the age of eighteen (18) years to perform any service on the premises of the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § III)  
17.86.040 - Enforcement and remedies. 
A.  Nuisance Per Se. Violation of the any provision of Section 17.86.030 is declared to be a public nuisance per se, which may be abated by way of civil abatement procedures. However, this remedy is not exclusive and violations may be prosecuted by and through any applicable local, state or federal law. 
B.  Minors and Intoxication. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years or an obviously intoxicated person to enter or remain on the premises of an adult oriented business at any time. A sign giving notice of this provision shall be prominently posted at each entrance to the premises of the adult oriented business. 
C.  Other Provisions of Law. Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize, legalize, or permit the establishment, operation, or maintenance of any business, building, or use which violates any city of Orland ordinance or statute of the state of California regarding public nuisances, sexual conduct, lewdness, obscene or harmful matter, exhibition, or public display thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § III)  
Chapter 17.88 - AMENDMENTS 
Sections: 
 
17.88.010 - Applicability of amendment procedures. 
This title may be amended as other ordinances are adopted or amended whenever it is found that the public convenience, necessity and general welfare require such amendment to accomplish the purpose hereof, except that whenever any such amendment will change any zone boundary, change the zoning of any property, impose new regulations, or remove or modify any adopted regulations, the procedures of this chapter shall apply. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.88.020 - Who may initiate. 
An amendment may be initiated by one or more owners of property affected by the proposed amendment, or by action of the planning commission or the city council. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.88.030 - Application. 
The application of one or more property owners for the initiation of an amendment shall be filed in the office of the city clerk on a form provided, and shall be accompanied by a filing fee as established by resolution of the city council, and by plans and other information as may be required to describe fully the proposed amendment. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.88.040 - Planning commission hearing—Notice. 
A.  Upon receipt of such application, or notice of intent to the city council or planning commission, the city clerk shall set the matter for public hearing as directed by the planning director. 
B.  The notice shall include the following: 
1.  The time, date and place of the hearing; 
2.  The type and magnitude of the changes proposed; 
3.  The place where copies of the proposed changes may be obtained; 
4.  A general description of the areas affected; 
5.  The right to appear and be heard. 
C.  The notice of public hearing shall be given at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing date as follows: 
1.  By publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, published and circulated in the city; and 
2.  By mail or delivery to all persons, including businesses, corporations, or other public or private entities shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within three hundred (300) feet of the property which is the subject of the proposed zoning change. 
D.  In the event the number of owners is greater than six hundred (600), alternative notice to that required by subsection (C)(2) above may be given at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing by either of the following procedures: 
1.  By placing a display advertisement of at least one-fourth page in the newspaper having the greatest circulation within the area affected by the proposed amendment, and in at least one additional newspaper having general circulation within such area, if such additional newspaper is available; or 
2.  By placing an insert with any generalized mailing sent by the city to property owners in the area affected by the proposed ordinance or amendment, such as billings for city services. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.88.050 - Planning commission recommendations. 
Any such hearing may be continued from time to time. Within forty (40) days of the conclusion of the hearing, the planning commission shall submit to the city council a written report of recommendations and reasons therefor. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.88.060 - City council hearing—Notice. 
Upon receipt of the planning commission recommendation, the city clerk shall set the matter for public hearing by the city council. Notice of the hearing shall be given, and the content of the notice shall be as provided in Section 17.88.040. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.88.070 - Proposed changes to amendments. 
The city council may approve, amend or deny the application after the public hearing. Except that the city council shall not make any change in the proposed amendment until the proposed change has been referred to the planning commission for a report and a copy of the report has been filed with the city council. The failure of the planning commission to report within thirty (30) days after the reference of such proposed change shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed change. The planning commission is not required to conduct another public hearing on the modified proposal. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.88.080 - City council action. 
The hearing may be continued from time to time, except that the city council shall act on the matter within sixty (60) days of the original date of council hearing. Failure of the council to act within such period shall constitute disapproval of the proposal. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
Chapter 17.92 - APPEALS 
Sections: 
 
17.92.010 - Allowable appeals. 
A.  Determinations and actions that may be appealed, and the authority to act upon an appeal shall be as follows: 
1.  Decisions by the City Manager or His Designee. Any decision by the city manager or his designee including zoning clearances, may be appealed to the planning commission. 
2.  Planning Commission Decisions. Any decision by the planning commission may be appealed to the city council. 
3.  City Council Review/Appeal. 
a.  Any member of the city council within ten (10) days from the date of the review authority's action may request the opportunity to review/discuss any decision rendered by the city manager, his designee or the planning commission. 
b.  The city council may appeal any decision by the city manager, his designee, or the planning commission at the next available city council meeting if a member of the city council has requested the opportunity to review the decision within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the review authority's action. A majority vote of the city council is required to initiate the appeal. 
B.  Statute of Limitations. The decision of the city council shall be final on all matters unless an appeal is filed with the Superior Court of the county of Glenn within thirty (30) days after the decision of the city council. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.92.020 - Filing and processing of appeals. 
A.  Timing and Form of Appeal. 
1.  Appeals shall be submitted in writing, and filed with city clerk, on an application form, within ten (10) days from the date of the review authority's action. 
2.  The appeal shall state the pertinent facts of the case and the basis for the appeal. 
3.  Appeals shall be accompanied by the filing fee set by the city council. 
B.  Scheduling of Hearing and City Manager's Report. When an appeal has been filed, the city manager shall schedule the matter for consideration by the appropriate appeal body identified in Section 17.92.010 and prepare a report on the matter. If the matter originally required a noticed public hearing, the city clerk shall give notice in the same manner followed for the original hearing, in compliance with Section 17.88.040. 
C.  Review by City Manager. 
1.  The city manager shall determine if the appeal was filed within the applicable time limits and shall summarily reject any appeal which was filed beyond the time limits. Further, the city manager shall determine if the appeal contains sufficient information as required by subsection A, Timing and Form of Appeal, above. 
2.  If the city manager determines that the information in the appeal is incomplete, the city manager shall immediately notify the appellant of the insufficiency and allow the appellant an additional seven days in which to correct the deficiency. 
3.  If upon the expiration of any additional time, the city manager determines that the statement on appeal is still insufficient, the city manager shall summarily reject the appeal. 
D.  City Attorney's Authority to Summarily Reject Appeal. Upon presentation of the notice of appeal, together with the required statement on appeal, the city manager may summarily reject the appeal if the city attorney finds that the matter being appealed is a requirement of law. 
E.  Action. At the hearing, the appeal body may consider any issue involving the matter being appealed, in addition to the specific grounds for the appeal. 
1.  The appeal body may, by resolution, affirm, affirm in part, or reverse the action, the decision, or determination of the original review authority. 
2.  When reviewing an appeal, the appeal body may: 
a.  Deny the permit or entitlement, even though the appeal only requested relaxation or elimination of one or more of the conditions imposed on the permit or entitlement; or 
b.  Impose additional conditions that may address other issues or concerns than the original subject of the appeal. 
3.  The appellant shall present all available evidence and testimony at the appeal hearing unless the appellant can demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the appeal body, that new information: 
a.  Was not available to the appellant; or 
b.  The appellant could not have participated in the review process because they could not have known about the review process. 
4.  If new or different evidence is presented on appeal, the planning commission or city council may, but shall not be required to, refer the matter to the city manager, his designee or the planning commission for further consideration. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.92.030 - Appeals from administrative action. 
A.  All interpretation and decision of the administrative staff authorized by this title are subject to appeal. Appeals of any administrative interpretation or decision, shall be made by filing a written appeal with the city clerk. The planning commission shall hear and decide on the appeal within forty-five (45) days of filing the appeal, and shall make findings supporting their decision on the matter. The decision of the planning commission on such matters can be appealed to the city council, who also shall review and decide on such appeal, if filed, within forty-five (45) days of such filing of the appeal with the city clerk. 
B.  All such appeals shall be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) calendar days of the final action by the planning commission or city manager. 
C.  The city council will conduct the appeal as a de novo hearing and may approve, deny or modify conditions of approval. The city council may also refer the matter back to staff or the planning commission for additional consideration or to obtain additional information. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
Chapter 17.96 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
17.96.005 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes uniform provisions for the noticing of zoning changes, for the regulation of nonconforming uses, structures, and lots and for the general administration of this title. Within zone districts established by this title, there exist structures, land uses, and lots that were lawful prior to the adoption of the title, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted differently under the use regulation and development standards of this title or future amendments. This chapter also recognizes that the investments made in developed property can be substantial and that provisions for continuation of certain nonconforming structures or uses may be desirable, particularly if it can be assured that the structure or use does not negatively impact adjacent properties. Further, this chapter provides for the improvement of nonconforming structures and properties to reduce the blighting influence that can occur if abandoned structures cannot be reused for their originally designed purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07)  
17.96.010 - Zoning change—Notification of county assessor and owner of record. 
Whenever a zone change or zoning variance is granted on a property, the city clerk acting for the city council shall, within thirty (30) days, notify the county assessor of such action. Whenever the request for a zone change or a zoning variance is made by other than the owner of record, the city clerk shall simultaneously notify the owner of such property that a notice has been sent to the county assessor regarding the zone change or zoning variance. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.96.020 - Nonconforming uses. 
The lawful use of lands or buildings existing at the time they become subject to any regulations of this title to which they do not conform, may be continued, except that the following provisions shall apply unless a use permit allowing such modification and/or expansion is granted: 
A.  No such use shall be enlarged, increased or structurally altered, nor be extended to occupy a greater area than that existing on the effective date of the application of these regulations to the subject property. This includes converting enclosed garage space. 
B.  Any use for which a use permit is required by these regulations shall be considered a nonconforming use until a use permit is obtained. 
C.  If any such use or building is involuntarily damaged or destroyed, the structure may be reconstructed and the use continued without the need for additional planning or zoning permits, based upon the following criteria: 
1.  The use or structure shall continue to be identified as an existing nonconforming use or structure; 
2.  The footprint of the structure shall be unchanged from the damaged or destroyed structure; and 
3.  All new buildings shall be constructed utilizing the standards and requirements of the currently adopted version of the building code. 
D.  Any interruption of a nonconforming use, or the use of a nonconforming building, which continues for twelve (12) months or more, shall be deemed to be an abandonment of such use, and subsequent use of buildings or land shall be in accordance with the regulations applicable to the subject property. 
E.  Ordinary maintenance and repair may be made to any nonconforming use or building, provided that the maintenance and repair activities do not result in a physical expansion of the existing footprint of the structure. 
F.  Except as otherwise provided by law, nonconforming uses may be expanded, under the following terms and conditions: 
1.  Approval shall be by use permit on a case by case basis by the planning commission. 
2.  Approval of the planning commission must be accompanied by specific findings as follows: 
a.  Only increase in size of existing structures; 
b.  In the case of structures there shall be no change in basic use, unless other necessary permits are obtained; 
c.  No more than a fifty-percent increase in size of structure excluding carports and garages; 
d.  Under no circumstances shall any development exceed the permissible maximum building coverage as described in this code and/or the city general plan standards. 
3.  Each applicant shall be entitled to the same right of appeal as now exists for appeals of planning commission's actions to the city council. 
4.  The nonconforming use of land or buildings may only be modified or enlarged without use permit approval when such modification or enlargement brings the entire parcel into conformity with this title. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, § 1; Ord. No. 2013-07)  
17.96.030 - Nonconforming lot area and width. 
Use of lots with areas or widths which do not conform to the minimum specifications of the zone in which they are allocated will be permitted where the lot in question was delineated on a recorded subdivision map or was under one ownership on the effective date of these regulations and owner thereof has not subsequently acquired adjoining property. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.96.040 - Permit issued in conflict with provisions prohibited. 
All departments, officers and public employees vested with the duty or authority to issue permits, certificates or licenses shall issue no permit, certificate or license for uses, buildings or purposes within the city in conflict with the provisions of these regulations, and any such permit, certificate or license issued in conflict with the provisions of these regulations shall be null and void. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.96.050 - Public nuisance declared. 
Any building or use operated or maintained contrary to the provisions of these regulations shall be, and the same is declared to be a public nuisance and shall be subject to injunction and abatement as such. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.96.060 - Remedies nonexclusive. 
The remedies provided in this title shall be cumulative to all others provided by law and not exclusive. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part))  
17.96.070 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, whether principal, agent, employee or otherwise, who violates or causes or permits a violation of any of the provisions of this title shall be punished pursuant to the provisions of Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 3 (part)) 
